The Theater of the World.

THE Theater OF THE WORLD: IN The which is discoursed at large, the many
miseries and frailties, incident to mankind in this mortal Life.

With a Discourse of the Excellency and Dignity of Mankind; all Illustrated
and Adorned with choice Stories, taken out of both Christian and Heathen
Authors, very delightful and profitable for any Judicious READER.

Being a Work of that Famous French Writer, Peter Bovistau launay, in three
distinct Books, formerly translated into Spanish by Baltazar Peers del
Castillo, and now into English,

By Francis Farrer Merchant.

London, Printed for Sam. Ferris at his shop in Cannon-street near
London-stone, 1663.

To the Lady SIBBEL BOTELER, my ever honored Mother.
Madam,
THough You have, and I am sure may claim, a Maternal intrest in several
hopeful, industrious and obedient Sons, the Delight, the Prop and Honor of
your Age; Yet none of them has been more experimentally sensible of the
adverse stroke of Fortune, (and thereby more apprehensive of the various
Miseries which attend mankind, upon the stage of this World) then my self; If
I should have penned mine own tragic story, it would have appeared sad enough;
but casting mine Eye upon several works, worthy esteem, I found none more
agreeable to most men's, especially mine own condition, or any more fit for
public contemplation, in these latter ages then this, which is aptly styled
(as I have found the world to be) a mere Theater, where every man acts his
part: And indeed I could find no way more fit to Vindicate my life from
suspicions of Idleness, and the Aspersions of uncharitable Tongues, then to
produce this Translation, as a witness of my real desires and intentions to
pass those too many spare hours, days, nay years (which God has been pleased
to inflict as a trial) not in a vicious mispending, but rather in a modest,
humble, and virtuous, contemplating, enjoying and improving of time, which I
conceive ought to be employed, first to Gods glory, secondly for the good of
mankind in general, and thirdly for purchasing present, private, good, and
future bliss.

As for the subject, it is in other languages very learnedly set forth, and
fear I have rather, ignorantly, abused then voluntarily misused it, having been
bred a negotiating Merchant; And not an Industrious or judicious Scholar,
which am confident to your self, with all that know me (and I hope to those
that know me not) will cause a favorable construction, for what errors may
therein be committed.

Dear Madam though to your many extraordinary and more then common blessings
and favors, I am not able to return any thing, but (what otherways Low) love,
duty and obedience; yet let me request an acceptance of this small mite of my
endeavors, upon which, It you are pleased but to cast a smile, I shall be
joyful, and withal persuaded that having your judicious Approbation, there will
be no moderate, or charitable person, but will accept the discourse, though
they may not applaud the style, of him, who now a ever he has done, subscribes
himself,

Your Dutiful and Obedient Son, Francis Farrer.

The Author to the Courteous Reader, wishes Health and Happiness.
DEsiring (friendly Reader) with some special service to gratify the
favorable entertainment thou did vouchsafe to a former translation called
Chel^donio and other works of ours, amongst many and various cogitations and
purposes which offered to my view, none did appear more worthy the speculation
and the contemplation of a Christian Commonweal, than this present Treatise,
taken for the most part out of St. Augustines Book de civitate Dei: In the
which he does manage a feirce war against all Infidels and enemies of the
Christian Faith, and puts to confusion and conquers those Pagans with their own
weapons, the which gave me boldness to take so great a charge on my shoulders,
trusting by the grace of God, to bring to light in our vulgar Tongue, a work
that may in some measure serve for a s^eild against the Assaults of many new
Sects and Opinions, which do spring and increase throughout the whole world in
these our days.

But here I will not trespass upon thy patience, to put thee to consider, how
many Books, and how many Greek as well as Latin and French Authors it was
necessary to read and ^ur(...) to bring to effect so difficult a design;
although from this work I have not gathered so necessary a fruit as to
understand the full intention of good St: Augustine, which in this Book rather
then in others his works appears more intricate to be found out; yet from a
continual and much Reading of Greek, Latin and French Authors, I at length
produced this, which I call, The Theater of the World, adorned with the best
and most commendable Sentences of them; Therefore not to take from any the
honor due to them, (gentle Reader) thou may believe that the Treatise I
present to thy view is the choice conceptions of other men's works; the which if
thou should call it health, or making spoils of other men's labors, would
be taken for no offense; And indeed its no other, but the gathering together of
Sentences with great toil, giving to understand that such like Treatises as
this is, which are in a manner Satirical and Anotomies of Vice, ought to be set
forth with Examples and Sentences of Superiors rather th^n with a lofty style,
or a high manner of writing or speaking.

Object. And now I do well believe, the^e will not want some delicate Paliate
that will say, its true, here are things worth our Reading, but amongst the
Roses, you have put sharp Thorns and prickles: Here are many things very rough
and rigerous, and much severity and bitterness used in them.

Answ. To such galled Horses, that will not stand the currying and are
skittish, when their delights and desires are touched in the least, who will
keep a liberty to themselves of doing evil, and think that none dare, nor can
reprove them; Let me entreat these men before they pass further in perusal of
this Treatise, to read and call to remembrance, with what Authority and rigor
the Ancient Fathers of the Church, as St. Ambrose, St. Jerome, St. Augustine,
Origines, Tertullian Eusebius, Lactantius and others did reprove the Vices and
Sins of their times; also with what a bold heat ^f zeal did St Bernard write to
Pope Eugenius? With what rage does he rise up against scandlous Prelates, in
that Sermon which he made in the Synod concerning spiritual ^astors, and in his
three and thirtieth Sermon upon the Songs, when he comes to strike so home* in
the reprehension of Vices, that he makes sin appear to be an Imposthume of all
filthy and abominable corruptions, crying and complaining* against the great
Pompes and delights, and the vast expenses which the Bishops in his time lived
at, leaning the poor sheep of Jesus Christ to suffer, and his Churches to fall
to the ground: What pricks would it be to their Consciences, to consider the
curse that fell upon Ananias and Saphira his wife, when they kept back part of
the money, the land was sold for, and lied to the Holy Ghost; they fell down
dead at St. Peter's feet: St John Baptist calls sinners sons of Vipers; Let them
consider how Epimenides the Greek called the Cretans, cruel beasts, abominable,
shameless liars, slothful; also let them look how the Prophet Elias, etc.
spoke against the Babylonians: What strange words and sharp expressions they
used, although they were so grave, good and very severe men? tell me now I pray
you, with what stern, feirce and bitter words and sayings, would those
Prophets, Apostles, holy Doctors, and ancient Philosophers preach and reprove,
if they lived in our times, if they had flourished in our age, which is so full
of Vices and so corrupted with all abominable wickednesses, that it appears
like nothing more than a receptacle, or sink, wherein the filth, dung, and
Vice of all Ages past, are emptied* Yet I would not be taken for such a
reformer, as to be an absolute Judge of men's Vices; for I am a man as others
are, a sinner; and for telling the truth of passages, I would not willingly
offend any man; for my intent is to speak against men's Vices, not against their
persons: And I will unmask some sins which go hidden, that weak people way not
hence forward fall into their snares, and that they may find the true means
and remedies hereby, to free themselves from so great evils.

As for those that cannot suffer this my way of writing, let them learn to
reform their lives, and govern themselves after such a manner as not to give
offense to others, and thereby to bring dishonor and an evil report upon
themselves: And indeed wicked men live in this world, as in a wild field of
Licenciousnesse: There are many that do dress their Vices in gallant
Liveries, and other do so closely endeavor to mask theirs; as if none should
come to understand or epsy them, such pains and labor do these men take to
attain this their so much desired, yet deceitful liberty; to avoid which,
review favorable Reader this Treatise, which the Author Pedro Bovistuau,
presented to his Country men in Latin, and their native language French, and
Baltazar Peers del Castillo to his beloved Countrymen, the Spaniards: As now I
do to thee and all the rest of our loyal, true hearted Englishmen, to whom if
it find the least favorable acceptance; I shall in testimony thereof, hence
forward not let pass a day of my Life, which I shall not Dedicate to thine and
their service, as now I have this Treatise to the profit and use of all pious
Christians, Farewell.

A Catalogue of such Books as are to be sold by Samuel Ferris in Canon-street
near London-stone.
Speedy Conversion, the only means to prevent emment destruction, very
seasonable for these Times, by James late Lord Primate of Ireland

An Epitomy of History.

Mensuration made easy: or, the way of measuring all solid and regular bodies,
as of Timber, Stone, Glass, etc. by John Martyn, Surveyour.

Canaans Flowings, or Milk and Honey; being a collection of many Christian
Experiences, saying, sentences, etc. by Ralph-Venning.

The History of the World; or, an Account of Time, Compiled by the learned
Dionisius Petavius.

A Practical Commentary, or an Exposition with Observations, Reasons, and Uses
upon the first Epistle General of St. John. By John Cotton, Pastor of Boston in
New England.

An Exposition with Practical Observations, continued upon the Fifteenth,
sixteenth and seventeenth Chapters of the Book of Job, by Joseph Caryl.

Several Treatises, viz. The Dejected Souls Cure. The ministry of Angels to the
heirs of Salvation. Gods Omnipresence. The Sinners Legacy The Combat between
Flesh and Spirit. The Christians Directory to guide him in his several
conditions, by Christopher Love, late Minister of St. Laurence Jury, London.

A Treatise of Effectual Calling and Election, by Christopher Love.

The Zealous Christian taking Heaven by holy Violence, by Christopher Love.

Cheap Riches, or a Pocket-Companion made of five hundred Proverbial
Aphorisms, etc by Nath. Church.

Gildas Salvianus; The Reformed Pastor. By Richard Baxter of Kederminster.

The Desciption and Use of an Instrument called the Double Scale of Proportion,
by Seth Partridge.

The English Physicians Guide; or a Holy-guide, Leading the Way to know all
things Past, Present and to come, to Resolve all manner of Questions, etc by J.
H. Student in Physic and Astrology.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE Miseries of Man, And the many vice which are Predominant
at this day amongst all degrees and condition of Persons, and in which he is
compared with other Creatures, and how in many things they excel him.
SOme of the ancient Philosophers Greeks, Latins, and others; after that they
had diligently searched out, and seriously contemplated the nature and kinds of
all Creatures, and discussed, the being, the virtues and properties of them
all, and comparing theirs with ours; said, that Man is more miserable, then all
things that breaths or walks upon the face of the whole Earth, and that his
condition is worse, being subject to so many and great misfortunes; others that
are more rigorous Judges and Censurors of the works of nature, do call her a
cruel Stepmother, that is not in any respect favorable to mankind, and
uttered a thousand other blasphemies, (as I may say) against her, some others
of them all their lives long bewailed the Calamities and Miseseries of
humanity, not ceasing a moment to refrain from tears as Heraclitus, continually
persuading a(...)en, that this life was nothing else but a The(...)e of
miseries and sorrows, that all things that Men can behold under the Heavens,
are merely a Sea of passion, which requires nothing less then our continual
Tears, Sights, and Groans. Others again, like Democritus laughing, jesting, and
mocking, made a bloody war against the vices that then reigned in the World; if
he, I say, should arise from the Grave, and see the disorderly and confused
vices, that are so risen amongst us Christians now a days, he would find far
more cause of laughter and derision, then he had in his days. There was another
kind of Philosophers that were far more disdainful and strange, that did not
content their fantastical humors, only to murmur against nature, or complain
of her works and effects; but with so great, mortal, and unnatural hatred did
persecute man, as if they thought he was born for the only mark of white, at
which they were to discharge, or let fly all their Arrows, Darts, and shots of
curses, miseries, and calamities, that they or all other Creatures could let
loose upon him; Of whom I shall give one for an example: Timon an Athenian
Philosopher, who was the Inventor, Fomenter, and most rigorous setter forth of
this opinion, for he did not only declare himself a capital enemy of mankind,
and tell it to all men's faces; but his actions confirmed his words; for he
would not converse, or have any dealing with, or dwell amongst men, but rather
live in the desert amongst bruit beasts, far from any neighborhood, or Town,
that he might be troubled with no visits, and living as he did, he did shun
ever to be seen or spoken with, much less to be visited by any, except one an
Athenian Captain, named Alcibiades, and his familiarity with him, was not for
any love or friendship toward him; but he understood the said Captain was like
to be a scourge to men, and that he was born to be a torment and trouble to
them; for (by some divination) he certainly knew that his Athenian Neighbors
were to suffer many afflictions and vexations for his sake; nay, he did not
content himself to let loose the reigns of his malice: Thus far against man his
own kind, only to fly from, as from some cruel and fearce beast, but he did
endeavor to do him all the mischief that lay in his power to procure even to
destroy and ruin all mankind, inventing new ways how to bring to the ground,
and end their days, to accomplish which he caused to be set up in his Orchard
many Gallowses, to the end all desperate Persons, that might be wearied with
the troubles of this life, should go thither and destroy themselves; Now some
few years afterward for his own accommodation, or to enlarge the place of his
habitation, it was necessary for him to take down those Gallowses, so without
any premeditation, of what might succeed him, and withal to show his farther
malice, he went to Athens, whether being come, without any shame; he called the
people together by lifting up his voice in the streets, as a common Crier does
when he proclaims any novelty, the Citizens hearing the Hoarse, and strange
voice of that foul and horrid Monster, and knowing long before the sordid
humor and opinion that possessed his mind; they instantly gathered themselves
to him, hoping to hear some novelty or wonder, he seeing the greatest part of
the Citizens, as well principal as common, congregated to hear him, began to
speak with an audible voice; saying, know Citizens of Athens, that for a
certain necessa^y occasion which has happened to me, I am re^olved to pull down
the Gallowses that are in my Garden; therefore if any man be so weary ^f ^his
world, or be so desperate as to hang himself, let it be presently, before I
pluck them down, after he had ended this his so affectionate offer, without
making any farther discourse; he returned to his House, where he dyed in this
his vain opinion, but continually musing and contemplating Man's Misery, and
when the pangs of death seized on him, to show the Odium he bare to Man; even
to his last gasp, he commanded expressly, under heavy curses, that his Corpse
should not be burried in the Earth; because (said he) it is the element upon
which men do commonly take their quiet repose, and in the bowels of which
humane bodies were buried, and all this for fear his bones should be seen of
men, or the dust of his Carcas should touch or be mixed with theirs; but that
they should cast him into the Sea, where the fury of the swelling waves might
not only hinder, but defend the passage of any Creature in their approach to
this his elected Tomb, and he commanded the following Epitaph to be written of
him, which Plutarch makes mention of, and was learnedly translated by Claudio
Gruget.

After my miserable and wretched life ended, they buried me in these deep
waters; Reader, be not curious to understand my name, God confound thee. Here
you see this spiritually poor, though naturally wise Philosopher, having
thoroughly examined humane frailty in this world, heartily wished he had not been
born a man; but much rather that he had been brought forth, by, or transformed
into some bruit beast, and merely upon the deep sense and understanding he had
of the invetterate malice that dwells in the hearts of men.

But now let us leave this our ancient Philosopher Timon to his malicious
complainings, and briny Sepulcher, that we may give way to a serious view of
some of the expressions of of Marco Aurelio, a Roman Emperor, to this effect;
who as great a Philosopher as an Emperor considering, the weak miserable and
fragil condition, which continually attends the poor and short life of Man;
said, the Battle of this World is dangerous, the end of which is so wonderfully
terrible, that I am very certain, that if any one of our forefathers should
arise from the dead; truly relate, and give us a perfect view of his whole life
past from the time he came from his Mothers womb, even to his last breath,
giving at large another of the great pains and griefs his body has suffered,
and seriously discovering the strange alarms and various successes, with which
fortune has persecuted him, it would cause admiration in all men, to consider
the body that has suffered so many torments, and the heart that has so
valiently conquered so great difficult war-fares; and I my self do freely
confess to have found the same to be true, which though it be to my disgrace;
yet for the profit that may redoun'd to after ages (I will relate) in fifty
years that I have lived, I resolved to make trial of all the vices and evils
of this life, that I might understand whether the malicious wickedness of men
had any limits or bounds, but finds experimentally, after a serious speculation
and consideration, that the more I drink, the more I thirst; the more I sleep,
the more I desire; the more rest I enjoy, the more weary I am, the more I have,
the more I desire, the more content I have in seeking, the less in enjoying:
finally, there is no sublunary thing that I obtain, with the which I am not
quickly cloyed, as suddenly abhor it, and desire another thing; O how
excellently did that famous Greek Doctor St. John Chrysostom, contemplate
after he had merely out of compassion bewailed the Calamities of man, and that
dark obscurity with which they are encompassed, when he cried out; Oh, who
could obtain the benefit of a Watchtower which were so convenient and
skillfully built, that from thence he might easily see all men, and that he
could enjoy so great, and audible a voice, that from thence being heard and
understood of all he might proclaim, the high sentence expressed by that Royal
King and Prophet David, how long will your hearts be hardened: Oh, ye Sons of
men, and not without great cause and good reason, did this holy man St.
Chrysostom use these zealous expressions, for let any man after a sound and
mature Judgment; but seriously consider the miserable estate and condition that
the whole World lies under at this day, the many traps, cozenages, cheats,
blasphemies, adulteries, roberies, incests, wars, dissentions and effusions of
blood; violencies, rapines, ambitions, covetousnesses, hatreds, rumources,
malices, desires of revenge, etc. With which the uverse lies drunk, nay, even
drowned in; May say, that we are come very near the time, which was so much
abhorred and abominated by the Holy Prophet, Isai. 59. cha. 2. v. Who has said,
your iniquities have separated betwixt you and your God, and your sins have hid
his face from you that he will not hear, for your hands are defiled with blood,
and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, and your tongue
has muttered perverseness, none called for Justice, nor any pleads for truth,
they trust in vanity and speak lies; they conceive mischief, and bring forth
iniquity, they hatch Cockatrice Eggs, and weave the Spiders Web, he that eats
of their Eggs dies, and that which is crushed breaks out into a viper, their
Webs shall not become garments, never shall they cover themselves with their
works, for their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in
their hands, their feet run to evil, and they make have to shed innocent blood;
their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and destruction are in their
paths, the way of peace they know not, and so on: And indeed, our wickedness
does multiply, and our sins are our capital enemies, and give the greatest
testimony what we are.

St. Bernard in one lamentation that he makes upon the miseries of our life,
sets forth to us, how much the sad and debil condition of man is, to the end
that without any farther discourse, he might bring him to understand his own
weak and fragil condition, which he begins to tell as follows: Oh man, both
blind and naked, consisting of humane flesh and a reasonable soul; awake thou
that art so forgetful, call to remembrance; consider what thou art, wherefore
do thou wander so vainly from thy self, even drunk and besotted with things
that are subject to so sudden and perishable a mutability, sleeping so
securely amidst the vanities of this World; nay, rather drowned in the weak and
fregil delight which the Earth sets before thee; do thou not plainly perceive
that the nearer thou make thy approache^ to the World, the farther thou art
parted from thy God; by how much the more thou seem to gain of these outward
vanities, so much thou love of those things, which thou ought to set a
higher price upon; the more careful thou art to enrich thy self in things
corporal, so much the poorer and beggarly will thou find thy self in things
spiritual, thou judge and correctest other men's actions, whilst thou art
forgetful to reform thine own; there is no Creature thou take in hand but
thou tamest, only thy self remains unbridled, thou art very watchful and
solicitous to epsy out the faults of others, but art very floathfull and
backward to look how and amend thine own; thou have a boiling desire of these
sublunary things in thy heart; but what a lukewarm, nay cold entertainment
finds coelestials in thy mind, consider the nearer thou drawest to death, the
farther reperation thou make betwixt thee and thy salvation; all thy content
is to provide for, dight, cocker and delight thy body, which is nothing else
but a lump of earth, a sepulcher full of vermin; and leavest thy poor soul,
which is the lively image of God alone, comfortless, unfed, nay dead with
famine, these and many other the like sorrows, did this holy man, (being in the
desert) express against the ingratitude of men, which we place here amongst the
rest, that it might be a deep persuasion to man, to consider and contemplate
his vile condition, that by retiring into himself, he should by a serious
meditation be induced to understand the sad and miserable being, and that
thereby he might see, the great need he stands in of his God, in whose hand it
is either to make him happy, or miserable, or full of evils and perpetual
torments, without doing him the least injustice or injury, more then does the
Potter to the piece of Earth, or Clay, in his hands breaking and molding of it;
either to make any vessel thereof, or to let it remain in a confused lump not
having any forms; for indeed man is no other thing, but a statute of Clay
placed in this World, (which is the mouth and warehouse, wherein is declared
the wonderful works of God) and that if one should encounter it sharply, there
is no doubt but it would fall to the ground in pieces; and although he is
compassed with so many evils and infirmities, and sees himself subject
continually to the hazard of death; yet he is forgetful, and never takes care
truly and humbly to submit to his God, nor ever would willingly be his true
Subject.

Now that we have in general considered the estate of man, it will be
convenient that we treat thereof more particularly and amply, that all men
might be persuaded to humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, and that
by a more narrow search into themselves, and a nearer speculation, every man
into his own debill, and fragill condition; and because of all the heathen
Philosophers Pliny has written (as I conceive) the best, therefore I will in
this place declare his opinion, to the shame and confusion of Christians, that
they should be tought in these things of a Pagan, one that knew not God,
without law, or the least light of those Holy and Evangelical mysteries
declared to us, which adds to our greater reproach; consider a while (says
he) how man is necessitated to hide, cover, and cherish his frail body, at the
cost of other Creatures, for the which nature has with a large hand
plentifully provided, some with feathers, others skins, furs, scales, and
fleeces; Nay, even the Trees are is no sooner sprung up but they have a coat
bestowed on them, of bark to defend them from the violence of the suns heat,
and winters storms, but to set forth the better; what a small vallue or esteem
she had for man, he alone is cast into the World naked, like an abortive or
rejected thing, and is no sooner born, but she furnishes him with sobs and
tears, for a lawful inheritance; as a sign, of those miserable calamities he
is to undergo, for those tears which man sheds at his birth, are the heralds
and discoverers of that field of dangerous evils, into which he enters; Here
thou see (gentle Reader) the beginning of the fairest and most principal of
the works which God created, in the first six days of the World for whose
respect all Creatures have their being, yet of himself is of so little
validity, that if they do not cherish, succor, defend, and protect his
nakedness; he would be subject to the violence of every Creature; do but behold
him after he is taken from his mothers womb, and they will see him bound,
wrapped up, lying down; and like the trunk of a Tree not able to raise himself
up without assistance; Here you may look upon, and contemplate this so proud a
Creature; (who by his appearance, would cause us to believe that he came into
the World merely to swell and be puffed up with pride and vanity, see his
beginning is in sorrow.

But now let us consider: When will he begin to use his feet? When will he
begin to use his tongue? To how many infirmities is he subject? All other
Creatures, when they are first brought forth understand something of the actions
of their nature, some do succor themselves with their swiftness; others with
their strength: Only man knows nothing unless he be taught, the most certain
natural knowledge that possesses him at his birth is to weep; he only amongst
all Creatures is subject to labors, troubles, passions, pleasures, delights,
ambitions, courtuousness; and indeed, to all disorderly appetite of this life,
he only is born to serve his own concupisence, and thereby to suffer extreme
anguish and sorrow, and to be short, he is the most subject to entertain
emnities and odioms, against those of his own kind; all other Creatures live at
peace with those of their kind, the Wolves do no hurt, nor do prey upon each
other; but live in love and amity one with another, only man is a capital enemy
to man, and worse if it could be expressed; and for some sign of favor to other
Creatures more then to Man; but (as! conceive,) to do him a more favorable
courtesy by his contemplation thereof, Dame nature has provided for them of
Houses fit to shelter, and protect them from the inclemency of the Heavens, and
from the vehemencies of frosts, snow, and storms; bestowing upon the greatest
of them, dens, and caves, and to the lesser Houses proper for them, which
they carry upon their backs, as Tortoise, the Cockle, the Snail, etc. and to
all other small Creatures; such accommodation as is most befitting their kind
and being; Also I cannot be unmindfull of the Fruit and Seed of the ground how
she has provided for them, cases, rindes, prickles, thorns, and husks; in the
which to retire defend and preserve their kind; but man has nothing, unless he
does procure it by the hard labor of his body, and the sweat of his brows;
nay, many times even drops of blood, before he can obtain either to satisfy his
hungry appetite; or cloth his naked body.

Now, if we do but consider the health, and good constitution of body, that
other Creatures enjoy; compared with ours: We shall clearly see what advantage
they have of us, for it does appear. Man is naturally formed, and as it were
gilded over with a beautiful complexion, but it is so weak and subject to
such diversity of infirmities, that it would be accounted a wonder in the World
to find a Man whose beauty is not fading, and changing. And farther then this,
Nature has purcharged Men with such an unsatiable and hungry appetite, that we
never cease, seeking after and desiring the choysest viands: to supply our
emptiness, and if in case we find any thing that seems pleasing to our palate,
we cannot refrain only to suffice, but overcharge nature, by devouring so much
thereof; from which superfluities are engendered Catarres, Flegms, Apoplexes,
and a thousand other diseases. Other Creatures do not so, for they content
themselves with what nature has provided for them, eating it as it is, without
boiling, roasting, or otherways dressing it, to content their appetite or
pleasing their fancies; and with this she has bestowed upon them such a
regulated contentment, that they eat or drink not more then what is needful
for the maintaining life; but Man had he all the fruits of the earth, the flesh
of all cattle in the World, of all the fishes in the Waters, of all the fouls
of Heaven, all would not be sufficient to satisfy his greedy desire, in the
spoiling, consuming, and destroying them only; but he must have them masked,
dressed, seasoned, and sophisticated brought into, several dissimulated gustos,
merely to invite and draw his stomach and gluttonous appetite to devour more
then nature requires, even to the overcharging the ship, and causing her to
sink under her lading; nay, they fill their stomachs so brimfull with these
pleasing viands; that they intoxicate their best part, insomuch that there is
not one of their senses, but is disabled to do any true service to the bodies
use; and truly, with grief and shame enough I speak it; that the superfluous
vices of glottony and drunkenness which at this day is so predominant amongst
Christians, causes many utterly to loose their shame, and to prostrate their
bodies to all sorts of vices, be they never so execrably wicked, even to the
committing of Whoredoms, Thieveries, Murders, Poysonings, and in toxicating
Witch-crafts, and I do much wonder, how that the entrails of very many are not
rotted, and their Livers burnt up and putrified, with the excess of meats and
drinks; when behold poor Lazarus lying at the door; even perishing with hunger,
and cannot obtain a morsells of what remains in fragments, or procure the least
crum that falls from their Tables; for which cause the Prophets call these men
Fat Calves, Belly-gods, etc. Certainly, they are justly compared to bruit
beasts, for the soul (which is the principal part of man) that does inhabit
such bodies, lies embalmed as it were with wines, sauces and pleasant viands,
she lies as in a dark and obscure Prison, drowned and overwhelmed as in a full
Sea; also the five Senses, which should be at her command, and serve her as
wayting-Gentlemen, they cannot attend her; being burried as in the entrails of
bruit beasts; against such gluttons as these, who make a God of their bellyes.
The Prophet expresses a curse; saying, woe be to thee that rise up early to
drink, and remain unto the evening, till Wine has inflamed thee; This sort of
vice, for our sins, is so rooted, so common, and made so familiar amongst all
Nations, that there is none but have a touch thereof, and none but are in some
measure infected therewith; and which is worse, and preceeds farther, is, that
it is counted a glorious Exploit for a Man to exceed in drinking, and most Men
do account it a fame to be taken for g^^d T^pers. The Tarters, the Persians,
and (...) Greeks, held it to be the highest glory to (...) high, they erected
triumphant Trophies (...) those that did excel: The Macedonians learned this
vice of Alexander their Emperor, but the Italians bore away the bell, and
carried away the prize from all the rest, for emptying the Bowls, (I could wish
England did not excel, or strive to excel herein our time.) Pliny writes, that
drunkenness in his time did arive to such a height, that Men did not content
themselves to take turns in their healths each with other, but they caused
their flocks and herds to drink Wine without measure. Paulo Diacano in his
History, relates a strange story of this monstrous and horrid vice of
drunkenness; saying, there were four old Men agreed to meet together at a
Colation, in the which they resolved to drink each Man the years of his age,
and made a challenge two and two; in the which every Man was to drink so many
times as he had lived years; the youngest of them was 58. years of age, the
second 64. the third 87. and the fourth 92. years old; we do not certainly know
whether they eat little or much at that banquet; but this is known, that he that
turned up least, drank 58. cups, and the most 92. Considering this, and knowing
the wrong that superfluity of Wine does to Men, not without cause did Plato
say, that in some measure it appeared that the Gods did send the Wine to
mankind, or rather create the Juice of the Grape in the World, for a
chastisement and vengance upon Man for his sins; for when they are once drowned
in this sweet liquor, they attempt all vice, they fight, and many times kill
and destroy each other; the which was contemplated by Cyneas the Ambassador of
the Great King Pyrrus; the first day of his arrival in Egypt, when he saw the
excessive Grandeur of the Plants, and great height of the Wines of that
Country, said very justly may such a mother deserve a severe punishment, that
produces such a vicious Son as Wine is; and the same consideration caused
Anedrocides to prophecy to that Great Monarch Alexander, that Wine was the
blood of the Earth, and that he should be careful to refrain from it; the
which he contradicting, and being at several times distemperd with it, he
killed Clito his friend; burnt the City of Percepolis, and caused his best
Physician to be set upon a Stake, these and otheir enormions, uncomely and
excessive crimes did he commit in that condition, which me thinks cannot but
cause a loathing in the soul of every good Christian of the vice of
drunkenness; considering how it lays him open to all wickednesses, and to the
commission of such horrid evils, and afterward causes a sad heart to
remember them, and many tears to repent them.

These two vices of glottony and drunkenness did not begin to take root in our
days, but they made their entrance into the World at the beginning: The desire
to eat and taste of choice fruit, was the cause of our Fore-father Adam and Eve
their fall, and the shutting us out of Paradise: By the glotony of Herod (that
is after he had eaten and drunk liberally) he made that promise by which St.
John Baptist lost his head; the rich Gutton for minding his Belly more then any
thing else, was condemned for it; The Text says, he fared deliciously every
day: as he buried himself in delights, not conside^ing the poor, so was he
afterward drowned in torments, and buried unpittied. Noah being overcome with
Wine discovered his nakedness, to the derision of one of his Sons; Lot in his
Wine lies with both his Daughters, and unknown; what a stupidity does it bring
upon us, even to the forgetting of our selves, our condition, and our nature;
Here you see plainly how Dame Nature has bestowed her favors more to other
Creatures then to us; for they know to withold, rule, and put such bounds to
their appetites, that they seldom pass them, always satisfying themselves with
what is necessary to maintain nature, and preserve health; for which cause they
seldom are afflicted with thus many and great infirmities, which do
continually war against us; and if in case any dolours or calamities do trouble
or molest them, nature has endowed them with such a knowledge as to seek out
peculiars and proper remedies for their diseases, without any necessity of
running to Doctors, who many times instead of putting recipe, put decipe,
changing r. for d. and for there rrecipe often we pay very dear, and give our
money freely to such as destroy us; because their Medicines for the most part
are mixtures composed rather to the decaying, then the upholding of nature, and
are very dangerous; the which other Creatures are free of, because they have
some understanding what is fittest for their cure: as the Wild Pigions, Jayes,
Black-Birds, Partriges, etc. do purge their superfluities with Laurel-leaves;
the tame Pigions, Turtles, and Chickens, with the herb Pelitory; Dogs and
Cats when they find themselves much overcharged, do cleanse by eating the Grass
that is watered with the morning dew; the Red-Deer when he is wounded,
understands so much as to procure Dittany for his cure; the Weesel when he
intends to encounter with the Rat, eats Rue, by which he finds himself more
strengthened and courageous; The Wild Boares cure themselves with Ivy; The
Bears with Mandrake; and the Eagles knowing with what difficulty and pain they
lay their Eggs, by reason of the straightness of their passage, they seek out a
stone called Tiles; which the French and Spanish call the Eagles Stone, by
virtue of which they enlarge the passage, and lay their Eggs with more ease;
which sort of Stone is made use of by many Ladies in Italy to this day, for
their easy delivering.

Also there are many Creatures which may serve not only for Doctors, but
Medicines; There is a Bird called Colio, which Aristole speaks of in his Book
of Creatures, that a Man that has Jaundice looking upon him, is presently
healed, and the Bird dies; The Swallows, if in case (as some times they do)
they find their young ones blind with the smoke of the Chimny, wherein often
they build their nests; they search out for the Herb Celandine, or Tetterwort,
by means of which they quickly recover their sight; The Snakes, and several
other the like creeping things, finding age and a dimness of sight to creep
upon them to prevent it, and also that they may renew both, eat Fennil, and
remain as youthful and quick sighted as at the first; the Pelican does not only
wound, but many times dye of those hurts, with which they pierce their breasts,
with their own heart blood to cure their young ones, being stung by malicious
Serpents: It is confessed on all hands, that the Apothecary was taught by the
Stork, the use of Glisters, for when he finds himself obstructed, he thrusts
into his fundament the Moss of Trees, and sometimes Herbs and Grass. Plutarch
being elevated with admiration, considering the great favors and gifts
naturally is bestowed upon other Creatures, more then upon Man; does undertake
to affirm, that the Animals have a knowledge of all the three parts of Physic;
for after he has proved (as I have said) that they understand the greatest
part of Simples, and know how to use them for their own benefit; Also (says
he) they observe the second part, which is moderation in diet; for when they
find themselves so satisfied, that they grow too fat thereby, then they eat
more sparingly, and sometimes fast; Instance the Lions and Wolves, when they
find that they increase overmuch in fat, eat no flesh, but sustain themselves
for a convenient time, only by sleeping in their Caves and Dens, till they are
come to their former stint of flesh, and agility of body; For the third part of
Medicine, which is Chyrurgery, it is held for a certain opinion, that the
Elephants have some knowledge, and make some use thereof, for they understand
how to pluck out the Arrows, Darts, and Spears that are shot, or thrown at
them, without benuming the wounded part, or doing it any damage, and this
instinct nature freely bestows on them, without being otherwise taught.

All which being deeply considered by that Greek Philosopher Herophite, caused
him sadly to complain, of the low and miserable condition of man, who in
reallity was made Lord of all the Creatures, yet in many things is forced to be
seemingly preatice to some of the most depicable of Aninals; Will thou see,
says he, the truth hereof, the Swallows taught him how to frame and build
houses, behold the art they use in making their nests, wherein to lay their
Eggs, they put the strongest materials at the bottom for a foundation, and
their uppermost are made thinner, and for within delicate soft things; and if
in case they cannot find out dirt or clay for their fabric, (as in many hot
Countries they cannot) then they repair to some Brook, and dip themselves till
they are all over wet, they seek out a convenient sort of earth, and mixing it
with the water, make claye fit for their occasions, with as perfect dexterity
as the best Mason; also they build their nests round and not square,
insimilitude to the spherial Globe, the better to defend them from storms and
tempests, and from the assaults and charms of other birds, all which is a
wonderful and strange architecture, and as certainly true as strange.

But to proceed farther, what shall we say of that mavelous and ever to be
admired spinning and weaving of the Spider, which taught women that act; nay
those that pretend most still were her prentices, and even the fowlers learnt
their art, and fishermen to make their nets of them; but their is a vost
different betwixt the works of man and these creatures, whose webs are made so
pure, as there is not the least knot appears, nor one third bigger then
another, and all comes out of the small body of the female, for its she only
that spins, and makes the web alone, she is like the good houswife stays at
home, whilst the Male, like a careful Husband employes himself in catching
flies, and to maintain himself and mate, he seldom leaves his standing, but
is waiting for the Prey that shall fall into his Net; and many times though his
body be no bigger then a Pea, he catches in his toils great flies, small
lizards; he also observes his times and seasons in his gain, as if he
understood a little of Astrology, for he does not wait as we do for fair
weather, but rather when it it is most cloudy his sport is best, by which many
times he would Prognosticate rain to us, for then he catches more cunningly
and quicker, as Aristotle expresses in his Book of Animals. Now tell me
sinceerly, Gentle Reader, who would not wonder at that kind of supernatural
industry, of that Raven which Pliny avers he had seen in Asia, being much
vexed and greived for want of water, and not finding any, but at the bottom of
a Bucket hanging in a well, which was so little in quantity that he could not
reach to drink thereof; at length he fetched so many stones and cast into the
Paile that the water rose up so high as that he could come to satisfy his
thirst; after the same manner did a dog do, which was left alone in a ship by
the Mariners, that he might come to the oil that was in the bottom of a Jarre,
he cast in many pemble stones and so purchased his will and eat it up; Who
taught these Creatures this secret and who taught them this small point of
Philosophy, that light things cannot remain under heavy, but they get
uppermost: And truly if we do but seriously consider the weakness of Man's
understanding naturally, we shall find that the most despicable Creatures, even
those we daily tread under foot, know in some sense more then we do, that it
may seem there is some secret virtue is within them, by which they do so
handsomely take advantage of us, as in prudence, strength, courage, clemency,
rigor, nurture, knowledge and understanding which they have in and amongst
themselves, as to desire those things that are good and useful and to avoid
those that are bad, to flee danger and as it were to make a jest or scoff at
man's understanding; they pretend to know, or do in some measure foresee what is
to come, they provide in the seasons those things that are convenient for their
maintenance and succor in time of need: All which and more being considered,
contemplated, and disputed amongst many of the ancient Philosophers, they
boldly undertook, without any equivocating language, to persuade all, that the
anmials had some part of man's Reason placed in them.

Let us now leave the Physic, Chirugery Architecture, and other Mechanic arts
which I have not only proved are known by other Creatures, but that they have
been Masters instructing men therein; and we will seek out something that may
seem more dilightfull and and pleasant to content such apetites as will not
read other men's writings, unless they find something of solace and pleasure in
them, or unless they meet with some buzzing vanity to awaken their minds
thereto.

What Man is their that can be so dull witted, so slow an Ignoramus, or of so
gross an apprehension; as not to admire, nay be almost at an ecstasy in his
senses to hear the rare melody of the ravishing Nightingale? who can but wonder
to hear a voice so near to a man's, so sweet, and so harmonious, to proceed out
of so small a compass? and which is more to be admired is, that at some time
he is so delighted nay ravished with his own songs; that to see him strain, one
would imagine each note would be his last breath, or as if his life would
expire before his voice, and that with so much dexterity, that many times would
make a man to think he had been taught by some great and skillful Master in the
science of Music, ringing from a base to a mean, and so as his warbling
Sonnet requires, raising his voice to such a height, as is beyond man's
imitation or reach; and being sufficiently wearied with his own chanting
Language, after a small pace he imitateth, and counterfeiteth his own voice,
with such an artificial harmony, that thou would not imagine but that it
were some other bird that sings his tune; and many times on a sudain, he makes
with his courtouse art in his throat such sweet and malodious streams of
Music, that he himself becomes astonished with the delight of his sweet
sounding voice; and gives not only admiration to men, but also to all other
birds with his enchanting and bewitching tongue, causing them to stand mute in
admiration, and sometimes forces them to a striving which can best excel in the
imitating, counterfeiting and stealing, the notes of his unparalleled Music;
and not contenting himself with this; he proceeds further to the teaching his
young ones, inviting and provoking them with the harmony of his own voice, to
imitate the same, instructing them, and giving them fully to understanding the
notes to sing, put into musical order, and to go through with them without any
space of taking breath; some long, others sharp and short, sometimes turning
and winding the whole strains, other whiles making pauses or rests, with
minnums crochets sudenly changing to a teill, then moderating his voice, and as
it were in an instant changing it into so many and diverse guyses, that its
impossible for any art of man to imitate let him study and use the best
endeavors he can. Aristophenes in the Comedy of the singing of the birds in
general, never could arive to counterfeit this, by reason of which and
Demcritus having many years heard the chanting melody of a Nightingale,
publicly confessed, that the Swans and Nightingales, were the masters that
taught men the harmonious science of Music, and that all the most ravishing
passage thereof, were stolen from the birds; the wise Solomon considering the
advantage that other Creatures have of, or how far they do surpass man in
natural understanding; sends him to their Schools and University, saying in
his Book of the Proverbs 30. Chap. 24. ver. there be four thing which are
little upon the earth, but they are exceeding wise; the Ants are a people not
strong, yet they prepare their meat in the summer; and the Conies are but a
feeble folk, yet they make their houses in the rocks; The Locusts have no
King, yet they go forth all of them by squadrons, or bands; The Spider works
with her hands, and is in Kings Palaces.

Its an incredible thing to contemplate the Ants; the manner how they load
themselves and the means they use to get home with burdens heavier and of
bigger bulk then themselves; and that with admired care, labor and diligence;
with what strange cunning, they bite off the ends of the grains of wheat before
they lay them up in their storehouses, that it should not grow nor rot; but
their natural understanding reaches further yet, and it cannot but be a
pleasure to behold them taking out their provisions to dry it after a soaking
shower; as also to consider, their art in making their little vaults, which is
worth our admiration, they make not the entrance thereof straight but crooked,
with two or three several ways, that other small creatures may not come to
guess at, nor come to know the fabric or true passages of their little caves,
they enter by winding and turning paths which does cause the others to loose
their way and conducts themselves to three principle (and for their use larg)
rooms, in the one of which they dress their meat, and eat, this serves them in
stead of a Royal Palace, to delight themselves in; the second is their
grannary, wherein their provision for the whole year is laid; and the third as
Plutarch notes, serves them for a vault, or a place to bury their dead; for it
is certain, as most of the natural Philosophers have found experimentally, that
they do make pompious exequies for those that die being a thing as has taught
them, is right due to the dead; not without good ground did that wise King
Solomon, then send us to the Ants and the Conies; in which we see the wonders
of God, that in so small creatures should palpably apeare such parties of
virtue (as I may say) and that from such weak and despicable animals we should
be taught such difficult lessons as, that we should fly from idleness, which
is the Mother and cherisher of all vices; which they strictly observed in the
primitive Church, for every one was commanded to live by his own labor, and
men durst not be lasie, nor evilly, foolishly, or unprofitably to spend their
Estates; The like was strictly observed by the ancient Romans, as Cicero that
Father of Eloquence relates, in the Book that he writes of the Laws of that
Commonwealth, in which he affirms, that no Roman durst go in the streets,
unless he had with him some signal Instrument, whereby to demonstrate his
calling or trade; and to give to understand, that he lived of his own labor,
and eat not of the sweat of another man's brows; therefore the Consulls had
constantly carried before them a battel-ax; their Priests did wear on their
heads a things much like a woman's vail; the Tribune bore in their hands a Mace;
The Fencers a Sword; The Tailor a pair of Shears; The Smiths a Hammer; The
Orators a Book; not permitting that those Men that were Masters of the Arts
and Sciences, should be the Servants of vices. If we do but judiciously
consider the Creatures of God, we shall find that amongst them all; Men only
delights in Idleness, though we plainly see that God imposes most labor on his
most excellent Creatures: The Sun never cease running his course from East to
West, the Moon never stands at a stay, the Heavens continually move, nor any of
the Planets do enjoy a moment of repose, the Air ever is passing to and fro;
The Seas, Rivers, and Fountains, never cease running, ebbing, or flowing; the
Earth, though a solid body, yet never is at rest, some time producing grass,
then Plants, then fruits for the maintenance of Man, and Beast, so that in
summer we find nature never is idle, but some time producing, other whiles
corrupting, then altering and then preserving things being incessantly active.
In conclusion, Gentle Reader, thou may believe that there is no disease can
be more pestiferous, and contagious for a Commonwealth, then is this grand Vice
of Idleness for it occasions the inventing of all mischeifes, evil expenses of
time and estates, and of wicked delights, which tend to the utter destruction
of men; so that we cannot but judge such persons more miserable then the bruit
beasts, who are profitable to us, and labor for us; as the Oxen, who give
their hides to shoo us, their flesh to feed us, and their strength to til the
ground for us; the innocent sheep yields her wool to cloth us, and her flesh
to feed us; but man is void of so much good: I mean, the vicious idle person,
is proffitable for nothing, nor is servicable in any thing, but to offend his
God, scandalize his Neighbor, eat of the sweat of other men's brow, devour the
Bread that others have labored for, to defloure Virgins, and dishonor women,
the thing above written being considered we may easily beheld with what a large
bounty nature has enriched the bruit creatures, and more especially
contemplating the plausible and costomary manner of their regulated and orderly
living, the well governed republikes that is amongst many of them, their just
and wholesome Laws, so well observed by all, constrains us to confess that we
are forced to imitate to observe, and order many thing as they do, tell me what
man is their so cruel and blood thirsty that will not in some measure, moderate
and appease his implacable Ire, and desire of revengea where he shall consider
that there is no beast, how brutish and fearce soever they be that will,
destroy, hurt, o^ c^^^ally exsecute those of their own kind; also tell ^e what
Son is their that can be so cruel ung^a^^full, and forgetful of his parents in
occa(...) as not to be moved, with yerning (...) of compassionate pity, when
he shall think upon the storkes, how they feed nourish, and cherish, their aged
parents, serving and ^ringing them food, in acknowledgment of (...) great care
they had of them when they were young, in bringing them up; Eliano adds a
further strange story and more difficult to be believed, then the former, the
love of the young Storks to their aged Parents, that if they have not any
substance ready at hand, being upon a case of necessity; they force themselves
to turn up what they eat the day before, that the old ones may supply their
present needs, and not dye by their neglect for want of nourishment, whilst
the young ones go abroad to provide more; or what father or mother is their
that shall be so cruel, or pittyless, to destroy, evil treat, or kill their
young Children? when they shall but consider, the experienced story of the
Dolphin; who is so diligently careful, and so exceedingly affectionate to her
young ones, that if any Fishermen chance to take any one of them, she will not
depart from about that man's boat, but continually follow him night and day,
till he enter into harbor, as if she had rather be taken her self, then leave
her young one. The like is storyed of another fish called in some places
Glaucus, a fish not so commonly known, nor so familiar and friendly to man as
the Dolphin is, yet is as careful to preserve and defend her young ones, for
when she sees a man, or any other creature, that may be any way destructive or
prejudicial to them, she swallows them alive, and swimes with them to a place
of security, where she turns them out again, without the least hurt to them;
it seems to be an incredible thing, that such a height of natural afection
should harbor in this creature who had rather force nature, and put her self
to suffer, then that her young should receive the least detriment.

Who is he that shall not endeavor to the uttermost patiently to undergo
poverty, or any other affliction that shall come upon him, if he do but
consider the Tuttle, a kind of fish with many legs, who when he is in extremity
of hunger, and can procure no substance, lays hold upon some of his legs and
eats them, knowing that they will grow out again, even as man's prosperity does
commonly after adversity?

Though death be terrible, and of all things most terrible to nature; yet what
man is their so faint hearted, fearful, and cowardly, as not to recover some
courage, when he shall contemplate the Swan, who when it finds death to
approach sings with extraordinary harmonious melody, and yet entertaines no
hope of a better life? there is no father that can be so cruel, barbarous, and
contrary to the Law of nature, that would take away all from some of his
children to give to others, thereby to make an extraordinary unequal devision,
if he did but consider the order and manner how the Swallows proceed in
bringing up and providing for their young ones, the which (as Eliano declares
in the Greek history which he wrote concerning the living creatures) do observe
a certain justice and equality in feeding them, by deviding and distributing to
each their proportion; and not only so, but because they cannot bring to the
nest all that's needful at once, but are forced to go several times, and not
to pervert the order observed by them they first feed that which was hatched
first then the second then the third, and so along to each according to its
birth and right of priority, for which cause an Indian Philosopher called
Diphilo after he had experimentally with great attention contemplated the
politic proceeding of this small bird, in feeding and bringing up her young
ones, said, Nature had planted in the hearts of the creatures certain laws;
which might be patterns and examples for men to live uprightly, and politickly
to govern the transsactions of their lives.

Is their any man so stupid or dull as not to draw some prudentiall doctrine
for his instruction, from the actions of the Cuckoo, which is the wisest of all
the birds, although commonly amongst the people its taken for an infamous
traitor, and we all scoff at any cunning in it or any good example from it,
the which with the understanding wherewith nature has endoed her, knowing that
by reason of her extraordinary frigid constitution; she cannot hatch her Eggs;
seeks out the places where other birds build their nests and lay their Eggs,
that she may lay hers amongst them; and the other birds hatche and bring them
up as their own; which may be in some respect, a clear example for parents, in
bringing up and desposing of their children, when they have so many that they
cannot tell how to maintain them, by putting them to trades, or to serve some
great men; where by their labor in the summer of youth, they may provide
suffitient to maintain the cold winter of age, which (if any) is the only time
of rest in all man's life;

What servant is there, that can be negligent careless, and idle, in his
Masters service, if he do seriously consider the noble and generous spirit that
is contained in the heart of a Horse; does he not employ his whole fortitude in
his masters service, and strive with his swiftest abilities to give his owner
content; the horse (as all the natural Philosophers hold) is of so grand
courage of spirit, that he had rather dye, nay, (if he had them) loose a
thousand lives, then desert his master in any eminent danger; but with a
strange and apparent vehemency of desire strives prodigally to spend his life
for his master; his natural and noble courage is such that he will rush like
lightning into the battle and cast down, kill, and destroy any Soldiers that
shall withstand him, leap over hedges, ditches, and trenches, clime up in
accessible (to imagination) cragie Rocks, and fortifications; and to conclude
he will not leave those toilsome labors, until his rider remains victorious,
and enjoyes the end of his desire; but men cannot draw so exact an example from
Horses, to be trusty and loyal, as may be produced by a more familiar and
hourly experiment of Dogs, which do not only know their masters, but fawn
upon, serve, strive to please and accompany them where ever they go, they know
them amongst many men, and will find them out, and are jealous and vexed if they
see their masters make much of any other Dogs; and they are so trusty that they
will rather lose their lives, then their owner shall receive any damage either
in person or goods. For confirmation of which, I shall only insert here one
example, which Plutarh and many others, both Greek and Latin Authors (worthy
to be credited) do relate, which may suffitiently serve, not only for
admiration of all men, but for a terror to all cruel and bloodthirsty
Homicides, and such as set little esteem of the life of a man, the which is so
abhorred, and abominated by the Omnipotent God, that he does many times permit
that the bruit beast shall be executors of his divine justice; and not only so,
but seachers out of Homicides, as will evedently appear by the ensuing story:
All the ancient Historians of animals, do make mention of a King called
Phyrrus, the which marching one day in the head of his Army, casually found in
the way a Dog; waiting upon (nay rather) defending and keeping the dead body of
his Master; the King causing a stop to be made to behold this so strange and
loyal a spectacle, it was declared to him by a plowman of that Country, that
the Dog had been there three days; without eating, drinking or moving from the
place; as if he had been obliged not to forsake the Corpse, such was his love;
upon which the King commanded the body to be buried; and that the Dog should be
maintained with a constant allowance in his own family, as long as he lived, in
testimony of that love, and fidelity he had showed to his master, and few days
after, it was commanded to search out for the murderers which were not to be
found at that time; but it happened a litttle after, that the Captains of the
Army were to make muster of their soldiers, and the King would have them to
pass before him, that he might view their furniture and arms; the Dog
aformentioned, after his master was interred, did continually wait upon the
Royal Person, was present at the time of the soldiers passing by; being in
appearance very sad, which he demonstrated by hanging down his head; being very
quiet, until he espied those that had slain his master; there he with an
earnest, and violent fury began to bark and set upon them, desiring to pull
them in pecces, and withal, he expresed terrible howlings, turning himself
from one side to another and some times toward King Phyrrus, steadfastly
beholding him as if he demanded; favor, and justice, for which reason, the
King, and those about him were very suspicious, that these men had been the
murderers; and were imprisoned only upon this suspicion; who after by
rigourous torments they were strictly examined confessed the fact, and received
punishment due to their fault; which certainly appears to be a wonder; yet sets
forth to us that the judgments of God are just; and that he abhors, and
abominates murderers and such as make light of sheding of humane blood; God
can and often does make use of dumb Creatures to bring to light Homicides and
execute his justice upon them; I could easily produce very many examples of
this kind out of the Histories both ecclesiastical and profane to demonstrate
evedently; that considering the Creatures, there is in many of them a sort of
harmony both moral, as well as of natural Philosophy; which is observed by
their good customs, and well ordered lives according to the dictates of
nature, their justice, temporance courage, their Government as in private
families, and their adminisstration of justice and power in their little
commonwealths their continency, and moderation in the wa^s of nature, and
other parts of virtue with which they exercise themselves; seriously if every
man did but with care diligently consider these things he would put his hand
into his bosm, heartily and truly examine his own being by nature, and his own
conscience within, and look upon the great advantage that Animals have of him
in many things; he shall thereby come to know more clearly his own misery and
vileness: Also to see his lamentable, and to be pitied transformation from his
being, how much he is degenerated and fallen from his Original Excellency and
Dignity; also, when he shall come to understand, that he who was created Lord
and chief of the Creatures, is become in many respects inferior to them, he
will abhor his passed wicked life, and earnestly strive to go beyond them in
virtue and piety, as much as he exceeds them in honor and dignity: Because the
Scribes and Pharisees did not do thus, our blessed Savior Jesus Christ calls
them, Sons of perdition; and the Prophet Isaiah, to put the Israelites in mind
of their neglect of pious lives, and their extreme ingratitude toward their
God, gives them an example of the Ox and the Ass, that know their Masters crib,
but Israel does not know these God; Israel does not consider: The like our
Savior seems to imply in that story of the Swine, into which that Legion of
Devils entered by his commission; consequently to teach us, that those which
spend and consume their precious time in serving of vices and vicious delights,
as many slothful men and gluttons do, who spend their lives like Swine; what
can such expect to come to in the end, but to be a spoil to Satan, and to
appear as Trophiees of his Victories at the last day. And truly it is a just
thing, that those which might have been a dewlling place for God, and a
habitation for his holy Spirit, and would not; but rather despised and refused
his most gracious favors, and the like, that such should be a habitation for
Devils: Such Swine are those (which at this day) do make it their glory, their
happinness, and their Paradise in this World, to procure their ease, and
vicious felicity; such as do mask and dissemble their sinful vices under so
close a cover, that they are continually suspicious that they should come to
light, and they themselves thereby should lose their Temporal goods, their
Offices, their Honors, Dignities and Preferments, if it should be suspected
that they were guilty of any enormity, or carnal delight. Such Swine are those
flattering and fawning people, who spend their lives, masking and giving a
different hew to vice, and cheating Princes and great Lords, who understand no
other trade, but how to hide the deformed face of vice from their Kings or
Lords; that understanding no better, he might not go out from the limits of
wickedness, that they may enjoy the fruits of his extravagant expenses, and
feast upon his irregular liberality. The first Article of the faith of these
men, is, That their is no other God but their belly; for all their appetites
and designs are plotted, merely to delight their ungodly corpse, giving
themselves to carnal delights: Their Religion and Faith is converted into
carnal liberty; the Law of Christ they wish not, neither do they love it; his
Commands they think are full of prickles, and very rugged, hard, weighty, and
very sharp they do appear to such delicate palates; soothed up in vices and
soft couches; they will by no means drink of our Savior cup: This wine (say
they) is too bitter which thou give us here. O Lord, what an evil Breviary
does their expression appear to be, to any good Christian! They would have a
Jesus Christ clothed with soft velvet, and more delicate, soft and amorous, if
it could be procured: They are like our Pressbyterians, who being only the fag
end indeed of Geneva Calvanists, would have a King; But how? He must be
according to their fond humors, or else a Commonwealth for them: Our vicious
flatterrers will have none of S. John Baptists ridged and rough way of living;
his course garment does not please their palates: No, no, they seek for
entertainment in the Courts of Kings and Princes of the Earth, all their
employment is to seek their own pleasures and delights; this is the greatest of
their cares, and for this they watch night and day; and to obtain this their
desire, they employ all their prudence and industry: But in vain do these men
labor and vex their spirits, to put a gloss or cover upon their pernicious
ways and counsels; but let them look to it, there will come a day, in which all
things shall be clearly discovered before God, that all the World may see and
know them: This the Royal Prophet David understood, when he said, Whither can I
go to hide my self frem thee, O Lord? or whither shall I fly from thy sight? If
I soar up to Heaven, thou art there; if I go down to Hell, there shall thy hand
find me out; if I take the wings of the morning, and fly from East to West,
thou can easily overtake me: If I should hide, cover and wrap my self up in
nights obscurity, the greatest darkness is light to thee: He that made the
hearing, and gave being to thy fight; can he want hearing and sight? So that
for conclusion, What a terrible abomination is it to see, that Man only, who
is the most vile, wretched and invalid Worm that moves upon the earth (except
his hope of an eternal bliss:) I say, that he which is the most miserable of
all creatures, should dare to violate the Laws of Nature, seldom or never
keeping within compass, as other Creatures do, with moderation; nay further, he
is so audacious and shameless, that he will assay to stand at defiance with the
Great God of Nature, and rise up in Rebellion against him, who when he pleases,
can cast him into that Bottomless Pit, whence there is no Redemption: Who can
but he astoniwed at thy fantastical pride and presumption, O thou fragil and
inconfiderate man, that thou alone of all other creatures, dare resist thy
God, who is glorified, and ever adored by Heaven and Earth, Stars, Planets, and
Elements, Angels, Beasts and Devils; therefore be not so obdurate, O man.

The Second BOOK OF THE Theater of the World.
Wherein is discovered, The miseries in all estates of Mankind, from his first
forming in the womb of his Mother, to his retiring into the womb of the Earth,
the Grave.

WE have in the first Book treated of Man's condition, as he is compared with
other Creatures; and showed, he has not only no cause wherefore to wax
arrogant, extol or set a higher esteem of himself then they, but that he is in
many things more useless and unprofitable then they. And now having laid this
shallow foundation, and commenced, as in a foul Copy, to draw out a Tract of
his miseries; it is convenient for prosecuting our Discourse, to enter more
deeply into this matter, by continuing this sad and Tragical discourse of the
miseries of the life of Man: First looking upon his beginning and original
generation; and going on discoursing of all his several ages, and particular
passages of his life, until we conduct him to his grave, where all troubles are
ended.

And first let us consider the matter of which he is engendered; Is it, think
you, any thing else but a kind of filthiness and corruption? and the place of
its conception, what is it but like a foul and loathsome prison? all the time
that he continues in the belly of his Mother, what is he, but like a little
lump of flesh without knowledge, or being?

After this manner is the original of man's being: When the Mother has received
and retained those two different seeds in her body, which by a natural heat is
compacted, there increases a tender skin over the same, much like to that which
thou shall find in an egg that is half boiled; so that it appears more like an
egg that is addle (or like an untimely birth, then any other thing;) some few
days after, the blood does mix^ with the vitals, which being joined, they begin
to boil the faster; and from this seething heat is produced, three small
swellings or risings; of the which afterward are formed the three principal
parts of the body, and the chiefest pieces of harness that adorn this proud
Creature Man, which are the Liver, the Heart, and the brain; which last, is the
most excellent part of this Edisice, the situation and abode of all the
offices belonging to the body, and the true fountain from whence flows those
five waiting-Gentlemen that attend in this Palace, upon those faculties of
Understanding, Wit, and Memory; it is the true Register of Reason; and if
consequently we should consider the order of the Creation, of the other parts
of the body, how and when they are formed and fashioned; and how the Creature,
being in the Mothers belly, begins to evacuate a kind of urine, through those
small pores of the navel; and how the said urine is evacuated into another
small vessel, a little divided from the Creature, whiah is ordained by Nature
for the said purpose; also how it does not make its digestion in the usual
part, for it does not eat nor receive its nutriment by the mouth; nor does the
stomach, or the place of digestion, exercise their duties as yet; by which
means, the guts receive no excrement: Also, the first six days it is like
curdled milk, the next nine it appears like blood, the other twelve it converts
to a tender flesh; and in the eighteen days following, the soul (or a kind of
living breath* is infused into it: If Reader, thou do but feriously ruminate
upon the foregoing description of the Principium of man by Nature; where shall
I find such a Diamantin^ heat, that will not break out into the height of
sorrowful expressions, to behold a thing so miserable, a spectacle so strange
and grievous? Its very little what we have ye^ said, if we make a nearer
approach to consider man's frailty, if we make a farther entrance in
contemplation into what follows concerning his condition, who can but be
astonished to consider by what strange ways it is nourished in the Womb, by
what exquisite means the sustenance is conveyed into it, because it cannot
receive it at the mouth: Also if we do but seriously look into the feeble,
weak, and tender condition of it there; if thou do but in the least jostle
or strike the Mother, or does extinguish (as some hold) a Light before her, the
Creature suddenly stiflles and dies, merely with the scent of that stinking
vapor; all which was considered by Pliny, where bewailing the miseries and
calamities of Humane frailty, he says; Though I am much perplexed with sorrow,
yet am more possessed with shame then grief, when I contemplate the frail debt
and contemptible Original of the stateliest and proudest of all Creatures, that
many times putting out a Candle before the Mother, the foul smoke thereof
should cause her to miscarry, but being come to some Riper perfection in the
Mothers Belly, do but consider with me what delicate viands Nature has
provided for its sustenance.

If the manner of the Creation of it was a wonder to us, a thing of greater
admiration, will its food and means of maintenance represent to our
contemplation? Is it not strange that it is maintained and fed with that
monstrous blood, which the Mother should purge out every Month, which is a
sort of Food so detestable and noisome, that I am troubled and even ashamed to
declare it, although the Philosophers and Physicians that write concerning
these secrets of Nature do express it: Those that are curious and desirous to
understand these things, let them read Pliny's Natural History; and there they
will find what many others have written hereof before him. But to return to
our purpose:

After the Creature has eaten and maintained it self a long time with that
kind of Venomous sustenance, and is arrived to more then fitting, and to a
reasonable bulk of body, having need of more Food to maintain it, and not being
able by the Navel to receive so much sustenance as Nature requires, it turns it
self with a great violence to seek out for maintenance; and with tumbling this
way and that way, it breaks all those tender mantles and thin skins with which
it was till then enclosed: But the Mother not being able to suffer the
dangerous pangs that proceeds from this, would not willingly retain within her
Body so troublesome a Guess, strives to turn it out, and opens her body as much
as is possible, by which passage the Creature craving an Air, strives to get to
it, and overturns it self toward the outlet of the Womb, and so enters into
the light of this World, but not without grievous throws and pangs, and
sufficient shrieks and groans of the poor Mother, and not without danger, toil,
and some hurt to the tender body of the Infants; and in the time of the nine
Months what griefs, what anguishes, and sorrows do many Mothers feel? which
the Creature causes, and without making any long stories of many Women, who
being with Child loose their stomachs, and cannot eat or digest their food, but
are possessed with diverse strange appetites and longings, some of which (for
Example) have desired to eat humane Flesh, coveting to eat the meat out of
their Husbands mouths, and the like; which many times has caused men to fly,
and absent themselves from home.

Many Histories are full of Example of this Nature; others again, are extreme
desirous to feed upon Ashes, Coals, Cinders, and the like; according to the
quantity of ill and corrupted Humors which are predominant in their bodies.

Furthermore, with what pangs and tortures many times are the sad Mothers
perplexed? And in what hazard do they see themselves when they come to the
bringing forth of the Infants. Some come with their Arms for most, others with
their Feet, others with their Knees, and others come athwart, or double: But
what is worse and most sad and woeful, is a thing which cannot well be expressed
without terror both to the Speaker, (or Writer) and the Hearer; which is, That
sometimes there is a necessity to send for Physicians and Surgeons instead
of Midwives, to tair, dismember, and cut in pieces the Creatures, to get them
out of the Mothers body to save her life; and too often its of necessity to cut
up and anotomize the poor innocent Mother with several instruments, to beat and
stir the body to get out the tender Fruit: Some Humane Creatures are born
sougly, and prodigiously unshapen, that they seem rather to be abominable
Monsters then Men, others are produced with two Heads and four Legs, as one
was so born in Paris at the time the learned Author was composing this
Treatise. Some Twins have been brought forth that have cleaved, and been joined
together, as it was seen in France, two Females joined fast to each other by
the Shoulders, one of the which (after they had lived together some time) died,
and after made a putrefaction in the other, and caused its death.

Polidorus writes, That little before Hanibal went and joined Forces with
Marcello, there was a Woman delivered of a Child with a Head like an Elephant,
and another was born with four feet like a Beast.

The Modern Historians write to this purpose, That in the Year one thousand
five hundred and eighteen, a Roman Curtezan was delivered of a Creature, one
half like a Dog and the other half like a Man.

All that have undertaken to write the Histories of the Indies, do affirm; That
there are at this day many that bear the shape of half Men and half Beasts,
occasioned by that hateful, brutish, beastiality, that raigns amongst those
people, who take delight in committing such execrable Vices: Others again are
born Blind, Deaf, Dumb, Maimed, Lame, and some wanting a Member; for which the
Relations are sorry, the Mothers ill spoken of, and the Fathers ashamed; so
that if we do but with attention consider the many and sad casualties and
miseries that attend our Births, we shall find the old Proverb to be very
true, That our Mothers do conceive us in filthy loathsomness, bring us forth in
grief and sorrow, and do nourish and educate us with great pains and care.

This is the first Scene, or Act, in the Tragedy of our Humane Life: Here you
have seen what Government and Order it naturally observes, being enclosed in
the Prison of the Mothers Womb. Now let us contemplate a little.

What can man be compared to after he is gotten out of this close Prison, and
put upon firm ground? Truly I can fancy him like nothing so much as a Worm that
creeps out of a Dunghill: Oh what a gentle habit he brings to make his first
entrance into the World; also to cover this stately Fabric, and to grace his
pompuous entrance; what necessary Garment think ye does he bring with him? no
other but the filth and blood, with which he comes covered and bathed all over,
which is nothing else but a lively representation to us of that Original sin
with which the Child is bespotted, as holy Scripture teaches us: O sad and
weighty necessity; O miserable and deplorable condition: O what a sorrowful and
pitiful shame is this, that before this creature has sinned, or is in a
capacity actually to offend, that it should be bound with the shame of Original
corruption, and be a bond-slave to Satan, and be subject to evil before it
knows how to do ill. All this proceeds from that Fruit which was so fair to
the Eye, sweet to the taste, but bitter in effect to our forefathers: Or from
that cluster of bitter Grapes which the Prophet Jeremiah speaks of, That the
Fathers have eaten bitter Grapes and the Childrens teeth are set on edge; A
bitter Fruit indeed!

What is the first musical note that he expresses at his first coming into the
World? What are they but cries, tears, sighs, sobs, and groans, which are
certain Messengers, Discoverers, and Fore-tellers of the calamities which
afterward he is to undergo, the which he not being able to express in words,
endeavors to put us in mind of them with weeping tears.

All the Emperors, Monarchs, Princes, and great Lords which commands the World,
and turns it upside down at their pleasures; these at their birth sing the same
Song, are subject to the same frail condition.

The least Creature that Nature produces, so soon as they be born begin to
creep about, and seek out for provisions and necessaries to maintain life. The
Chicken so soon as it gets out of the shell, finds it self free of that
enclosure, there is no such need of washing and cleansing as there is of man, it
presently runs after the Hen, understands when she calls, and begins to pick
and eat, it flies, and fears the Kite, although it never received nor saw any
hurt by him, but merely by instinct of Nature it knows to avoid danger; now do
but consider and contemplate man when he is first born, and he will appear to
be like a monstrous lump of Flesh, which many other Creatures might easily
devour, he not having any strength or power to move or defend himself, he would
die with hunger, not being able to take the Breast, but would as soon suck a
sweetened poisonous potion as that, and would as soon take red fire hot Iron in
his hand as any eatable thing, not being of capacity to know good from evil: If
thou leavest him in the Cradle, there will he nestle in his own Dung, and
batten in his own Urine, not being able to cast those Natural excrements from
him, nor cleanse himself, as the least of all other animals can do.

These are the sweets and odiferous scents, with which Nature does perfume man,
with such sort of stuff does she perfume and adorn this little room, wherein
is contained so much presumption and haughtiness of spirit, that he esteems
himself to be so valiant and strong, as if he deserved to be Lord of all the
other Creatures, when many of them are more valiant and stronger then he: But
let us trace his farther progress.

After he is lanched forth into this Gulf of miseries and sorrows, how its
needful to suckle him, and give him Food to maintain life? for if they do not
give it him he knows not where to find it. This care is to be the Mothers;
for this reason Nature has given them 2 Breasts like two small round Gourds,
proper places and fit, to contain the Milk for the sustenance of their
Children; but how many Mothers are there at this day, (if the truth were
spoken) who are contented and think they have done too much for their Children
by bringing them forth only, and that many times Abortives, and oust out from
their Entrails, and are presently sent out to some Village to be nursed,
without either seeing or hearing of them at all, for which cause there is many
times a poor Child sent them instead of their own. Such Women do rather take
pleasure and contentment in a Foisting-hound or Lap-dog, and with much more
shameless delight do they kiss, hug, and embrace it, then if it were their
own natural Child, which they count a shame to feed, cleanse, swathe, or take
into their arms.

Most part of the other animals do not use this practice, nor are so unnatural
to their young ones; they never commit them to any other, although they have
never so many, but are a continual shield of defense and protection to them,
for they will not forsake them until they see them of sufficient strength and
capacity to guide for the present, and defend themselves from danger: And which
is more strange, there is often strifes, debates, and emulacions betwixt the
Males and Females which shall do most for them: The truth of which has not
only been experimentally demonstrated in the Apes, but more in the Bears, a
sort of cruel, fierce, and ravenous Beasts, which love their young ones so
much, that they do not only content themselves with cockering and giving them
the teats, but seeing that they are cast out without any form or shape, they
labor with a wearisome toil, continually licking them until they have brought
them to a Natural figure or likeness.

Also the Birds, although they have many times 5, 6, or a dozen under their
Wings, possess no Gainers of Corn, yield no Milk, nor have any store laid up to
feed them, yet they never leave nor forsake them, but find out new ways,
force strength out of weakness, and act as far as nature has taught them, that
they may comply with Natures obligation, and hatch and bring up their young
ones: But where can we find a better or more sollide reason of humane misery?
then this, That the poor Wretch is no sooner born, but he is deprived of that
which of just right does belong unto him, and Nature has provided for him: He
is forced to suck the Milk of a strange person; and often, if it be a cheap
Nurse, they do not look whether she be crooked, maimed, or lame, or whether she
be infected with any foul vice or infirmity, either in body or condition, from
the which they receive so much prejudice and hurt, that it were far better they
should be brought up in the Desert, then come into the hands of such Nurses?
and if it were only the body that received this damage, it would not behalf so
bad; it is not that only that is interested, spoiled, and hindered, as formerly
it was seen in Titus the Son of Vespatian the Emperor, and many others, who
being brought up and suckled by an infirm Nurse, passed the few days of his
life in a weak, sickly, and unfortunate condition, as Lapriadus writes.

But all this is nothing in comparison of the detriment and prejudice the Soul
receives from that evil Character which is stamped therein, by the lewd
breeding and the wicked life of the Nurse.

Dion a Greek Historian, in the life of Cayus Caligula the third Emperor of
Rome, writes, That they did not impute to his Parents the wicked, infamous, and
mischievous Nature of this lewd and blood-thirsty Emperor, because it was
certainly known he had sucked it with the Milk: For the Nurse that gave him suck
was of a wicked and cruel disposition by nature, and had a custom to dip her
Niple in blood, and then give the Child the Teat; from which he commenced to be
such an inhumane and appetitious glutton as to eat men's blood; for afterward
he not satisfying himself with continual Deaths, Woundings, and Wicked Actions,
which he committed, but would suck and lick the Swords and Daggers with which
he had slain men. And farther:

Not being able to satisfy his wicked appetite with humane blood, he wished,
That there were no more Heads in the World but one, that he might take it off,
and consequently remain absolute Lord of the whole World.

Is it not sufficient then the great troubles and torments which the poor
Creature has suffered in the Womb of his Mother, but ye must provide new
sorrows, add new afflictions to his misery, as soon as he is born into the
World; and that sometimes for delicacy, or by ungrateful, hard-hearted, and
unadvised disaffection of the Mothers, who unnaturally denying them their own
Breasts, expose them to more anger then they are aware of; for often Nurses do
either change them, or feed them with rotten, diseased, and corrupted Milk,
from whence it proceeds they come to live infirm, sickly, and impotent, (as it
has been experimented by many learned Physicians,) and that with a full damage
the poor Creatures, and infamy to the Mothers of them; for there is nothing
more certain, that if the Nurse be blear or squint Eyed, the Creature will be
so. This is not from the Milk it sucks, but from a continual converse and
custom the Child takes looking upon his Nurse, and if she be given to much
drinking, makes it of a faint and feeble complexion, and causes it to love Wine
and strong drink, as we read in the life of the Emperor Tiberio, who was much
given to this Vice; for the Nurse that gave him suck did not only drink to
excess her self, but often fed him with sops in Wine.

Here you see how the dispositions and customs of Nurses do work upon, nay are
predominant over the weak natures of Children: If she be given to drunkenness,
so will it; if she be infirm the like will it be, and if she be bad the
Creature often proves worse: But suppose we have him in the tuition of a
wakefull. wholesome, and careful Nurse, and he seems to be out of danger: O sad
and unfortunate animals, even then he seems to be most surrounded with
troubles: I say, even then thou can not but consider him most environed and
encompassed with miseries and calamities; with what labor and pains do the
unfortunate Nurses bring them up, many do burst themselves merely with weeping
and shrieking, insomuch that they need no other larum to keep them from their
quiet repose even at midnight, then what these do appear to be; others do
stumble, fall, and catch wounds, not understanding, how nor which way; so that
there remains hardly a joint of the frail body, but has received some
detriment or maim, and if I should take in hand to relate the infirmities,
which very many poor creatures do naturally inherit from the loathsome and
putrifactious diseases of the Parents, it would be an endless work, as also if
I should begin to declare the multitude of toys and fooleries they busy and
employ themselves within this their tender infancy: With what childish sports
do they spend their time, with continual prattling, running into the Water like
a Frog, building little houses of Clay, wallowing and drailing in the dirt,
other whiles tumbling in the dust, riding on a stick, coveting and riding the
Ring, and galloping and changing Horses, as if he were a Squire of the Stable
Royal, often playing with, and following Dogs and Cats, grow suddenly angry,
and is as soon pleased, will laugh with one, and cry with another, and that in
a breathing while.

Who would ever think or believe that so vile and dejected a Creature, who is
as it were overwhelmed with miseries and calamities, and thereby in every sore
and sad condition, should change mind and forget himself so much, as to swell
with pride, grow haughty, and vainglorious, and that in a short time, which
consideration being well pondred by that Tragic Poet Euripedes, caused him to
say, That we ought to weep and lament at the Birth of a humane creature, for
why? he is not born but to be poor, miserable, naked, surcharged with sorrows
and griefs, and then die.

Here ends all his sighs, groans, and anguishes: Of what salidity is it for
miserable man to live? or what profit does this unhappy Creature reap from the
Worlds light: But a far better, more sublime, and holy use, did that heavenly
Prophet Job make of this consideration when he was in that grievous conflict by
Gods commission, when he said, Job 10. 9, 10, 11. Remember (I beseech thee)
that thou haste made me as the Clay, and will thou turn me into Dust again:
Haste thou not poured me out as Milk, and curdled me like Cheese? Thou have
clothed me with Skin and Flesh, and haste fenced me with Bones and Sinews;
thou haste given me life and favor, and thy visitation has preserved me.

If that Prophet Jeremias out of pure compassion bewailed the miserable estate
of Israel, being Captive in Babylon: If Anthises lamented the destruction of
the proud City of Troy, the Consul Marcello the ruin of Saxagosa in Scicilia,
and Salustrus of his Roman Citizens; then it may be lawful for us, and we may
very well with so many and so good surely lament and bewail the miserable
entrance that man makes into the Theater of this World; sad and unprofitable
gain, and dangerous converse that meets within this life, and the sad and
deplorable end he makes at his death, the which being deeply contemplated by
the Prophet Esaias, he had rather been breathless and died in his Mothers
belly, cursed the Breasts that gave him suck, the knees that sustained him
sucking.

For the same reason the Prophet Jeremias considering that man was made of the
dust of the Earth, conceived in sin, born to sorrow, and in the end to be food
for Worms, he wishes that his Mothers Womb had been his Grave, that it had
been the Tomb on which his Epitaph had been written.

But let us now further consider the excellent Anatomy that the holy Prophet
JOB makes of Man, how he does cloth and array him; also how he sets him forth
in his perfect Colors, saying; Man that is born of a Woman is of few days,
and full of trouble; he comes up like a Flower, soon withers, and is like a
shade, that never stays in one being.

Prithe Reader lets more seriously contemplate and consider these words, and
that without giving discontent to any man, leaving every one to the strength of
his own judgment and argument; yet that we may discern how all the Sentences
and Sayings of the Heathen Philosophers are but a kind of babbling, compared
with those of the holy Spirit of God; they are but a Dream; nay, a Scipher, in
respect of the least point of Grace which the Lord our God puts into the heart
of man when he would have him to know and acknowledge his humble and low
condition.

Man (says he) that is born of a Woman, or the Son of a Woman: It may be these
last Words may appear to be superfluous, and that they were not fitly placed;
but truly they are wisely set down, and very significantly do point at the
frail principium of this proud Creature Man, for why? he is born of a Woman,
and amongst all the Creatures that God made, there is none so subject to
miseries and infirmities as they are, and especially those that are most
fruitful: They seldom have a months quiet throughout the year, and that not
without fears, terrors, cares, and continual tremblings.

Now after so miserable and deplorable a beginning; if this life were long and
healthy he could the better pass it over: But Job says presently after (He is
of few days, and those full of misery.) There are few creatures that have a
life so short as man, nor any so easily taken away, therefore what need
instruments, Poisons, Graves, and Swords, and the like, do but stop his breath
for a short time, and he will fall down dead, and lie like a Log of Wood, his
life being only an Airy breath which inhabits the body, and quickly flies
away.

Theophrastus and other ancient Philosophers, murmured against Nature, because
she had given so large lives to the Hearts, Ravens, and other animals, which
serve for little in this World, and Man which is Emperor and King of all the
Creatures, and absolute Lord over them, his is but short and brief, though he
have honorable and caelestial employments here; and what is worse, she clips
and cuts from this short life which is bestowed upon him, a great part with
Sleeps, Dreams, Angers, Cares, Troubles, Losses, and other misfortunes, which
attend, molest, and abreviate this short life, these our few days; and if we
should well cast up and consider the pains, labors, and troubles we undergo,
the many anguishes and cares thereof, and how they waste us and hasten us to
our ends, we shall find that few are the days of our sorrowful Pilgrimage
here, which brings us to the comparison of which the Prophet makes of man with
the shade.

What (says he) is the shadow, but only an appearance which deceives the
sight of man, a fancy, a figure without being or substance, the which sometimes
appears greater, sometimes lesser, even so is man, which sometimes seems to be
something, and in effect nothing; for when he is most elevated, most raised up,
and at his highest, on a sudden there is no more memory nor trace of him then
of a shadow when night is come; it is with him as the Royal Prophet David says,
37 Psalm 35, 36. verse. I have seen the wicked Man in great power, and
spreading himself like a green Bay Tree; yet he passed away, and lo he was
not; yea, I saught him, but he could not be found, the Memory of wicked Men
shall rot.

Here thereto have we with as much brevity as possible could be, set forth
through how many troubles, storms, and shipwracks, miserable Man passes
before he arriveth at the Haven of Youth, and gets out of the tuition of
Nurses, and from that Labyrinth of Childhood, in which he must be assisted and
looked after with so much care and diligence.

Let us now consider and contemplate him being grown bigger and of a more
comely stature, and see whether his miseries and sorrows have end here.

Verily, (if we will be impartial Judges) we shall find that his calamities
and labors do not only terminate, but that he falls into, and launcheth forth
into a more spacious Sea of Dangers and Afflictions: For by this time Nature
has provided for him a thousand Combats and Assaults, stronger and more
fiercer then the former; his blood begins to boil, the Flesh allures and
invites with her delights, sensuallity shows the way how to put them in
practice, the World and the Devil tempt and beguile the disordered Appetite of
his Youth, with inviting to him such dressed and well prepared delicates, that
it is impossible that he who is assaulted, surrounded, and stormed with so
strong and so many Enemies, but that he should be conquered, if he receive not
succor from some good and friendly Angel, by the particular Grace and Favor
of God; for in that body which enjoyes Riches, Liberty, and Youth without
restraint, so generally lodge, dwell, and inhabit all sorts of Vice in the
World.

The Emperor Marcus Ancilius said, I am not in charity with our Stepmother
Nature, who seems not to have satisfied her revenge upon poor man at his
beginning, and his being unnaturally fed with the Milk of a strange Breast, but
strives farther to load him with all sorrows she can: Now he must also learn
his Trade, Occupation, or Science, from a strange hand, for which cause she
produces few Catoes, who will take care to teach their own Children; but rather
she tauses Fathers now a days to disdain and count it an undervaluing to do
it, and so leave them to taste of the bitter Potion of cruel and neglective
Schoolmasters, which often discourages them at the first entrance to learn the
liberal Arts and Sciences.

(...)s certain there is no ground be it never so fertile, fat, and fruitful,
that is not marred (...) wasted, and will bring forth Berries and Thistles
sooner then other Grass, if it be not well manured in all respects; and the
more Fertile it is, the greater quantity of unprofitable Weeds it puts forth,
if they neglect to Plough, Sow, and Dung it; so it is with Youths, they are apt
to grow worse then better, though they be never soingenuous, unless the Parents
seek out trusty and careful Masters to teach, and moderately correct them, or
do it himself, which is all very convenient.

If Man desires to gather good Fruit from Trees and Plants, it will be
necessary when they are young and tender, that he do cut, prune, and dig about
them, and take off the superfluous Branches: Even so he that desires from the
Youth and tender disposition of the Children to gather good Fruit, and not meet
with vexations from them in his old age, had need to cut short, prune, and
hinder the growing and increasing of Vices, and all occasions thereof, which
too commonly do bud forth in their young days, and to avoid all scandal and
discredit, the neglect hereof may bring upon himself, and be a perpetual sorrow
to Parents and Friends. How many Fathers and Mothers have there been, and are
in this World, who for neglect of bringing up their Children when young, and
giving them good instruction and learning, have had a thousand vexations,
troubles, afflictions, and discontents from them in their old age? And how many
Mothers be there, that instead of instructing in virtue, and teaching modest
retirement to their Daughters, do bring them up to too much daintiness, ease,
and liberty, only showing them how to follow their own delicious Appetites,
the which we may call Mothers and Nurses of the Body, but cruel Step-Mothers to
the Souls of their poor Daughters.

If that High Priest Eli was Heavenly chastised and his Sons destroyed, because
he did not reprehend and chastise them with that rigor and severe Authority
which he ought, what can they expect from God? What chastisement must their
Parents fear, that instead of being Reformers and Correctors, shall be
Corrupters of their Children? Such may be compared to Munckies, who do so love
their young ones, that they are ever making much of, and hugging them in their
Arms, by which means they often fall into the hands of Hunters: Even so it is
with Parents, who for want of chastising, and putting their Children from them,
and putting them ou(...) learn Lawful employments, come to fall (...) the hands
of Justice, and to ill ends, with disgrace enough to their Family, grief and
shame to their neglective Parents and Friends.

The ancient Romans so much abhorred the Parents that did not correct their
Children, that for this cause alone they made a Law, in the which they ordered
and commanded, That the Son that was taken in any offense should be for the
first time reproved, for the second punished severely, and for the third
hanged, and the Father banished, as a party in the fault, because he did not
sufficiently reprove and chastise him.

Objection.
Let me ask one Question by the way? If those ancient Romans were living at
this time in these our days, what would they do? seeing the pitiful and
lamentable Estates of many of our Commonwealths: What Banishments, Chains,
Prisons, and what kind of Torments (think you) would they now invent to
chastise an infinite number of Fathers, who do not only solicit (seeing they
cannot teach their Children themselves, long before they send them to School
and tuition of Masters) their ruin, but poison them with ^^^r daily bad
examples, which does so corrupt and vitiate them, that all that can be done
toward their future reclaiming comes to as much as nothing, for those who from
their Births should by good examples and advice instruct them to be virtuous,
do teach and ingraft in them the poisons of Blasphemy, Swearing, Drunkenness,
Gluttony, and wickedly spend the Estates of their innocent Children, Whore,
Lie, prostrate and sell their Wives and Daughters in sight of the World.

How many Mothers are there at this day, who like HERODIAS teach their
Daughters to Dance, spend all their time in learning Rhetorical-Complements,
entertaining Gallants, Triming, Dressing, and Painting themselves; coloring
their Cheeks, Lips, and Eyebrows, adorning themselves with rich Clothes and
Jewels, as if they would set out a Shop of Wares, and make themselves Pedlers,
and go to sell jets and prances in the Streets; to which Parents, what can be
expected to happen less, then did to the Royal Prophet David, that his own
Children were Executioners of the punishment of his sins in this kind, who
were so unruly and unnatural wicked, that one of them Amon by name, Ravished
his own Sister Thamer, and another who was Absalom, killed his Brother Amon,
and conspired the ruin and the death of his Father, and at length forced him
to fly from his House, and lay with his Concubines, wherefore it is an ancient
Rule of Philosophers, That God often permits many sins to be committed and go
unpunished in this life, deferring it for a greater demonstration of his
Clemency: But the sin and offense that many Parents do commit against him, in
not giving good documents and examples to their Children, he never lets that
pass, but some way or other makes them even cruel and afflictive Executioners
of Gods Justice on their Fathers faults in this World, and that justly; for
Parents cannot bestow on their Children a better Legacy, then good, wholesome,
and virtuous documents, and sound knowledge, with which he may make him
immortal, and of a perpetual fame, for the Natural being, the Mortal Body, and
this short and miserable life, which we receive and give to our Children, Death
with a sudden and fierce snatch does soon cut the third thereof. To sum up what
has been said.

Suppose the Creatures do escape the dangers of the Mothers Womb, happen to be
Nursed with unwholesome and corrupted Milk of their infirm Nurses, fall into
greater, and more dangerous evils; and which is terrible, if they come under
the tuition of lewd Masters, and under the power of wicked and perverse Guides
to teach them; yet this is nothing in comparison of the Souls mis-fed and
misled; for of far higher price and esteem is the maintenance of the Soul then
that of the body: And here we must not forget to quoat the Divine Plato, who
has written more at large to this purpose, then any of the ancient Heathen
Philosophers, therefore it will be fit we make some profitable use of his
Authority and Doctrine, which is so rare and choice, so supernatural and
Divine, written with discreet diligence and care, handled at large and exactly,
and set forth in so gallant and lofty Style, that many Heathens that have read
his Books Ziocha, Of the Immortality of the Soul, and another, in which he
principally treats of the short and miserable life of Man, they cast themselves
down headlong from high Rocks into the Sea, and into deep Rivers, that thereby
ending and cutting the third of this miserable and sorrowful life, they might
enjoy that pleasant and quiet one which they hoped for, toward which all
Navigate, as to a certain and secure Harbor of health and happiness.

This Philosopher in the Dialogue that he made of Death, and the frail and weak
life of Man, introduces a great Philosopher called Socrates, the which with
admirable Eloquence* particularly declares the miseries, calamities, torments,
and vexations which attend our life, saying thus; Do thou not know that
humane Life is nothing else but a pilgrimage? and a continual motion from one
Estate to another, the which Wise men do pass over with great joy and content,
and rejoice and sing when they feel the miserable e(...)his our pilgrimage.

Do thou not know very well, that Man is composed of Body and Soul, and that
his Soul is enclosed and set in the Body as in a Tabernacle or House? with
which Dame Nature was pleased she should go covered and laden, and that with
sorrow, grief, and sufficient care, and extremely against her will, she being
oppressed with such a load of frail Flesh, so great troubles, and so infinite a
multitude of evils.

Although put the case that Nature were friendly, would do us some favor, or
repart some of her courtesies to any of these oppressed Souls, as to give them
a light and agil Body, or sooner to afford them liberty; yet in the end such
are the counterfeit and attendant weight of evils which are incident to them,
that the miserable and afflicted Souls not being able to bear so great a
burden, they grow peevish, mutinous, afflictive, and very desirous to pack
from so straight a prison, that they may go and enjoy the happiness of those
Caelestial and Eternal blessings which they so much desire, and cordially seek
after.

Do but consider that the laying aside, or leaving this Life, is but a Truck or
Exchange from worse to better.

What do we? or, what do we find in this Life? For if (...)do but put our Hand
into our Bosom, (...)hall find that from the day of our Birth to ^^e day of
our Death, there is no calamity nor trouble with which we are not afflicted, of
which we do not taste, there is no kind of misery or affliction with which Man
is not acquainted, with which he is not some time or other persecuted and
afflicted; there is no Poverty, Cold, Heat, Whips, and Stripes, of which man
cannot be a Witness in Death, understanding it, and that before he attains to
the perfect light of Reason, or indeed have any Tongue to complain, or desire
favor, of which we can understand no other sign, or better testimony, then
the tears, sighs, and groans, he casts forth at his Birth, which are as
forerunners and discoverers of the Field of miseries and calamities into which
he is come, and of which the sorrowful entrance makes him sensible.

But after he has passed by an infinite number of evils, and attained to the
age of seven years, what a necessity he has of Guides and Masters, to teach,
instruct, and correct him, to look after him, and keep him from harms, and in
growing up, more strict and severe Masters are necessary to correct his
extravigancies, and lead him in the paths of Virtue, for Childhood and Youth
have need of a Bridle more strong then Iron, to withdraw it from all Vices with
which it is assaulted, and bring it to accustom it self to virtuous actions.

Thence in few years his face begins to be covered with Hair, a Beard adorns
his Chin, and he comences to right Man, with which his cares and troubles
doubly increase, and he enters into a Stage where he meets with new afflictions
and vexations: He must go forth into public to seek company and go in
Society, which is like a Touchstone to try the purity of his inclination to
good or evil. If he be descended of a Noble house, of a Famous and Illustrious
Family, or if he be an ordinary Gentleman, that he may maintain his Honor, and
follow the footsteps of his predecessors and imitate his superiors, he must
seek out many inventions, provide rich and convenient accouterments, be hardy
in Battle, and understand stratagems and policies of War, expose himself to a
thousand dangers and hazards, lay his life at stake upon all occasions, spend
his blood prodigally and without fear to die with Honor, and thereby to obtain
a new and immortal fame for himself and his successors; and all this he must do
if he will not be taken for a cowardly, lazy, and ignoble person, and be
disesteemed and despised of all men: And if he be a man of a low degree, born
for a Farmer, a Labourer, or a Servant, he is not for that more free from
cares, troubles, pains, and restlesness in body and soul: He must labor night
and day, toiling and sweating, even to drops of blood many times, that he may
procure bread and water.

If he strive never so much to employ himself in his Calling, yet very often
though he labor and travel, and do his uttermost endeavor to relieve his
necessity, he cannot attain to what is requisite for him.

Then not without cause did Marcus Aurelius the seventeenth Roman Emperor,
considering the condition of Humanity, complain, who was wont to say; Many
times have I contemplated within my self, if there ever were now, or could be
found, any Estate, Degree, Condition, Land, Country, Kingdom, or Age, in the
which there has lived a Man that has not in his life tasted what thing is
adverse Fortune; that has not met with Crosses and Afflictions: And if there
could be discovered such a one, I believe he must be some abominable Monster,
and a strange sight to Mortals, and ends his Reason with this saying.

To be brief, I find that he that yesterday was rich, to day becomes poor, he
that yesterday was in health, to day is visited with sickness, he that
yesterday was in jollity, laughing, to day I see him weeping, he that yesterday
was in prosperity and esteem, to day I see him despised and in adversity, and
he that yesterday was alive, to day I see him dead and in his Grave.

But now lets return to our commenced purpose, and lets search more
particularly into things.

Show me that man that has most desired, obtained a condition, and that more
suitable to his wishes and contentments, then any other manner of living, that
has not at last grown weary, despised and complained of his sad hope, repented
and been sorry that he had spent so much precious time in proceeding in it.

To see this more clearly, lets consider some principal degrees of men in the
World, beginning with such as sail upon the waters most part of their lives,
swiming like fishes, which are Mariners, to how many dangers are they subject
night and day, what a house do they enjoy, what thing is there dwelling but a
continual filthy prison; what clothes do they wear, but of Cloth like a sponge,
fit for nothing but to receive filth and water, they go like voluntary
Vagabons, and are in a seeming and perpetual exile; they have seldom any
repose, they are encompassed with blustering Winds on all sides, they have but
small guard from the Waters, Tempests, Hailes, and Snowes, and are subject to
Pirates and Robbers, to Rocks, Shelves, Sands, and surging Sulkes of the
superbious Sea, and ever in danger of drowning, and being interred in the
bellies of Fishes, which being seriously considered by that famous Greek
Philosopher Bias, who doubted whether such people were to be accounted amongst
the Earthly Creatures, or those that live on the Water; or whether they were to
be accounted amongst the living or the dead.

And another Philosopher called Anacharsis, said; That there was not above two
or three Fingers betwixt them and Death, that is as the planks are in
thickness, this life appearing so detestable.

Peradventure thou will think to find more quietness in that of a Husbandman,
and that there is less troubles in a Country life; thou will be apt to
question, whether a Rustic life be not better, and give the answer thy self
that it is, because it is more easy, more quiet, sweet, and more pleasant,
especially knowing that most of the Patriarchs and Prophets made choice of
this manner of living, being the most sweetly quiet, without prejudice or guile
to any, the most plain and sincere, free from the difficult Catches, Traps, and
Turmoils of Traffic.

Also many of the ancient Roman Emperors left their Royal commands and
employments, forsook their Palaces, their Capatals, Triumphant Arches,
Amphitheators, Pleasures, and many other Magnificent Ornaments, to withdraw and
retire themselves into the Country, to prune and graft the Trees with their
own hands, to plant Flowers and sow Seeds in the Gardens, as did Dioclesian,
Attalus, Cyrus, Beroaldus, Constantine, one of the Caesar's, and many others,
which Columellia and other Historians do make mention of.

But those that would attentively consider and ruminate upon these things,
shall find under their Garments there are many Thorns, there are more prickles
then Roses among these seeming sweets; thou will not deny the truth hereof, do
but seriously mark with me.

Almighty God catching Man out of the Earthy-paradice, for a chastisement
(besides his banishment) sends him to till the Earth, telling him withal,
Cursed shall be the ground for thy sake, it shall cost thee thy labor if thou will eat of the fruit thereof; nay, and many times after great labor, travel,
and vexation, thinking to eat of the Fruit of thy Labors, thou shall gather
Briars, Thorns, Brambles, Thistles, and other Weeds, that thou might not
eat thy Bread without sorrow, nor enjoy an hour of quiet repose, until thou
return to the Earth out of which thou waste taken, and of which thou waste
mouled.

But Oh sad, Men that we are; who are more sensible of Gods Curse in this kind
then the poor peasants, who often having well plowed, sowed, and manured their
Land, taking pains early and late, suffering the extremities of heat in Summer
and cold in Winter, sometimes wounded with some Viper, Snake, or with their
Plough instruments, and after a whole years pains and travel there, a Dew, a
Hail, a Nipping Frost, a Storm, or a Drought, which burns, spoils, and
destroys the Fruit of the ground, and leaves a comfortless Harvest to them,
some their Sheep, Horses, or Cowes die, others are plundered by Soldiers,
which do take away, spoil, and destroy even all they have in their houses, and
when they come home, expecting to find repose, and hoping quietly to rest
their wearied Limbs, they find the Women weeping, their Children crying, and
all the Family complaining for want of Food; in conclusion, this life is no
other thing but a Mortal Wound, that has its Root or principium deep within,
and keeps the miserable patient in continual pain and sorrow: Even so is the
poor Husbandman seldom contented, but now he torments himself of one side,
then on the other.

If there falls much Rain, he says, I never saw such Floods and Waters: If
Rain be wanting, I never saw such a Drought. Then he complains the Locusts is
in his Grain, or Storms, or Whirl-Windes, have blasted his Corn in the Field,
his Trees in the Orchard. But above all they do complain of the Soldiers when
they are in Field, for from them proceeds many evils to them.

In the following lamentation which was lately presented to me by a friend and
sufferer, which is Entitled, Give peace in our time O Lord, of which Sentence
the following Discourse is a gloss, Da pacem Domine in diebus nostris, quia non
est alius qui pugnet pro nobis, nisi tu Deus noster; Give peace in her time, O
Lord, because there is none other that fights for us but only thou O God;
which is a godly and learned expression in the Liturgy of the Church of England.

He says thus, O thou the only true God, thou well know I do not lie; I
have no Cattle nor Goods, which I can say I have received from any but from
thee, to thee a General of all Soldiers, who alone without danger can defeat
and resist them: I pray thee to avenge me, and chastise them, give peace to
all, we have great need of peace: But if thou will chastise men, as thou have
just cause, and thou only can do it, O Lord. Our forefathers although they
lived in this World, they never saw the Villainies acted which we see in diebus
nostris, in our days. With great care, trouble, and sweat, I labor, yet am
ready to die with hunger, it is three days since a piece of Bread has been
eaten in my house, (quia non est) because there is none: I sowed, planted,
manured, and gathered, I ploughed all my Land, both Waste and pasture to
maintain my house and family, but woe is me they have destroyed all. It was not
one alone that did this evil, God thou know how many they are, and how many
afflictions daily lie upon me, as well Actions of Debt, which by reason of
losses, I cannot pay, as these Soldiers which do torment and trouble me.
(Alias qui pugnet) Who shall we seek to defend us but thee: We peasants have
cause to complain, because they that should fight pro nobis, for us, do abuse,
afflict, and destroy us: O my Creator, what a comfort is it, considering thy
infinite mercy, that from the evils which I suffer none can deliver or avenge
me (nisi tu) but thou, I will not trust in the World, or any thing therein,
because it cannot help me, in thee alone do I put my trust, O my God: When
shall Robberries and Thefts cease, when shall reason and policy maintain true
justice, that will be the good, true, and happy time.

But let us leave the poor Husbandmen to their cares, troubles, and labors, and
let us proceed forward to see what are the passages, what sweets may be found
amongst Trafficks of Merchandises and Traders.

If we behold only its outward appearance, it will seem to be free of all
afflictions and miseries, because it is colored over with the splendid
Flourish of Riches, and other painted arts which they use, they may promise,
but cannot afford us any contentment, any sollid repose, or quiet enjoyment,
affirming that which Pliny says, That Trade was first invented, because it was
found to be absolutely necessary to humane life and society, and that many of
the ancient wise men were Merchants, as Tales, Milessius, Solon, Hipocrates,
and many others, and was the first occasion of ingendering love betwixt
different Nations, and enterchanging mutual amity and peace amongst bordering
Princes; for they carry or transport from one Country to another, from one
City to another, what is wanting or what abounds: Yet we cannot so far mark, so
artificially guild over this kind of living, though he carry it out never so
high, and dissemble it never so gallantly; you may read in their Eyes,
conjecture by their Faces. The disquiets, troubles, and perplexities which
attend Merchants, to what and how many strange hazards are they subject to
every moment, both by Sea and Land; besides the mention we might particularly
make, how the greatest part of their life they go like Fugitives and Vagabons
from Country to Country, from Town to City, from City to Village, that they
seem to be like Gypsies or banished Offenders; only it is true, their parting
from their Country and Friends is voluntary; they never do other, but run, go,
trot, nay, fly both by Sea and Land, meeting with colds, heats, passing as it
were through fires, waters, and snowes, being only encouraged and spurred on
by a disordered covetousness to get and purchase Wealth, they rejoice to loose
that contentment and sweet repose which they might enjoy at their own homes
with their possessions, their Wives, Children, and Servants about them, and put
their lives in danger by the deceitful, lurking, ambushments, and stratagems of
Thieves, who ever have an eye to them and their ways that they may rob and
spoil them, yet all this is forgotten, and masked over by their disordinate and
covetous appetites and desires, which does continually boil in their Hearts and
reign in their affections.

Now let us speak a little farther of them, and begin with the principal pieces
of their Harness, which are false Oaths, cheating their Neighbors, and
delays, these are the grand relics of their holy society; for it is impossible
to enrich themselves so much and so soon, as too many do, without prejudice of
other men.

They always have the old saying in their mouths when they sell too dear, that
they do it to keep themselves from poverty, from an empty belly, to keep
themselves from misery and trouble; they need no other thing but to turn their
backs upon God a year or two, and largely to express with their mouths what
they deny in their Consciences, and so ever to remain rich Asses.

How different and how many evils may we add to this, of which they are the
causes, by reason of corrupted and false Commodities from strange Countries.

The small Wares and Fooleries they bring over, which are not necessary for use
of Men, but prejudicial to Commonwealths, for they are good for nothing but to
visiate the fancies of Women, Gallants, and Children, and helps to maintain
excess of pomp, vice, and expense, as if our evil inclinations were not
sufficient to draw us into wicked Courses, without provocations.

With these and the like finical (but unprofitable) Commodities, do they rob,
spoil, and leave destitute of money, most Countries and Provinces, leaving
behind them instead thereof Childish Toys, and pedling trifles of little
value, and the worst is they come home ill principled, with loose living, and
teach the vices and bad customs and superfluities which they have learned
abroad, and bring with them their improved Merchandises.

They also have their Counsels, Conspiracies, and Consultations, and deputed
places for them in every Mart, City, which we call Exchange, and has a
different denomination, according to the Language of every Country; for in
every one they have these public places, whether most commonly do resort the
Richest and most Credible, resolving if possible to work and wear out of Trade
young beginners, and such have small stocks, that they might drive it
themselves, to whom they will it may be sell a parcel of Goods by the Great,
that they might cheat others by Retail; and it were well there were no worse
evil coucht under the covert of Trade; for since Princes of these latter Times
became necessiated, by reason of their excessive expenses and vanities. And
these Merchants are continually with full Cashes, they never want acquaintance
and entertainment in the Palaces of Kings and Princes, by which means they come
to know and converse with foreign Princes, and advise them of their own
Countries Affairs, lend them Moneys, and thereby commit Treason against their
own Natural Kings, and betray their own Countries and Cities, as it has been
seen by sad experience in France, not many years since, with great damage to
their Country, desolation to their Towns, and destruction to their people.

But to return to our purpose, and treat of Shopkeepers, which in several
other Countries are called Merchants.

I shall forbear to mention a thousand known Cheats, Arts, and Cozenages, with
which they know to sophisticate and corrupt almost all sorts of Commodities
which are necessary for the life of Man.

This is the principal piece of their Art and Cunning, and this they teach to
their Servants and Children before they will put them in trust with their Shops
and Wares: This is the Doctrine they teach to them in their Youth, they
encourage those most that under fair words can best couch a perjury, and sell
their breath at a better price then their Merchandise, like the cunning
Genoves, and Florentine, the subtle Venetian, and crafty Toledano. And for the
Worlds wickedness, we may see things so far out of order at this day in this
kind, that if thou go out of a Shop, having agreed the price of any
Commodity, not paying for it, or taking it with ye, and presently returnest for
it again, thou will find it trucked and changed by the hands of young Thieves
the Servants, who to obey their Masters will, and make them rich, are willing
to take a turn in Hell, and pawn their Souls to the Devil.

There is another kind, or sort of Tradesmen, of which hitherto I have not
spoken; who fill their Shops with Commodities, borrowed (with good security)
from those of their own profession; and under pretense of a great wholesale
Trade, buy upon trust great quantities of Merchandises, and make plausible show
merely to cheat their Creditors, and after they have gotten into custody much
Goods and Money, turn Banckrupts, and take as the Spaniard says (Calcarem
villa Diego.) All they can get together, and run into strange Countries, and
there live in as Noble and Triumphant equipage at their own cost, with the
Wealth they have robbed and pillaged from other miserable and afflicted men,
who often remain so poor and desperate, that they are ready to kill and destroy
themselves, having lost by Cheat that which they thought had been as safe as in
their own hands.

The Athenians understanding such like Cheats and Abuses to proceed from
Strangers, they would never permit they should ever inhabit, set up Shop, or
dwell amongst their Citizens, or within their Walls; but they allotted them
places distant from the City, there to build Warehouses and Dwellings, and
have their Traffic.

Anciently there were many Commonwealths that would never permit them to bear
any public Offices amongst them, or enter into their Senates, or Counsels:
Also they have been sharply reproved of many of the Doctors of the Church in
several occasions and passages of their Books, for their vile way of livelihood
and dealing. Saint John, Chrysostom, and Saint Augustine say, It Is very hard
for rich Merchants and Tradesmen to please God, or make a true and sincere
Repentance of their sins, alluding to that of our Savior, It Is hard for a Rich
man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, be he of any Profession or Trade
whatsoever; yet God forbid, but that there should be some honest of all.

Let Us now vary a little to consider the Tragic story, the sad life, and the
weighty yoke, under which they subject their Necks; how they are led as in
amaze, they go to the Wars, who live in Martial employments, the which kind of
living is so bitter and hard, that even the bruit Beasts do abhor it, for they
have Caves and Dens, wherein to take their Natural repose at their times, but
the poor Soldiers, who seldom sleep, has no other Inn but the broad Field,
no other Bed but the bare ground, no other Canopy but the Starrie Firmament,
being subject to bitter cold Frosts, cruel Storms and Tempests, Raines and
Snows, is forced to suffer Cold and Hunger, Heat, and Thirst: When he hears an
Alarm he must resolve with himself to kill, or be killed, to be overcome, or
rout, and overcome his Enemies, which is his Brother and his Neighbor; and for
three or four Crowns a Month, he sets himself as a mark for Canon and Musket;
so that the misery of a Soldiers life, is greater then any other: Hearken
courteous Reader, if thou will understand what a horrible and abominable
Monster War is.

Haste thou ever seen a Battle betwixt a Woolf and a Bear, or the combat of any
other cruel Animals? What howlings, what tearing each other, and what strange
cruelty is it to see the bruit Creatures, spoil, pull mouthfulls out of each
others Limbs, without any favor? How much more abominable thing is it, to see
a man pale, furious, and almost transformed into a bruit Beast, set upon, hack,
and hew, and strive to destroy his Neighbor, or of this kind; spend his
uttermost rage and fury against him, without making account of many other evils
and cruelties which succeed thereon.

The simple people travel and labor to build, beautify, and surround, with
stately Walls, famous Cities, and Towns, which they do maintain and enrich with
their sweat and labor, fortify and strengthen with their diligence and care;
and all this without any disturbances, jealousies, or fears of troubles.

What an affliction must it be to see all their labors in their own view cast
down, laid waste, made desolate, and that in a moment, which was many years
raising, building, beautifying, and preserving, by the indulgent care of the
founders and wise successors: Nay, after that their Flocks and Herds taken
from them, their Bread like untimely Fruit, or the blasted buds of the Vine,
devoured they know not how, their Peasants destroyed, their Towns and Villages
burnt and consumed by the hands of these devourers.

There is no house nor family (where War is) in which they do not bewail and
lament a loss. All Trades and Offices first grow cold, and after Wars rigor,
are laid aside, and the poor distressed people must either fast, or run
desperate courses, to seek a livelihood, and to preserve life: Their Virgins
are defloured, their chaste Matrons remain barren and hid in secret places,
their Laws are silent and dead, or of none effect, Humanity amongst men dies,
or at least is a Stranger, Religion is polluted and corrupted holy Churches
violated and profaned, old men led Captives, and before their Eyes they see
Mothers kill their own Children; Youth dejects Parents and runs into all manner
of evils: You shall find thousands of Widows, and twice as many Orphans,
which makes the people hate King, Princes, and Governors, by reason of the
many afflictions and impositions which War brings upon them: There is nothing
but Rancours, Hatreds, and Curses: They must learn to entertain Strangers,
Game, and procure them for Friends, make great preparations and provisions for
War, as well by Sea as by Land; they must strengthen their Bullworkes, make
Re-doubts, provide Engines, as Pistols, Muskets, Accabuss, Grenades, and
Cannon-shot, etc. cleanse Motes and Ditches, stand Sentinels, and many other
things acquired for defense and offense!

What a sad misfortune is this of ours? that Nature should not be contented to
produce Man to so much frailty, and subject to so many infirmities, but that it
must admit of furious War to break in upon him, which is such a strange,
contagious, pestilential, and pernicious evil, that it contains all other evils
and wickednesses in the World, and drawing them after it, must needs be the
greatest of all: It Is such a destoying evil, that it does not only afflict the
bad, but delights in nothing more then when it persecutes Innocents and
Fatherless.

If this Devilish madness and fury were employed against Turks and Infidels,
or other strange people, it might seem to be something tolerable; such
victories and spoils might give us some content: But Oh, our God, when to the
contrary Christian Princes do act these things against each other! Would
thou know what are their Spoils, Trophies, and Victories of War? What is their
Glory and Magnificence? And with what they believe to establish to them and
theirs, a continual Empire with peace and quiet.

I will tell thee the greatest that can come to them.

The greatest Glory and Victory they can pretend, is, destroy, afflict, and
torment their Neighbor, their Brother a Christian, their Riches, is to see
their bordering Prince poor and low, his tears are their laughter, and for the
most part their Victories are so bloody and sad, that both Conqueror and
Conquered, have little cause to rejoice; for there never was any Battle of
consequence, wherein the Conqueror came off so to his wish, as that he had not
cause to complain of his loss, and be sorrowful for the blood that had been
shed, in which he could not but show some humanity.

As the Historians do relate of that great Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who entering
into Rome with great Pomp and State, with Triumphs they were wont to give for
encouragement to such as had gained great Victories, and subjected new
Provinces to the Roman Empire; being drawn in a stately Chariot, in the midst
of his Glories remembering the offense he had committed against his Neighbor,
with an audible Voice cried out: What greater Vanity can an Emperor of Rome
commit then this? that for having conquered many strong Cities, Towns, and
Countries, disturbed the peace and quiet of men, burnt and destroyed Cities and
strong Garrisons, undone honest, poor men, enriched Tyrants, and caused to be
an infinite number of Widows and Orphans; that in recompense of so many evils
and detriments to Mankind, he should content to receive with so great Pomp,
State, Triumph, and Magnificence; and of so many killed and destroyed, only
one should carry away the Glory and Honor.

He spoke yet farther.
By the Immortal Gods, I often that seeing and considering my self so
accompanied, and entering with such Triumph with those poor Chain-laden
Captives, me thinks I hear the sighs, groans, and lamentations of their poor
Wives, who remain behind as desolate Widows, and their poor Children as
forsaken Orphans: And looking upon the great Treasures and Riches carried
before me, yet remembering the multitude slain, I cannot rejoice heartily: But
on the contrary, though I showed my self with a merry and cheerful countenance
to all, yet inwardly my heart wept tears of blood, and I began to declare
openly to all my sentment, and to capitulate with Rome in the manner following:

Come hither Rome; Wherefore do thou so much insult over others, and please
thy self at the misfortunes of others? Art thou more ancient then Babylon?
More beautiful then Helia? More rich then Carthage? More strong then Troy? More
populous then Thebes? More adorned with Shipping then Corinth? More pleasant
then Thirte? Or more fortunate then Numancia? They all perished: There is
little or no ruins or Memorials of them left, or of those famous and excellent
men that did inhabit them: Do thou think to remain here as a chaste Virgin?
Do thou think thou shall remain for ever? which art so full of Vices, when
those perished in which all Virtues flourished: Know of a certain one thing
that I shall tell thee, That if thou aboundest and persistest in Vice, the
Glory now thou have, they had; and thou shall be destroyed and made desolate as
they were: What more excellent Philosophy? What more proper Examples? What more
true Oracles can we find then in the expressions of this Heathen Emperor, a man
without Faith, or Evangelical-light in his Breast; yet a true Moral-man.

Is it possible that we that were brought up in the School of Christianity, and
enlightened with the Grace of that Divine, illuminating Spirit, that we should
not fear that at the day of judgment, this Pagan-Emperor and many others,
should rise up against us, and condemn us, and strongly allege against us how
little we make of the life of a Man, much less of a Christian, whose brotherly
life ought to be more precious in our sight.

How many years has that part of the World which we call Christendom, been
disquieted and troubled by Wars; so that ye shall not find a Province in all
Europe that has not been bathed, nay almost made drunk with the abundance of
Christian blood that has bin shed in it: There is no Sea, nor River, that
sometime or other has not changed its Christiline into Scarlet with the
multitudes that have been destroyed: And all through a pride in some, and a
Phanatical spirit of contradictions in others, whose Religion is humor, whose
pretense is to fulfill their own, not Gods will.

When Halarico King of the Goths, as Paulus Oratius that lived in those times
reports, when he sacked the famous City of Rome, commanded Proclamation to be
made, That no man should dare to damnifie or plunder those that should retire,
or take Sanctuary in the Temples dedicated to Saint Peter and Saint Paul.

But in our days men are so inhumane that Temples will not avail, nor tears,
nor begging, favor, and quarter; but they shut their Ears to all, and deflower
Virgins, force other Women, and stab them; and evil treat the poor Sheep of
Jesus Christ.

Men are grown so dissolute, blind, and indiscreet, that without respect to
Sex or Age, they kill, destroy, and cut off the one and the other, as if they
willed if possible to consume even Nature it self: So that considering Man's,
nay, Christians cruelty, if God were not pleased to provide, Cities might be
populated and guided by Counsels of animals, for by little and little Mankind
goes wasting.

How can a Christian with conscience, having only a politic (though
professing a conscientious) pretense, so freely attempt to kill, a man, or men,
for whom Christ died. How are we so prodigal and liberal in spilling that
blood? to redeem, purchase, and preserve, which our God was pleased to shed and
little esteem his.

Is it possible that Christians should not have so much compassion of their
Brethren? as the fierce and bruit Beasts have of one another, who seldom do
hurt those of their own kind.

Wolves do not fight with Wolves, etc. unless it be to preserve their young
ones, or that they are desperate for want of food; yet in their greatest rage
and fury they never make use of, or procure other Arms then which properly
Nature has bestowed upon them: They never invent such Stratagems or Engines,
which the Devil helps man to project; for sure he was the first fomenter of
them: For there is no sublunary thing, which the fury of Artillary does not
cast down, destroy, and consume. For well considered, this invention is not
only more dangerous then any other kind of Arms or Engine of War in the
World, but is more to be feared then poison; although the very Thunder,
Lightning, from Heaven, the which is forged and composed of the four Elements
be so powerful and quick, yet this may in some measure be compared to it, and
when it comes to the utmost of its dryness, and when the fire takes hold of the
Salt, or sulphrous substance it multiplies and converts into fire and air.

But by reason of some humidity which remains incorporate in the Earthly
substance, it casts forth a Vapor, by which we may perceive each Element will
by force maintain its own natural jurisdiction, and with the force that each
Element puts forth, at last heat and moisture joined together, all converts
into Air, the which seeing it self besieged, strives to get forth, and being
free flies to its own Element; the Air, the Fire, rises and forces its
passage, but before it comes forth, it being the strongest and purest of all
the four Elements, converts the other three into its own Nature, from the
strength of which proceeds that strange Thundring-clap at the discharging of a
Gun, and what ever it reaches it breaks in pieces and converts into dust and
ashes. To pass by the different names of all sorts of Artillery and small Guns,
they call some Faulcons etc. in which men me thinks err very much to give to
such diabollical Engines the names of Birds, which we use for our recreations
and sports; they might better have called them Satan's, Barrabasses, and
Belzebubs, and the like, from the inventors of them.

Now we have declared the passages of War: What miserable lives they lead, and
what reward they get, who hazard their lives and take great pains therein, and
how it is in all respects, and all its effects a farther procurer of Man's
affliction and sorrow.

Now let us contemplate the life of Courtiers, how they live that are in the
Palaces of Kings, Princes, and great Lords, And to begin with those that are
near about the persons of Kings, etc. in what they place their greatest
felicity. Let Us make proof of their delights and pleasures.

They think there is no greater happiness in this life then the gracious Aspect
of a Prince: What greater favor then to see him, talk with him, and accompany
him when they will? What contentment may be compared to the Favors,
Treatments, and Advancements, which Kings and great Lords bestow on their
Favorites? What greater honor then to introduce a friend, or stranger, to the
Kings presence? continually to enjoy his company, his embraces, delights, and
love; with other Courtly pleasures.

There are some so fly and cunning, that are always watching, that they may
not let pass a good opportunity of preferment for their own advantage; others
are in hopes to fill themselves both Corpse and Purses, and at last are forced
to cast up all again.

Some exercise their Wits to invent Taxes, Loans, and Excises, to gather
together great Treasures, increase the Revenues of their Princes, and line
their own Bags with the spoils of the people.

With such men many times Princes deal, as we use to do with Cattle; we let
them fatten and grow gross, that afterward we may feast our selves and friends
upon them: So do Princes suffer these men to grow rich and fill their Coffers
with money, that they may take it all from them at once, and place others in
their rooms, though they have been never so trusty.

Do but behold how these miserable Courtiers do sell their liberties to enrich
themselves! They must, though against their wills, do what their Princes
commands them, be it right, or wrong, just, or unjust: They must strive to
laugh when they laugh, weep when they weep, approve what they approve of, and
condemn what they condemn: They must set themselves to act what shall be
proposed, and execute what shall be commanded them; even change and alter their
Natural customs and conditions: With the severe they must be severe, with the
sad they must be sad, and in a manner transform their own lives, beings, and
Natures, to please, delight, and content them, if they would attain to what
they desire, and not be cast out of favor. If their Prince be vicious, so must
they be; if cruel, their messages must be to shed blood: And though many times
the Favorite endeavors to conform to the conditions of his Master, and appear
like him in his Natural inclinations.

Often it happens that for one fault committed, one discontent, or one neglect,
in pleasing his humor, he turns him off, and makes him lose the Fruits of all
the Services he ever did him in his life, which we shall find verified in the
Favorites of the Emperor Adrian, whose condition was such, that after many
favors and rewards received, and being raised to the highest patch of
Dignities and Honors, for any trivial fault or discontent, they were not only
deprived of their Wealth and Favors received, but were declared Capital
Enemies to the Emperor; which being well considered and understood by Divine
Plato, who took all Courtly pleasures, Viands, and Delights, from the
Athenians, although he could not govern nor conquer himself, but must needs
return to the Court of Dionisius, Tirant of Scicilia, who afterward sold him
as a Slave to Pirates.

The like happened to that ancient and wise Philosopher Zeno, from Phaleris the
Tirant, in recompense of many good services he had done, caused him to be put
to a cruel death, the same payment did King Anachreon give to Anaxagaras, the
like reward had Seneca from Nero, and Calisthenes from Alexander the Great, who
because he would not acknowledge him to be a God and adore him, he commanded
his Hands and Feet to be cut off, his Eyes to be plucked out, his Ears and Nose
to be pulled off, and cast him into an obscure Dungeon, where he died.

These and the like ends had many other great Favorites and Philosophers, who
would not obey the unjust and inhumane Laws and commands of Princes and
Monarchs, they died miserable and cruel deaths in recompense of all their
services and good counsels they had given.

We will forbear to reckon up the great multitude of Vices and bad Customs
which always do follow and accompany Courtiers; how amongst them all things go
by contraries, and all humane law and society is perverted and prevericated.

There are many in the Court that do vouchsafe thee their Hat, that would
willingly take thy Head from thy Shoulders, there are such that will make thee
a Leg, that would be glad to carry a Leg of thee to thy Grave: They kiss many
hands that they would willingly see cut off, there never wants one, I know not
what, I do not understand it, I cannot tell how or when it was done.

With these and the like expressions they cause poor pretender(...)r any other
that has business at Court, to go away murmuring and complaining.

If in the Court thou will be bad, thou can not want companies of in any vice.

Will thou give thy self to Whoring, there are the principal Masters of it:
Will thou quarrel or fight, there are the chief Duelists or Hectors: Will thou
lie, there will not want those will approve and encourage thee therein? Will thou steal, rob, or pilfer? there thou shall find the most dextrous and subtle
of the Trade, of whom thou may learn and commence Master! If thou will cheat
at Cards or Dice there wants not pro-provision for it i will assure thee: if thou will swear false, thou shall not want one to pay thee for it in conclusion: if
thou will let lose the Reins of thy Appetite to all manner of sinful Vice in
the World, there thou shall find the best (nay rather the worst) examples and
patterns for it in the whole World. Here thou see the portraicture of a
multitude of Gallant and stately Courtiers, which is not a life, but a painful
and large death.

In these and such like things do very many Youths pass their times, which is
nothing but transitory deaths: Will thou understand what advantage ancient men
do bring from Court, being past the age of action? Their Heads gray, their
Teeth decayed, their Hands and Feet lame, with Cout and Rhumes, Pox, and Stone,
wicked thoughts, and their Souls made black and bespotted with sin, to conclude
there is little to be done in the Court, and much murmuring.

If thou would know more at large the lives of Courtiers, read over the Books
of Don Antonio and Guevarra Bishop of Mondonedo, and of Aeneas Sylvio,
otherwise called Pope pius, who writ two excellent and exact Treatises of this
effect, in which they do set forth to the life the gentle Courtiers; so that
there cannot more or less be said then what they have done.

Let Us leave the gallant, emulating, complemental, and contra-meaning
Courtiers, in their so miserable and unquiet life, and return to our purpose,
to contemplate briefly of the estate of Emperors, Monarchs, Kings, and
Princes, for whom (we may conjecture by the outward appearance) all the
pleasures, delights, and good fortunes of the World were made; for if we do
consider what man has need of to make his life quiet, pleasant, and happy, and
to enjoy this life in perpetual rest and contentment, it will appear to our
outward view, that Nature has provided more largely for Princes then for other
men.

What thing can Man enjoy, and be more happy in this life, then in great
Riches, abundance of Temporal Goods, Commands, Dignities, absolute power and
free liberty to act good or evil, or shall please his own palate without
contradiction, reprehension, or chastisements, power to run with loose Rain
after all sorts of pleasures, delights, and passtimes, and to have at his will
whatever his appetite or reason can desire.

All that can be acquired for man's contentment, his quiet and entertainment, as
rich Cup-boards, Vessels of Gold and Silver to eat and drink in, the many
delicious and various Meats, great, magnificent, and pompuous services and
furniture, rich Vestments; and all with a Royal neatness and order; with what
ever else can be desired to delight the senses, and maintain the pleasures of
Humane concupiscence, all which they have provided for them without asking, or
taking care, even from the Cradle to the Crown.

It Is true, if we should look no farther then on the outside of these glorious
entertainments, we should be really persuaded that they alone do enjoy the
pleasures and delights of this life, and that all others live in perpetual
anguish and trouble; but if we make a further entrance into these things with a
just balance weight, and with a true Rule try them, we shall find the same
things which we count as steps to the height of felicity, and which will make
them arive to the top of happiness in this life.

These are the instruments and preparations of Vice, by which they become to be
more unfortunate and miserable; of what validity are their rich garments and
furniture, gallant, and honorable services, and delicate Viands, with all
which they cannot defend themselves from the falsities and poisons which may be
mixed in them by those about him: We have experience thereof in our days. Does
not Plataria write, That one Pope was bewitched in his senses, with a paper
that was given him by a Servant for a private use, to wipe. --

Others have been poisoned by the smoke of Torches and Candles.

We read in ancient Histories, that some Emperors durst not lie down to take
their repose at night, till first they had searched the Beds, and diligently
looked into all corners and retirements in their Bed-chambers, for fear of
being murdered when they were sleeping, and changed their Lodging often.

The History of our Times can declare the like of that Tirant CROMWELL, who was
a diligent searcher, as abovementioned, and often few of his own family knew
where, or in what Room he lay: What a terrible, gnawing, and continual
troublesome, waking Worm is a guilty Conscience?

Others there are who never would consent a Barber or Surgeon should come
near their Faces to shave their Beards, least they should cut their Throats.

The Kings of our Times are so jealous that they dare not eat a bit without a
Taster. Were it not better, says Julius Caesar, Dye at once, then live subject
to so many jealousies and fears: But what felicity can any man enjoy that has
so many thousands of men at his charge, under his government and protection: He
must watch and hear the complaints and petitions, and seek the welfare of all,
inviting with his clemency and liberality some to be good, and forcing others
to be so with rigor and justice: He must not be less solicitous to procure and
maintain the peace and quiet of his people, then courageous and valiant to
defend them from the assaults in roads and treacheries of their Enemies,
without setting down many other the like calamities and ears, which attend and
surround the Royal Crowns and Scepters of Kings and Princes; they command all,
but for the most part one or two governs them.

Pogio Florentino in a Discourse which he makes concerning the wicked Princes
and their infidelity, they commonly suffer themselves to be governed (or led
on) by three sorts of people, with which they converse which are most pleasing
to them, and which are most familiar with them and approved by them.

To begin with Flatterers, which deserve the first place, and because they are
Capital enemies to the truth, they bewitch their Souls and poison their
dispositions with such pestiferous and dangerous potions of tyranny, folly, and
vice, that all their Subjects feel the smart thereof: They call their folly and
rashness, prudence; their cruelty, Justice; their dissolute luxuries and
uncleanness, gentle sports: If they are covetous they say they are provident:
If they are prodigal, they call them liberal; so that there is no vice in a
King or Prince, which they know not how to mask, paint, and gloss, under color
of some virtue.

The second are the Master Builders and inventers of Taxes, Excises, and
Impositions, the which sleep not day nor night, to invent some new strange way
to get money out of the common people for their Lords and Masters: These invent
new Dignities and Honors to be bought: These take away, diminish, and cut them
short again: These petition for confiscations and condemnations against other
men; all their study, diligence, and care, is to gather together, win, obtain,
and procure, the Lands, Goods, and Inheritances of the poor people.

There is another kind of men, which under the pretense and covert of good, do
make of themselves honorable Hypocrites, who have their aspect and reach so
large; that they are always entrapping and discussing other men's lives and
actions, seeming to be Reformers and Enemies to vice; they denounce against
some good men, and raise lies against others.

These approve such wickednesses, and not only are cause of men's loosing their
Estates, but many times of their lives, who have deserved no such punishment
for what alleged against them, neither from God nor Man, for which cause the
Ancients held a custom (as He^odiano relates) to condemn for Devils and
Enemies of their common weal (after their deaths) those Princes which in their
Reins had ill governed the people, and basely spent their Revenues (as England
may dearly lament in our age, but then there was no King in Israel.)

Also they were wont to congregate in their Temples with their Heathen-priests,
to petition their Gods not to take such Rulers into their Society or Community,
but to condemn them to infernal Furies, to be tormented and chastised.

This custom was not only anciently used, but of latter years (yet not
amongst true Christians) they had certain proper Curses and Execrations against
such wicked protectors of the people, as Antonio de Guevarra denotes, who was
Choronist to the Emperor of a Viceroy of Sicilia, upon whose Tomb in revenge
of his many Tirannies and base abuses they writ as follows.

Qui propter nos homines, et propter
Nostrum salutem, Descendit ad inferos.
Truly by this little I have written, may thou see the miseries and
perplexities with which Royal Scepters are encompassed, these Thorns are
hidden under covert of these beautiful Crowns of Gold, and seeming Rose-Beds
of Government, the which often are, and ever ought to be green, fresh, and
beautiful, without withering, that they may afford content, savor, and sent to
all, be a continual light and good example, like a bright shining Lamp to the
whole World, for if they are infected with any muddy Vice, if any necessary
thing be wanting to a Lamp, it presently burns sadly and dim, a man had rather
be in the dark then have such a light, like the wickedness of princes.

How much the greater, or how much the more sinful their Vices are, so much the
more are they worthy to be reprehended and reproved for them; for as Plato
says, It Is not only one sin to them in the action, but a second sin, and more
dangerous in the Example; so that if it is a hard thing for any man to be good,
(as Hesiod said) it is sure a greater difficulty for a prince to be so, for the
abundance of delights, pleasures, and honors which they enjoy, are rather
Fuel to increase, then Water to assuage the burning heat of Vice.

Mankind for the most part is apt to surfeit himself, and wish to make his
perpetual abode in these and the like superfluous delights and dainties: But it
will be first convenient that they that do attempt (especially Princes) to give
themselves over to Worldly pleasures, or set themseves upon the delights
thereof, that they well understand the natures of Vices.

What a virtuous man sure was Saul before he came to be King of Israel? How was
he praised and esteemed by the Holy Spirit in the Holy Scripture, and was
chosen of God for that Royal Dignity and Charge? But how soon was the Sun of
his Justice, Truth, and Obedience, Eclipsed? How Glorious, Magnificent, and
Just, was the beginning of the Reign of Solomon? What gallant symtomes did he
show of a virtuous King; but he no sooner opened the Gates to Royal pleasures,
delights, and pastimes, but he fell into the hands of evil Women, who robbed him
of his senses, riches, and religion.

Of twenty two Kings of Judab, only five or six did persevere in virtue and
goodness unto their lives ends: And if thou will make a diligent search into
the lives of the Kings of Israel, from Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, there were 19
in all; there was none of them that Reigned well, or pleased God in their
lives, and by that means brought their business to an ill period.

If we consider the estates of the Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, and Egyptians,
we find more evil then good amongst them: If we consider what were the Roman
Emperors, having so many flourishing Kingdoms, such large and fertile
Provinces under their commands, we shall find them all consumed in Vices,
filled with Cruelties, and wrapped up in Uncleanness, that it is a horror to
read their infamous lives in the Histories.

Oh what a magnificent glory was it to see the flourishing estate of the Roman
Republic, before Sylla and Marius turmoiled and disquieted it, before Cat^lme
and Catullus troubled it, before Julius Caesar and Pompey vexed it with civil
wars, before Augustus and Marco Antonio endeavored its destruction, before
Tiberius and Caligula defamed it, and before Nero and Domician corrupted it:
For although they enriched and enlarged its Territories, by adding great and
large Kingdoms to its Dominions, yet of far more and greater consequence were
the vices and ill customs which were introduced with them to the public
detriment, for the Riches and Goods they spent and lost, but the Vices remained
still on foot as absolute Lords of their Commonweal.

What Memorial is there in Rome now of Romulus that founded it? Or of Numa
Pemphilio, that built the great Capitol, or of Anco Maroio that did surround it
with Walls, or of Brutus that freed it from Tirants, of Camilio that put the
Gauls or French to flight: Do not these examples, etc. which have been hinted,
plainly make appear to our view, what chance* what happiness attend Supreme
Magistrates, and how that Kings and Princes are more subject to the great
changes and assaults of Fortune, then any other men in the World; for very
often the third of their lives is more in danger to be cut thereby then any
private person, and that when they think themselves most secure.

The infamy which does follow evil Princes, their Vices remaining upon Record
in Histories, is a thing that they should have respect to, much more then to
the evil reports and back-bitings of evil principled men: For the last can
only defame them living; but the first, which is History, tells and makes
odious their vicious lives to all following Generations, which being well
pondered and weighed by Dioclesian and other Emperors, considering the troubles
which do attend Princes, they set at naught their Crowns and Scepters, abhorred
to live in command, and govern where so vanities and troubles were attendants,
but retired themselves to a Country life, rather desiring to sequester
themselves all their days, and spend the remainder of their lives in that
pleasant and peaceable solitude, then to enjoy the utmost of delights and
pleasures, which at best are but weak, deceitful, and perishing enjoyments.

But now it is time we leave the temporal Princes, and turn to treat something
of Spiritual Lords, beginning with them that counts themselves the Heads of the
Church of Rome, the Popes, the Patriarcks of the Greek Church, Archbishops,
and Bishops, etc.

Would not a man think that they are happy and fortunate in this World, they
enjoy the greatest Dignities in the Earth, they gain what they have, and
sustain it without dint of Sword, preserve themselves in it without much danger
or labor, most Christian Monarchs do reverence and honor them, and kiss their
feet, they abound in Riches, and are full of Dignities and Honors, although
St. Peter and the Apostles whom they represent, were true and lively patterns
and examples of poverty, yet if thou considerest well, and look to the end
of the Tragedy, thou will not only not count them happy, but thou will loose
the appetitious desire of wishing to enjoy their great estate, or to be Pope,
Patriarck, Archbishop, or Bishop, but out of a pure charity thou would
bewail them; for that Pope or Bishops, etc. that will govern the Church
according to the rules, laws, and precepts, prescribed by God himself, must be
like a public Slave or Servant, venture his life to save that of others,
esteem little of his own health to preserve that of his Neighbors: He must
watch whilst others sleep, set Spies, and have his Ambushments all the World
over, never be without care or quiet, that a moment of their lives may not pass
without profit to the whole, that Satan with his entrapments do not beguile or
disturb their Flock.

And if it be so as Saint John Chrysostom says, in a Commentary of St. Paul's
Epistle to the Hebrews, that a Curate or Rector of one only Church is saved
with much difficulty; by reason of the great charge of Souls that lies upon him.

What danger does he run that is in a higher place, and is Bishop of a thousand
Congregations, or more; where shall his portion be, if he be negligent to see
so many thousand souls fed? which being well considered and experimented by
Pope Adrian, a Learned man in his way; who was wont to say, and that weeping,
(but to his most particular Friends) That amongst all estates of the World,
none seemed to him more miserable, or of a more dangerous condition, then that
in which he was of Pope; For although such Dignities have their Foot-Cloaths
and Canopies, etc. of State very rich, adorned with Gold and precious Stones,
so gallant, sumptuous, and full of pomp, that no more cannot be.

All this Noble provision, all this Royal State, unto the foot of which no man
(forsooth) must approach but on his Knees, is full of sharp Thorns, the rich
Mantle they wear is loined with Prickles, and Cares like sharpest pointed
Needles, the burden is so heavy to bear, that it makes the back bend and grow
crooked, even of the most strong and stout hearted man; for that rich triple
Crown and Diadem which encompasseth thy Head, may better be called a flame,
that burns and consumes the strength and Soul.

These are the words of Pope Adrian; which well considered, I believe there
would be very few strive to attain to that place and dignity.

It is such a charge, that no honest man can deal with; For he must uphold all
profitable errors, and maintain things (if advantageous) contrary to his own
Genuous: But it is time to leave the chief heads of the Church, and their
weighty charges, and turn to the inferior Members, who are sick of the same
disease; and to contemplate them more near.

Let Us first consider what the Priests of the Gentiles were, and let us compare
these with ours, that we who are enlightened with Evangelical faith, and suck
the sincere Milk of Christianity, may be troubled and ashamed, and learn of
such who should be taught by us.

It is a certain and confirmed truth, That the Priests of the Heathen were
chosen of the most learned and known of the Heathen, of the best and most
famous: As we read of the Priests of the Egyptians, the which were maintained
at the public charge, and never spent their time in any other thing then
(after their Duties and Ceremony ended) in Philosophy, and searching out the
secrets of Nature, from which honest and virtuous employments, proceeded a
singular and notable profit and benefit to all posterity; for as Aristotle
writes, They were the first inventers of Mathematical Arts, their lives were so
orderly, good, and virtuous, and their Doctrine so admirable, that Lycurgus
Pythagerous, Plato, Democritus, and the greatest part of the ancient Greek
Philosophers, left their Countries, their Houses, their Wives, their Children,
and their Academies, to go and learn of the Egyptian Priests.

The very same custom they used amongst the Priests in Babylon, which were
called Caldeans: What spare time they had, their Ceremonies ended, they
employed in studying Philosophy, and the secrets of the Heavens; so that as
Diodorus Siculo writes, We owe to them the invention of Astrology, and the
greatest secrets of Astronomy, which they found out with extraordinary care and
labor.

Also, the Persians had Priest; which they called Magicians, which is as much
as to say, Wise men; which they so much loved, honored, and respected, for
their good lives, as well as for their excellent Doctrine.

In their most urgent occasions and in their greatest necessities, they ran to
them as if they had been Gods on Earth.

The Indians, as by the following Discourse, had their priests, which they
called Gymnosophists, of such excellent learning, and such just and virtuous
lives, that they alone were sufficient to confound, alay, and abase the pride
of that great Tirant Alexander, as Plutarch writes, who was determined to make
desolate their Countries, to kill and destroy whatever he found in them.

But when he heard these wise men, who like noble Heroes came to plead for
their Country, he did not only not do it, but he bestowed upon them great
Treasure, and let them all live in their ancient freedom and liberty.

Also the ancient French (then called Gauls) before Christianity was preached
amongst them, as Julias Caesar's in his Commentaries writes, They had Priests
which they called Men of Lives, which were men of great Austerity and much
knowledge, for the which they were honored as Gods.

The time that they could spare from their usual Ceremonies, they employed in
teaching Children and instructing Youth, disputing the Immortality of the Soul,
the Motions of the Heavens, the Circumference of the Globe of the Earth, the
principium, Beings and Natures of things.

In these and the like profitable labors and studies, did these good men
employ their vacant hours, not suffering one moment to pass which they did not
improve for the common good.

Here thou see the condition and the life these men did lead, these were
their usual employments: In these virtuous actions did they spend their times,
who though Priests, yet Heathen Priests, without true Faith, true Law, or the
true God, without hopes of a future and better life, and without fear of
chastisement; which we believe God can when he pleases lay upon us.

Now let us compare with what has been said, the Lives, Customs, and
Occupations, of our Ministers and Priests; and (I doubt) we shall find, that
these Heathens will rejoice one day against them to be their accusers and
condemners for the wicked life very many of them lead. I speak against the bad,
and their Vices, and not against the good, or the Priestly Function; for I well
understand and know, that there are many good and learned Shepherds, who with
true Christian diligence are ever watchful over their Flocks, which have a
strict and continual care over their Foldes, gently feeding them at seasonable
times; and as is most agreeable to Gods holy word.

I also know, That in all Christian Universities there are many excellent
Doctors, who with their holy understandings, lives, and Doctrines, do like so
many resplendent Jems adorn and beautify our Europe.

But how many Churchmen are there in the World? I wish we have not too many
false, seducing, ignorant, and scandalous Teachers amongst us in England: But I
am sure they have exceeding many in the Roman Church, of whom I shall give you
a Character, given them by one of their own Church, who are so nursed and fed
up in ignorance and fooleries that they hardly can read over their Mass,
therefore they murmur it betwixt their Teeth, That their ignorance may not be
discerned.

Now if they cannot read, how shall they be able to understand the Dignity,
Virtue, and Efficacy, of the holy Sacraments?

How many Pastors are there this day in the World that understand better how to
Court Ladies, and take pleasures in other Vanities, then to unfold the
difficult questions of predestination, free will, and others, which the holy
Scripture sets forth. Against these the Prophet Ezekiel propounds a woe, saying
in the 34 Chap. 2, 3, verse. That they spent their time more in feeding
themselves then their Flocks, and instead of gently leading them in plentiful
pastures, they eat the Fat clothed themselves with the Wool, killed them that
were fed, but they cared not to feed the Flock.

And in another place, such are called dumb Dogs, blind, and sloathful
Teachers, that cannot, or dare not, bark at the Wolf Satan: They are very
curious to seek out any thing that may make for their pleasures of Hunting,
Hawking, and glutting their paunches; but little, or no care do they take to
seek out a good pastor for the Flock of Christ, who one day will call them to
account for their charge, and make them dearly pay for those which are lost
through their carelessness and neglect; in conclusion, these are true Leaches,
whose principal purpose is to suck the blood and sustenance of the poor Sheep,
spend the Churches Revenues in pomps, delights, sports, and other exercises,
instead of maintaining the poor, relieving and marrying Orphans and poor
Maids, (as Saint Nicholas did) who gave, and they knew not who did give it,
for the instruction of Youths in the Liberal Arts, maintain them in
Universities to learn the Sciences, both Divine and Humane: But our God, which
is just in his Judgments, brings these unjust Stewards and vain spenders of
his Goods to account, when they least think on it.

It is certain there are many priests that have gathered the fruits of their
Benefices, consumed and spent their Rents and Tithes twenty years together, and
have not visited their poor Flocks not three times, which they recommend to
foolish and ignorant Curates: And let them be never such idiots, yet he that
will officiate cheapest, he shall have the place; for the which if God be not
the more merciful, it were just in him, that they who serve God by their
blind proxies, (it may be to the destruction of many Souls) should be
condemned to suffer personally Eternal pains, which being well contemplated by
holy Saint Barnard in his 33 Sermon upon the Canticles, being very angry with
them, he complains much against their excessive pomps and superfluous
delights, and paints them out in such lively Colors as their dishonest and
vicious lives do deserve, which he does with a more Divine then Humane penzil,
saying; There reigns in the whole body of the Church a pestilential spot and
contagion, which cannot easily be healed and blotted out: The Ministers and
Servants of Jesus Christ do serve Antichrist, they go very much decked and
honored with the Goods of the Lord, but do not serve the Lord: Out of his
Treasures do they take the Garments of unrighteousness, which thou see they
every day wear, from hence they have the Gold with which they adorn their
Saddle, Trappings, Spurs, and Stirrops; hence they have the rich Furniture for
their Houses and retirements, which are far better adorned then the Churches,
they have all their charge, and their Spurs are better gilded then their
Altars, from hence they fill their Tables with sumptuous Banquets and delicate
Viands, and also their Cup-boards of Gold and plate. The Gormandizing
Gluttonies and Drunkenness which they so frequently use do all flow from hence,
even from the peculiar Treasure of God, from that which he has set apart as it
were more particularly for his own use, and he concludes, saying; That they may
come to enjoy without fear, rule, or measure these and many other delights,
pastimes, pleasures, they by one means or other make the Prelates, Presbyters,
Arch-Deans, Deans, Bishops, Archbishops, to become their friends.

The said Saint Barnard being afterward incenced with anger and holy zeal, in
a Sermon which he made in the Synod concerning prelates and Ministers, he did
not send to them, but face to face he told them of the foregoing Enormities,
and openly declared to them, That this was not the way to direct, dress, and
adorn, the Spouse of Jesus Christ, but rob her of that she had, and leave her
naked; not to preserve, but to destroy her; this is not to maintain, uphold,
and defend her, but to spoil, make havoc of her, and betray her into the hands
of her Enemies; not to instruct her and her Children, but to perplex and weary
her; not to document her, but to profane her; this is not to feed the Flock of
Christ, but to destroy it. These are the words of that holy man to the
Eclesiasticks of his time, when they did not lead such wicked lives as in our
days they do.

Saint Peter and Saint John said they had reither Gold nor Silver to give to
the poor man that begged at the Gate of the Temple.

If they should see their successors, but not their imitators, how they
flourish in Courts, what glory and state they take upon them, how they go
clothed in Silks, perfumed with Musks and Amber, in Coaches, and on Hose-back
like Saint George, lying at ease in the magnificent palaces of Kings and
Princes, when they themselves were the most part of their lives lodged in the
Prisons, Castles, and Dungeons of Tyrants; what think you would they do? what
would they say? what can these men expect, but that the Lord will come with his
Scourge, and whipped them out of the Temple, these Merchants, sellers of the
Offices and Benefices of his Church.

If we will diligently search and enquire into the lives and conditions of
those that have a hand in the Government of Commonwealths, how many miseries
and evils shall we find them subject to, though it appears to be the most
necessary and free life, and the most notable entertainment that Man can enjoy,
yet for all that we shall perceive that it has its troubles, its turmoils, and
afflictions, as all others have, and though it have some quiet pleasure and
contentment with the honor and respect that every one gives them, yet this
condition is so brittle, frail, and transitory, that for the most part it
happens to them, as with hot swellings of wounds or inflammations, and other
infirmities which do breed and engender in a man's body.

Every one will needs see, touch, and prescribe his remedy: Even so those
Judges and Senators must act all publicly; for although they would, they
cannot, nay, they dare not, hide from the people the least of their designs;
for the multitude although they are not so wise as to give a good reason of
things, yet they are not altogether so sottish, but they can give a guess at
what is good and what is bad; for which reason commonly those that govern
amongst them are subject to be like Players in an interlude, though they be
sometimes honored and respected, yet they are often reviled, scoffed at, cast
off, and rejected, to their utter shame and confusion; for the foolish and
giddy-headed Rout, which Plato called a Monster which has many Heads, its
mutable, uncertain, and unstable, a mocker, a jeerer, a friend so much of
deceitful jests, that it will as soon speak evil of one as praise him, without
scence, or discretion, no friend to reason, but against it; its a Traitor, an
obstinate fool; and above all, inconstant.

Such must they be in secret as in public, those that govern, if they will
well command this Beast the common Rout; for as they judge in public Audience,
even so are they judged in secret by all; even in the greatest and most
important business, as in the affairs of less importance, their never wants
this evil, but always in Commonwealths they have contradictions.

As Plutarch in his politics expresses, the Athenians murmured against their
Simonides, because he spoke high, the Thebans accused Paniculas, because he did
spet much; the Lacedaemonians blamed their Lycurgus, because he always hung
down his head; the sleeping of Scipio troubled the Romans, because he snorted
much; those of Vtica defamed good Cato, because he eat in haste, and with both
his Jaws; and they esteemed Pompey ill nurtured and very uncivil, because he
scratched himself only with one Finger; the Carthaginians spoke evil of
Hannibal, because he always went unlaced and open at his stomach; others
jeered at Julius Caesar, because he went ungirt.

All this is but a small matter in respect of what the Commons in Commonwealths
have put upon their Leaders, in comparison of the multitude of their Senators
they have persecuted, banished, and put to death, in recompense of the many
services they have done for them, and the many miseries, afflictions, and
troubles they have sustained for them and their Country.

If that great Greek Orator Demosthenes should arise at this time, well might
he say over again what he once said in this case, complain of the peoples
ingratitude; for after he had been a firm shield, defense, and protection to
his Country, and a Real deliverance to the City of Athens, he was by the Rout
unjustly banished, as if he had been a Thief or Malefactor: Socrates was
bewitched, Hannibal was so evil treated of his Contrymen, that he was forced
to banish, or absent himself from them, and wander through the World begging,
and miserably ended his days.

Even so the Romans served Camillo, the Greeks Lycurgus and Solon; one of the
which was stoned to death, and the other (after one Eye plucked out) banished a
a Murderer.

Moses and many other Saints often had experience of the mad fury of the
giddy-headed multitude; but if they lived in our days they might complain a
thousand times more then in their days they had occasion.

But as we do breath forth and openly proclaim the fooleries and mis-deeds of
the giddy and fickle-headed Commons, it is not reason we should hide the errors
and vanities of many Judges and Governors of the people, how they become
wicked and corrupted, amongst which some are unjust out of fear of distasting a
Prince or great Lord, and do as Pilate did, not to incur the anger of Tiberius
Caesar, he condemned to death the spotless Lamb Christ Jesus.

Others are corrupted by love, friendship, and favor, as Herod the Tetrarch,
who for love to please the foolish fancy of a Maid, condemned to death innocent
Saint John Baptist, although he knew he was blameless: Others are led out of
the way by a mortal rancor and hatred that possesses them: As that Prince and
High Priest, who commanded St. Paul to be smiten on the face whilst he was
pleading at the Bar in his own defense: Other whiles they are bribed and
blinded with Gold and Silver; as the Son of that great prophet Samuel.

This is such a contagious Disease, is taking, and of great account, and that
even amongst the most precise; all with a good will do receive presents, says
the prophet; all holds out their hands for gifts; as the physician if little
money, little health: they observe not the course of Justice toward Orphans,
neither do they judge aright the cause of the Widows.

And in another place he says, Woe be to you that suffer your selves to be
corrupted and suborned with bribes, entreaties, rancor, or friendship; and for
the same do make of the good evil, and of the evil good, of darkness light, and
of light darkness.

Cursed be ye that do not judge according to the justness of the cause, but
look upon the persons, and give Sentence according to the gifts with which
ye are bribed; ye that shut your Eyes to equity, and set them wide open to
bribes; ye that do not guide your selves according to the dictates of Reason,
but according to your affections, payment, and according as your own appetites
or wills shall rule; ye are very diligent in rich men's concernments, but do
delay, neglect, and defer the causes of the poor; ye are very sharp and austier
against the poor man; but soft and flexable if against the rich; which brings
me to what the wise man said, That if the poor man speak no man will hear, but
asks who was it? If the rich man speaks, every one says such a man speaks
well; Oh how gallantly has he spoken; every one is pleased with his Language,
every one praises him to the height: All is but a Scifer, all is Air in a poor
man, in respect of the pretenses of these great men, in respect also of the
Worms of preferment which gnawes the Entrails of such as are trusted in this
public Honor and Dignity; for they presently would their Sons what the Mother
of the Sons of Zebede desired hers might be, command Lord that my two Sons may
sit one at thy Right Hand, and the other at thy Left Hand in the Kingdom of
Heaven; even so do they desire that their Children may succeed them in their
Governments and precedencies, although oftentimes they are simple and incapable.

The Prophet Jeremiah speaks of the Judges and Magistrates (especially of
Commonwealths) that they enriched, ennobled themselves, and endeavored to
speak their own ends, before they would judge the cause of the Orphans and poor.

Is it not reason, says the Holy Ghost, that I should avenge my self of such
men? Hear what the holy Spirit sentenceth by the mouth of Saint James against
them at the day of judgment:

Seeing thou haste destroyed the innocent and just, and thou haste spent thy
time in all sorts of pastimes, delights, and pleasures, and ever haste
endeavored thy hearts content in this life.

It was all false, says our Lord, for from henceforth thou shall sigh, weep,
groan, and howl, being surrounded with Torments; your Riches shall perish, your
Garments the Moaths shall eat, your Gold and your Silver is rusted, and that
rust shall rise up in judgment against you, shall eat and consume your flesh
as a fire, because the tears, sighs, and groans of the Widows and Father less
came up to my Throne.

Here we see the complaints of the Prophets and holy Apostles against the
corrupted and mercenary Judges: This is the Sentence which God has pronounced
against them and such evil doers.

Now there remains to our serious view nothing worth our notice, but how it
fares with married people; what a contented life do they lead, after we have
diligently searched the lives of the principal conditions of the World; it is a
certain and known thing that if we will in our phansies imagine, or compose in
our understandings, an Idea, pattern, or copy of a happy Marriage, well endowed
with all things can be desired, as Plato did in his Reipublick, or as Saint
AUGUSTINE did his in Civitate Dei, that in appearance there is nothing in the
World that can be compared to the delights, pleasures, pastimes, and quietness,
which attend a Married life.

That this may be true no man can deny, for with them the good and bad fortune
is in common; each participates in the others condition; the Bed is common, the
Children common, there is such a conformity betwixt them, their hearts, minds,
and affections; so that two bodies, two souls, seem to be one; and if we do
receive a contentment, a pleasure, and a delight, when we impart to our
intimate friends, our negotiations and our passages: How much greater delight
and hearts-ease must it be to declare fully what happens to us, to unburden our
breasts, to ease our Spirits in the bosom of such friends, which are tied to
us with such an undissolvable knot of charity and love, who we may as
confidently trust as our own bosoms, making them Treasurers and loyal Keepers
of the greatest and most valid secrets of our hearts, not hiding from them the
uttermost thoughts of our souls.

What greater testimony can there be of a true, perfect, and perpetual love,
then for a Woman to leave Father, Mother, Sisters, Brothers, and Kindred; and
even seem to be an enemy to her self, to follow the Husband that loves,
honors, and respects her, so great is her affection, that she despises and
sets at naught all other things: She desires nothing more then her Husbands
content and welfare: If he be rich, she will so far as in her lies, preserve
his Estate; if he be poor, she studies more then how she shall increase his
Estate.

In this she imployes her time and the industry with which Nature has endued
him, to help him and prevent his poverty, she greatly rejoices to see her
Husband enjoy prosperity and contentment: If troubles, crosses, and afflictions
do come upon him, she helps to bear the burden of his sorrows, she comforts,
accompanies, and secures him.

If a Married man will sit at home, or retire himself, he has a Wife that
continually will accompany, discourse with him; and with her loving
entertainment expel from him all sorrow, grief, and melancholy: If he goes a
Journey she accompanies him with her Eyes so far as her sight can reach, and
being absent, she honors, desires, and expects him with tears, sighs, and
complaints: When he returns home again, she runs forth to receive, embrace, and
entertain him, diligent to assist and undress him, inventing new and exquisite
love-toyes and delights to content and please him, by all the means and ways
she possible can; so that a good Wife seems to be an extraordinary gift and
blessing, which God has bestowed upon him for his pleasure, delight, content,
and refreshment to his Youth, and for a help, comfort, and solace to his old
age.

Nature can afford us but one Father and Mother, but Matrimony represents many
to us, giving us Children that do honor, reverence, and love us, more then
their own selves; for being young, they sport, they tumble, and play the little
Apes, they play the Fools, prattle, and chatter, to give us content, to please
our appetites, and increase our mirth with their innocent sports and pastimes;
so that it is in appearance as if Dame Nature had bestowed on married people
for their recreations, some Players of interludes, or delightful Jesters, to
pass a great part of this miserable life; and when old Age comes upon us, which
is a thing common, and of necessity must come upon all that live long; these
little Monckies (as I may say) do ease and comfort the troubles of this life.
They shut our Eyes when we die, and see us decently restored unto the Earth
from whence we were taken.

These are our Flesh, Blood, and Bones, when we look upon them we see our
selves; so that the Father that has his little Son before him, may say, He
sees his own portraicture, though in a smaller compass, in the face of the
Child: In them we seem, as if we are born anew in the World; and although Age
may load us heavily, and molest our quiet with Aches and pains, it very much
chears and bears up our drooping Spirits, when we see these little figures and
portraictures of our own persons, which do cause and maintain a perpetual
memory of us to remain, and by pre-creation of Children, like some fruitful
Tree, from whose Trunk is cut plants, which grow up and produce many Trees and
Plants.

All which, the Author has fully discoursed in a Treatise which he brought to
light the year before this, concerning the excellency and dignity of Marriage,
in which, I think, he has not omitted any thing that might set forth the
honor and glory of holy Wed-lock; so I shall not turn so far from my present
purpose, as to speak of that which I then so largely discoursed of.

But because the point I am about treats of the miseries and troubles which
attend all estates and conditions of men in this World, it will not free this
more then the rest.

I will declare in short what I have read hereof in several Authors, especially
in that called The Politic Mirror; but I and all of them must needs confess,
that there are many sweets, delights, and pleasures in Wedlock; yet do but
consider and poise with equal balance the great care and charge thereof, you
shall find many sharp Thorns and Prickles amongst these Rose-Beds, and
sometimes sad storms and Tempests.

To prove the truth of this, look upon the Athenians, who were a people that
were anciently in great esteem and honor in the world for their prudence and
knowledge, seeing many Women that could not live with their Husbands, by reason
of the Differences which continually rose betwixt them, they were forced to
choose a new sort of Judges in their Commonwealth, which they called Overseers,
and friendly Composers of Differences, whose Office it was to take Cognizance
of all Discords betwixt Married Couples to reconcile them, and to use all means
possible to make them friends.

The Spartans had also their Judges and Magistrates for this purpose, even to
correct the foolish pride and vanities of Married Women, and to suppress the
bold impudence of many of them: The Romans would not allot particular Judges
for this; it is possible that they believed that men were not able to restrain
the unbridled audaucity of Women, (when they resolve upon any thing) they would
rather seek succor of their Gods; for which cause they dedicated a Temple
apart to the Goddess Vici placa, in which they reconciled all Discords of
Wed-lock: But who can (said they) with patience suffer the burden that attends
Matrimony, or bear with the fooleries and arrongancies of Women, or submit to
the yoke of such an imperfect creature? Who can be able fully to satisfy the
Carnal, as well as the disorderly appetite of rich clothes and vanities of most
Women?

Has it not been an ancient saying amongst the Greeks, and is still used
amongst us, That a Ship and a Woman ever are wanting one thing or other; if
thou take one of poor or of low condition, thy kindred and friends will
disrespect her, and as little esteem thee; if she be rich she will strive to
make thee her slave and vassal; for when thou think to marry one of thy
equal, thou take one that thou can not command; if she be unhansome, thou
can not love her, if she be beautiful thou art sure never to want companions
and friends at home; a fair woman is a Fortress that every one desires to be
commander of, all lay seige, and battery against it, Oh what a difficult thing
it is to keep that, which all men desire, and use their uttermost wits to
steal, procure and enjoy: behold said Guillermo Periera a jealous man, the
great danger in which I leave thee; the head which thou now have of a round
form, may be turned into a square shape, meaning in plain terms thou may
be cornuted; in conclusion, if she be rich* she will be proud, if beautiful,
there is ground for jealousy; if foul or ill shaped, there is matter of hatred
and disaffection offers; for which cause Diponates as a deep sufferer in the
affairs of Wedlock; was wont to say, That married people had only two good
days, the one was the Wedding day in which all is pleasure, contents and
pastimes; the bride is fresh, beautified and cheerful; all new joys or
novelty is pleasing, in delights always the beginning is most apetitious and
savory; the other is the day of death of a man's Wife, for the Snake being dead,
her poison dies with her; even so when the woman dies, the man is freed from a
sharp and hard servitude, in confirmation of this they produce a story of a
young Roman Gentleman that the day after the Wedding, his friends finding him
sad and pensative, after the enjoyment of his first nights pleasures, some of
those that were most intimate with him and private, asked of him the cause of
his sorrow, and why (he that had a Wife beautiful, rich and of noble
Parentage) should be so sad! he stretched forth his Leg and pointing to his
foot, he said, friends you well may see, how well made and fashionable my Shoe
is, but none of ye know where it pinches me; Philemon affirms, That a Wife is
an inexcusable evil to a Husband; for its a difficult thing to find a good
Woman; therefore says the ancient Proverb in Spain: Vna buena muger, una
buena, Mula, una buena cabra, son tres malas Bestias, a good Wife, a good Mule,
and a good she goat, are three necessary evils; to make good this they produce
Plutarch questioning; is there any thing more quick and nimble then the tongue
of a Woman, any thing more biting or more pearcing then the injuries*
expresses, more rash and indiscreet then her boldness, more execrable then her
malice, more dangerous then her fury, more false or counterfeited then her
tears, not to make a large relation of many other offenses, the ill huswifrie
and gadding abroad of many women, neglecting their Children, putting them to
others to Nurse, and if they do bring them up at home, they are too often so
perverse and wicked, by their Mothers example, document, and cockering, that
they do not only hazard the loss of the Honors and Estates of their fathers,
but their persons and lives also, leaving such a blot upon their families,
which can never be blotted out, or taken away; of which evil Augustus Caesar
feeling himself hurt and wounded, he wished that his Wife had never brought
forth Children, he was wont to call his Empress, and his niece horsleaches that
sucked, and wasted him, and his substance, to his great grief and pain, (sure
he had a bad wife and worse children) Marcus Aurelius one of the most wise and
worthy Emperors that ever took Golden Cepter in hand, (well considering and
understanding what passages there are, betwixt married people) being importuned
by some friends to marry his Daughter, he gave them this answer; Do not salute
or press me any more about this matter, for if all the councels of the wisest
men were joined together, and refined in a Goldsmiths fire, they would not be
sufficient to give a certain good and wholesome advice for making of a happy
match or marriage; therefore how do I think that I alone should dispose of her
so suddenly without advice aod deliberation; Its now six years since that
Antonio Pio made choice of me for his Son in law, and gave the Empire in
marriage for dowry, we were both deceived, he in accepting me for Son in law,
and I receiving his daughter for Wife, he was called Pio, because he was good
and charitable to all, only to me (says he) he was cruel and pittyless, for he
gave me with a very little Lady, abundance of bones; these portions, these
bitter galls, and many others mixed with the pleasures of Wedlock; and if we
would confess the truth, we cannot so easily mark, hide, paint over, and set
forth, the gallantry, delights and pastimes thereof, if we weigh in the
balance against them the weighty burden of cares, travells, and troubles which
married men undergo, it will be a great happyness if the Scales are equal, and
the burden the lighter, which God grant to every man.

The Third BOOK OF THE Theater of the World.
Wherein is discoursed, Man's miseries more particularly and exactly to the end
of his Days.

LETS leave the Estates, conditions and degrees of men in their labors,
travels, sorrows, and dealings, casting their nets and hooks in the maine
Ocean of the World, and return to our commenced purpose of the miseries of
Mankind; that we may more particularly give account of the remaining scourges,
and afflictions with which nature does chastise, whip, and torment Men; with
which engines she endeavors to draw this vessel of Earth to the knowledge and
love of God, were it not just, that man seeing the corruptions of all estates
and degrees of the World, their contemptible and loathsome conditions and
beings, that dead he is, nothing but a harbor for Worms, a Corpse, and being
cast into the Grave, if after a time it be opened, gives such a horrible and
contagious scent, that all that come near or pass by stop their noses, that
they may not be infected with it: were it not just, that affliction should come
upon him, assuage his pride and allay the wicked motions of his heart, and
bring him to a contemplation of his frailty, and thereby be afraid to offend
his God; for our vile and impudent nature is grown to such a height that we do
put our selves in defiance with God, as if we would fight the field with him,
we break the fences, and cut through his true established Uniformity of
Religion and worship, and by necessities born of our own fantastical brains,
(as many seeming wise men do in our days) wilfully and not for conscience
withstand it, and do thereby (God send it be not laid to their charge) keep the
people from unity, love and quietness: St. Jerome and St. Austin do affirm,
that in their days the Word of God was in great esteem, and published, that
there was hardly a Nation in the World where there were not some Christians,
even in the remotest parts thereof, but in our days, for our ingratitude and
our manyfold transgressions, God has been pleased to turn his back upon us,
overclouding the light of his Gospel, so that it appears in luster, only in
the least quarter of the World our Europe, where it hardly enlightens two parts
of three, and what is more to be lamented? is the multitude and diversity of
Opinions which daily are broached and fomented amongst Christians? in the which
we find our selves every day more involved, for what one says is white, others
say is black, what some hold for day, others say is night, in fine there wants
not those, who do make a lie, and Antichristian faith, of the truth of Jesus
Christ, from which proceeds a great and strange evil, which is an exceeding
cause of offense to ignorant persons, seeing some wise men affirm what others
deny, knowing as they do that there is but one only truth, and that I can find
it in no place more transparent then in the Church of England: For what others
can say against her is not against any fundamental truth, but against her
decent Ornaments, and Divine order; God is the God of order; and appointed
distinct Vestments for the Priests that served before Him in his Temple at
Jerusalem; so that all ignorant people as well as knowing ought to shut their
eyes and ears against all novelties, and stand steadfast first in the faith,
but next in the practice of their forefathers, for had there been any error of
consequence, so many wise men as lived in those days would have amended them,
its true the Church may to appearance run a great hazard in the depths of
affliction, but shall never be devoured, drowned or destroyed, which as a
miracle we have seen of our Church in her persecution and restoration; these
Sects and Heresies going on as they do, well may we say that the fences of the
pasture where the Flock of Jesus Christ were wont to be gathered together and
fed, are broken down, and that Wolves are entered in, to destroy, disperse and
devour the innocent Sheep, and all proceeds from the carelesseness of their
unwatchfull and disagreeing Pastors, who neglect to stop the gaps, mend up the
fences, discover, withstand and hinder the growth and increase of this
tamelesse devouring and poisoning beast of Heresy; from whence it proceeds
that many of the sheep have fled, and gone astray without a Shepherd; others
are fed of ignorant and blind Shepherds, which are hired for a small matter of
money, and are in danger of being lost, because the chief Pastors take no care
to overlook them, and for those that remain together in the fold and pasture of
Christ, are at the point of hazard to be parted and mislead from the true way;
and certainly if we could see with our corporal eyes at once, the great and
apparent danger that all Christendom is in at this day, if it were possible to
number the multitude of Souls which are daily in danger to be lost by these
Sects, Schisms, and Heresies, it must needs make a man's hair stand upright,
with amazement,

Tell me truly Gentle Reader, is there any manner of chastisement, scourge,
torment, anguish, or sorrow? of which we have not tasted in our days, with
which God has not assayed to awaken us.

I will not refrain to wright somewhat, and begin with the cruel wares and
great effusions of Blood which has been amongst us within this fifty or
threescore years; although I have written thereof in another Treatise, and the
memorial thereof is so fresh that the blood is hardly stenched of the wounds
which has been so deeply cut amongst Christians; the great multitude of people
(as well men as women) which wander as vagabonds from Country to Province and
from City to Village, forcibly banished from their Countries, Parents, and
houses, with the distressed Mothers laden with their sad Orphans, who by the
diligence, fury, and cruelty of their Enemies; are forced to fly from the
burning flame, and to seek out some ease, house, or repose for themselves, and
their hunger bitten infants, nay, and often cannot find it, these may be
sufficient witnesses of the many strange and bitter evils which attend War,
what greater grief then to see the streets filled with such kind of sorrowful
and afflicted people; what conscience, or continency of life can they have, who
are the cause of such Tragedies, when they shall here the tears, sighs, and
outcries of such miserable Creatures; especially when they shall consider that
there is a full and particular account to be given of all the blood that
unjustly or maliciously has been or shall be shed, from Abell who was the
first man that dyed, unto the last that shall die in the World, as the holy
spirit of God teaches us in the Sacred Scriptures.

If we have felt the fatal stroke of War amongst us, which is one of the
principal messengers of Gods wrath, there is another which is the Pestilence,
which has not been wanting in our days, for God according to our hardness of
heart and impenitence proceeds with us by degrees, either increasing or
diminishing the chastisement: I have read of the most strange wonderful
Plagues, and contagions that have happened in former ages, the which we will
compare with those of our times; that we may come to see and understand that
when God is highly offended, whets and sharpens the sword of his anger and fury
against us, all other Creatures are overtaken with the irefull stroke thereof;
Many Authors worthy of Credit, have written that the Citizens of Constantinople
were visited, with such a strange kind of horrible Pestilence, that those that
were smitten therewith, they imagined that they were slain by the hand of a
neighbor or friend, and being fallen into this frenzy, they dyed distracted,
being only possessed with this fear, that they believd their deaths wound
proceeded from another man: There was in the days of Heraclius such a mortal
Plague in Romania, that in few days there dyed many thousand men, the fury and
frenzy of the contagion was so great, that the most part of those that were
stricken therewith cast themselves into the river Tiber to assuage the
exceeding heat, which like a red hot Iron, consumed their very entrails.

Tucidides a Greek Author, writes that in his time there happened in Grecia
such a contagious corruption of air, that an infinite number of people dyed,
without any remedy that could be found to mittygate or cure the disease; and
relates another thing more admirable and strange, that if any one recovered
health and escaped that venomous infirmity, they remained without any
remembrance of what was past, even to the forgeting of Fathers Children, and of
Childrens Parents.

Marcus Aurellius an Author worthy of credit, wrights that there happened in
his days so great a Plague in Italy that the Historians attempting to wright
thereof, said it was more easy for them to number those that were living, then
to give account of how many dyed, the Soldiers of Avidius Cassuis (a General
under the Emperor Macro Antonio,) being in Seleucia a City appertaining to
the Empire of Babylon; they made entrance into the Temple of Apollo, and
finding there a certain Chest, they opened it, (expecting to find a great
Treasure in it;) from which proceeded such a stinking corrupted pestiferous
air, that almost destroyed the regions of Babylon, from thence it flew to
Greece, and thence to Rome, putrefying after such a manner the air, that one
third part of the people did not escape where it came; but to leave the ancient
Histories, and examine what has happened since their time, and in our days,
that we who do hold our selves to be Christians may learn to understand our own
frailty and the great miseries to which we are subject with the scourges and
great afflictions which God lays upon us, and that God when his anger is
kindled against our offenses and extreme iniquities, lets fly the most cruel
Darts and Arrows of his justice against these Creatures, not omitting any kind
of evils, afflictions, and torments, whereby to execute his wrath and
vengeance, what better or greater proof can we have of this then that which we
saw in the year 1628. in the French Army, which at that time beseiged Naples,
that men dyed before they thought they had been stricken with death, and this
curse or Pestilence did not light upon the common soldiers alone, but executed
its fury against the most choice commanders, that the Lords Lautree, of
Vandemon, of Moloac, of Laval, of the Chatrinera Grandmont, and many other
Persons of great quality, who I cannot call to mind without tears, the very
same thing happened to the English when they took Buloigne from the French,
that there arose such Pestilential disease amongst them in the City, that the
living were not sufficient to bury the dead, for which cause the King of
England could not find a Soldier in all his Country would go thither
voluntarily but such as were pressed and forced thither as offenders, for the
more fresh men entered, so many more dyed, so that every corner of the streets
was infected and corrupted with the stench of the dead Corpse which lay in
every part of the City; A year after that King Francis of France married with
Donna Leonoca de Austria, there reigned in Germany such a mortal Plague, that
all that were smitten therewith dyed within twenty four hours, swetting a most
contagious humor, and a most horrid stinking matter, and although this evil
begin at the West end of the Empire, yet afterward it extended it self
throughout all Germany like a sweeping net that will catch all as it goes
along, for before it pleased God to send a remedy, there dyed so many
thousands, that many Provinces remained deserted, and uninhabited, for so great
was the putrefaction of the air that it left neither Creatures alive; and they
write that at the same time that the Pestilence reigned, with the like fury it
was predominant in England, in so much that with the venomous strength thereof,
it did not only overcome and destroy men, but the Birds forsook their Nests,
Eggs, and young ones, the beasts their dens, and Caves, the Snakes and Moles
went together in squadrons and companies, not being able to suffer the venomous
infection that had entered even into the bowels of the earth; in the year 1546.
the last day of May, in Stife a city in Province, began a most cruel and
Pestilential contagion, which lasted nine months, and there dyed great
multitudes of people of all sexes and ages, in so much that all their
Churchyards were so filled with dead Corpse, that there was no room to receive
any more, the greatest part of those that were infected the second day became
frantic, and cast themselves into wells, or else from windows, to others it
gave a flux of blood from the nose, with violence like a running stream, the
stopping of which and ending the life was all at once; it arived to such a
height of dissolution, that women great with child cast forth untimely births,
at four months, both they and their innocent babes dyed, being found full of
tokens, and on one side black and blew like bruised blood; in conclusion the
contagion was so great that fathers left their children, and the women forsook
their husbands; money and riches could not yield remedy to save the owners
thereof from dying of famine, because it was hard to get a piece of bread, or a
cup of water for money; and if in case they could procure food for sustenance,
the Plague was grown so violent, that many were taken away with the meat in
their mouths, the fury of the evil was so great, that only looking upon one
that was stricken; the infection instantly cleave to the party viewing and he
dyed; so great was the contagion of the disease, and the corruption of the air
of the City, to what member of the body the venomous breath or vapor did come,
there arose great sweling, carbuncles, mortally wounding sores, Oh what a
horrible and lamentable thing it was to hear the sad stories that a Physician
tells, one who was ordered by the Governors to heal the sick; this contagion
says he was so sharp and perverse, that it could not be stopped, with
blooding, Physic, medicines or any cordialls whatsoever; but it cut down
destroyed and killed all it took hold of, in so much as he that was stricken
therewith could expect nothing but death; for which cause there were several,
that when they preceived themselves wounded with this mortal infection, they
sowed themselves up in their winding sheets; there thou might see ten
thousand lie after that manner, expecting their last hour, that forced divorce;
O sad parting, of those two so loving consorts the Soul and Body; all which he
affirmed to have seen often done by many Persons, of all degrees; I my self in
the year 1648. being in Spain (where many hundred thousands dyed that year) in
several Provinces, but living in the City of Sevill there break out about
March a fearful contagion or Plague; (where I was visited therewith;) to omit
the relation of every particular sad spectacle I saw daily, I shall only hint
upon the principal passages, by which ye may judge the rest, there was every
morning to be seen, not a street without many dead Corpse in it cast out, not a
house uninfected, so that the most retired Carthusian Friars which came near
none, dyed thereof; the Birds dyed in the cages, not for want of food, but of
the infection; in one Hospital I was told by one that helped to bury the dead
there, that they all judged there dyed in one night four thousand persons; it
raged so much, and carried away so many people that all their burying places
being filled, they were forced to load continually dead Corpse in Carts, and
bury them in the common fields, where they had four several burying places, on
each side of the City one; afterward I had occasion often to take particular
notice of one of them, (where some of our English were buried) it was near
alone Church in the fields, called St. Sebastiam, over the door whereof I have
many times read in Spanish, but in large legible Characters; without the bounds
of this Church lies buried in fifteen graves, forty and three thousand, many
judged that in above four or five months there dyed three hundred thousand,
but those that are more moderate write two hundred and odd thousand, it swept
so clear, that when they came to cleanse the City, they found in very many
houses the last Person dead, and with the heat of Summer almost rotted in their
beds; this Relation may appear to some a story, that in such a City as that,
being but twenty three Parishes, should be such a mortality, truly I was eye
witness to most of what is related, as many Merchants of our English Nation
can affirm, and have no reason to give a false relation of that in which God
has been pleased to grant me so great a deliverance, for which ever magnified
be his Holy Name.

But to proceed on our purpose there remains no other thing but to contemplate
the other principal sc^^^ge of God, famine, a certain and diligent ^^ecutioner
of his justice, as he affirms by the Prophets and Apostels, that he will make
their Land barren, and unprofitable; so also our Savior Jesus Christ telling
his Disciples the sign that should forego the last day, after he had said men
should kill one another, and one ^ingd^me should rise up and make War against
a^^t^er Nation, he adds as a thing of greater degree of puni^hment, that
there shall be great Pestilencies and mortal famines over all the World, for
War, Pestilence, and famine are the strokes with which God commonly avengeth
himself of wicked men, when he grows weary of of waiting for their too often
late repentance.

Lets now see whether we have escaped the last, more then the first; I will not
go about to write of the famines which commonly is known to have happened in
Europe, Asia, and Africa, but will only relate the most memorable, which I find
in the History both Divine and Pagan, to the end that they that live in this
World, as in a Palace of delights, pleasures and pastimes, without tasting in
the least of the calamities and miseries to which man is subject, may (when
they see God shoot the arrows of his wrath against his Creatures) consider and
understand the sovereign power and Omnipotency of their Creator; and
contemplate the pittyfull and sad condition of our nature which (...)ubject to
so many miseries: Lets begin with that which the Romans suffered at the
general destruction of Italy, when Alarico a capital enemy to Mankind besieged
Rome, they were brought to such a poor, low and famished condition, and to such
an exceeding want of all things necessary, that they began first to eat the
Horses, Dogs, Cats, Rats and Mice, and all other sorts of vermin they could
find, and when these failed, they eat one another, the strongest devoured the
weakest; it is a certain and wonderful thing to consider, that when the
justice of God, follows, and puts us to a straight, that necessity brings us
to such a point or resolution not to pardon even our best friends, the Father,
the Son, or the Mother, the fruit of her Womb; The like happened in the siege of
Jerusalem, as Eusebus sets it forth at large, but a more horrid and strange
story follows, when Scipio besieged the City of Numancia, after he had
attacked and cut off relief from them, he put them to such an exstream
necessity, and mortal and canine famine; that every day they sallied out and
went to chase the Romans, (their besiegers) as hungry Dogs do savage beasts, to
eat them; so that without any loathing they eat the flesh, and drank the blood
of the Romans which they took, (not sparing one of them) with as great appetite
as others would eat Beef or Mutton, or drink at a clear Fountain, even so he
that fell into their hands, was presently riped open, cleansed and quartered,
and sold in their Market by pieces or retaile; so that one Roman amongst them,
dead, was of more value then alive; in the 2. Kings 6. Chap 24. ver, etc. There
is made mention of a great famine in Samaria in the time of Elisha the Prophet,
(which exceeded that before mentioned) where there was such want of sustenance,
that an Ass head was sold for fourscore pieces of Silver, and the fourth part
of a kab of Pigions dung for five pieces of Silver, but what was worse, and
most inhumane of all, that having eaten all the provision they had, the Mothers
eat their own Children; in so much that a woman of the City, complained to the
King of Israel, as he went upon the Wall, that her neighbor would not stand to
an agreement made betwixt them, which was to eat the first day her Child, and
the next day the other woman's; the which (says she) I accomplished, for we
boiled my son, and did eat him; I said unto her on the next day, give thy Son
that we may eat him, and she has hid him, the which the King hearing, rent his
clothes, and behold he had Sackcloth within upon his flesh, etc. Josephus in
his seventh Book of the Wars of the Jews, in the third Chapter, relates
another accident much like this, but executed with more fury, and after a more
strange manner; there was (says he) in Jerusalem when it was beseiged a Woman
both noble and rich, which had hidden in a certain house of the City part of
her riches, and fed sparingly on what she had, which she could not long do in
quiet, for the Soldiers of the Garrison in a short time robed her of what she
had laid up in store; and if she entreated and begged for any thing to supply
nature, and some did give her any, others immediately took it out of her hands;
and even force the bit out of her mouth, then she seeing her self in such
distress, ready to dye for hunger, and without any hopes of remedy for to
supply her necessity, she without consideration of what might appear best,
began to arm her self against the wholesome laws of nature, and considering a
Child she had then at her breast began to cry out, saying, Oh unhappy and
unfortunate Babe, or rather miserable mother, what can I do with thee? where
shall I preserve thee? things run, and are so out of order, that if I save thy
life, thou will be a slave to the Romans, therefore it will be better that thou
maintain and relieve thy Mother, and afright the cursed Soldiers who have left
me no hopes of remedy or comfort, be thou an example of pity to ages to come,
and move compassion in the hearts of those that shall be hereafter borne; these
words being ended, she beheaded her Child, parted him in the middle, and put
half on a Spit, roasted and eat it, and laid up the other half for another
time; she had no sooner ended this Tragedy, but the Soldiers came and smelling
the roasted flesh, began to threaten her with present death, if she did not
produce it, but she was so mad and besides her self, for what she had done,
that without fear she desired nothing more then to accompany her Son in death,
therefore she boldly said, be patient friends, for we have divided like
brethren; which saying and doing, she brought forth the other half of the
Child, and set it on the Table before them, with which sight the Soldiers
being frighted, astonished, and confused, they felt such sorrow and pity to
possess their hearts, that they could not speak a word for very shame; she on
the contrary with a furious, and discomposed aspect, and cruel countenance,
with a hoarse, and untuned, or unaccustomed voice, said to them, Sirs what is
this, is it not the fruit of my body; is not here seen my wicked fact, why do
not ye fall too, for I eat first? is it more irksome to you then to me, are ye
more scrupulous then I, are ye more timorous, more merciful then the mother
that bare him, will not ye eat of what I have first tasted, and now will eat
with you? but they not having power to see, and gaze upon so horrible and
abominable spectacle, got out and fled, and left the miserable mother alone,
with that small part which remained of her Son, which was the only thing she
had remaining of all her Goods; this i^ the perfect relation of Josephus
t^a^slated word by word.

But there are many who will not be moved by the examples of Ancient Heathen
stories, beleiving only what they see with their eyes, and touch with their own
hands; such reap as much benefit by the reading or hearing ancient Histories
read, as a deaf man does by Music, I shall make it appear palpably here how
God does not spare us more then he did the ancients; especially when we provoke
him with our sins, as we may see clearly in the following discourse, written by
Guillam Paradin a man of great learning, and exquisit Doctrinall parts; in the
Collection and reconciling of Histories, treating of the most memorable things
of our times, says; in the year 1528. men let loose the reins of their
appetites to all manner of vices, and did so surround themselves therewith,
that they utterly neglected to humble themselves, and turn to the Lord their
God, although they felt the stroke of his justice upon them, in cruel and
bloody War and effusions of blood, but rather they grew daily more wicked,
even to the height of all evils; for which cause God being angry with them,
began to discharge the sharpest arrows, and Darts of his wrath; he let five
the shafts of his anger against France, with such a fury, that every one
thought final destruction was come upon that Kingdom, for there was so much
want, so much necessity, such and so many calamities and miseries, that there
is no History or memorial does declare that ever any suffered so much
affliction and want, as well of Bread and Wine, as of all other fruits of the
earth, for the Plague came to such an exstreame, that in five whole years, from
1528. not any of the four Seasons kept their natural course and order; and on
the contrary there was such a confusion in them, that the spring came in
Autumn, and Autumn in the Spring, the Summer in the time of winter, and winter
in Summer time, yet Summer with his powerful heat was of more force, and
overcame all the other parts of the year; and put forth a double strength
against its greatest opposite cold; so that in the most sharp and cold time of
Winter, which is December. Janu. Febru. when the ground should enjoy a quiet
repose, while the seed roted in it, when it expected its natural season of
cold, then there was so much heat, and the earth was so kindled, dried, and set
on fire, that it was a very prodigious thing to see; for in all those five
years, there was not the least Frost that lasted above two days, neither was it
of so much strength as to freez the Water in the least; with this unusual
heat, there bred multitudes of vermin in the very Bowels of the Earth, as
Worms, Snailes, Locusts, and many others; which devoured the tender grain
before it did spring forth, before it came out of the shell, which was the
cause that those Grains of Wheat which should multiply, and put forth each
many stalks, there sprung from them but one or two at most, and those so
withered, weak, and dry, that in time of Harvest they did not gather the half
of that quantity was sowed, and sometimes nothing, this famine held full five
years without intermission; a thing so pityfull, sad and miserable, that its
impossible to imagine, unless one had seen it; by means of which it happened
that they sold in the Countries of Leon, Florest, Auvernia, Beaujolos, Borgonia,
Savoy, Dolphin, and other Provinces of France at fourteen, sixteen and eighteen
livers of torney, each liver being three shillings, for a horse load of wheat,
that the poor people were so afflicted, and tormented with this mortal famine,
and many other evils which it commonly brings along with it, that it was great
pity to see it, for they that had an orderly and reasonable competency, with
some small yearly rent, were forced for want of subsistence, to leave their
Houses and Countries, and wandered like Rogues and beggars from door to door,
and there was a daily increase of the number of the poor, in so much that it
was wonderful to see the multitudes of them, and impossible to apply a remedy,
but dangerous to stay and suffer their insolences, a continual hazard of being
robed, the which necessity might force them, what an unsavory stench, and
corruption of air proceeded from amongst them, by reason of their breath, etc
for they (to kill that would destroy them) hunga) eat of all sorts of Roots,
fruits, and Herbs, both good and bad, wholesome and unwholesome, not leaving any
sort of weed in Garden, Orchard, or common field, which they did not make use
of for food, even to roots and stalks of Colwarts and other herbs, when they
could get no more out of Gardens, they ran to the fields and Meddows for wild
herbs; many of them boild great Pots of Mallows, and Ca^dus, mixing therewith
a handful of Bran, if they could get it, and with this and the like sort of
viands, they filled their paunches like Hogs, it was an exquisite way, and
worthy the taking notice of, to see the ways they took to make bread of the
seeds of herbs and trees, as of the Acorn, and the hay seed; being forced and
taught by famine, master of all arts and inventions, by which we perceive to be
true what is commonly said by old Women, that want and necessity, makes men to
seek out unexpected remedies; as those poor men were forced to do willingly to
beguile the Swine of their food and sustenance; the which does manifestly
declare the exceeding wrath of God against the filthiness and beastyallity of
our sins; considering he is pleased to permit men to be brought to such a
straight, that they should eat and make their banquets with the swine; from
which unwholesome and unnatural sort of diet there bred an infinite number of
infirmities, which brought men to their last refuge; and made the stoutest
heart to tremble, there might thou see great companies of men women and
children, and aged fathers; people of all ages going in the streets naked,
pale, and shaking with cold, some swollen up as with Dropsy, others lying on
the ground half dead, resigning up their last breath; of this sort of people
many barnes, stables, and dunghills were full, there were others, so weak and
faint, that they had not ability to cast the word from their mouths to declare
their malady and exstream necessity, there were others also taken with
trembling, that appeared more like spirits, and fantasies then men; but above
all it was a spectacle of greatest grief to see many thousand mothers; pale,
lean, rejected; surrounded and burdened with many young children, the which
being almost dead with famine, could not cry nor ask succor from their sad and
afflicted mothers; and they instead of affording a remedy to their necessity
could only look on them, and that with exstream grief of heart, witness those
overflowing streams of tears which fell from their sorrowful eyes; and truly
in my opinion, this was the most deplorable representation of all the passages
demonstrated in this tragic story, when we consider how great a show of
compassion, the poor dissolate mothers expressed toward their poor helpless
children; the same Paradin relates further, that he saw in one Village called
Longhaas in Burgonia, a poor Woman, who by exstream diligence had gotten a
piece of bread; and being about to eat it; a young child not full a year old
which was sucking at her breast snatched it out of her hand; at which the
doleful mother being astonished, she stood still, observing how saverly the poor
child made a shift to eat that mouthfull of dry, hard, and black bread, as if
it had been the finest morsel, and when the mother would have picked up the
crumbes that fell from its mouth, the child gave so many screekes and so many
throngs, that the mother was forced to let it alone, as if it had sure some
certain understanding of what natures necessity required, therefore it would
admit of no company; Oh Omnipotent God, whose heart would not be ready to break
with grief to behold such a sad and doleful spectacle as this; The same
Author relates that in another Village adjacent to the former two women, not
being able to find out any thing whereby to assuage their hungar, they fed upon
a poisonous root, not understanding the malicious property thereof; they were
poisoned therewith (in such a manner) that all their parts, both hands and feet
were changed into a green like a Lizards skin, and there came forth a
contagious substance from betwixt the flesh and the nails, in so much that by
reason of the venom thereof; no remedy could befound to save them, but they
dyed; in so much that at that time there was nothing within its degree and
kind, was not an executioner of Gods wrath against man for his sins; in
conclusion these miseries, afflictions and calamities, continuing so many
years, the poor farmers, and laborers, were forced to leave their Countries,
Towns and Villages, and go to seek succor from the rich Merchants, which long
before had provided and laid up great quantity of Wheat in their Warehouses and
Granaries; from whom they bought their bread at dear and excessive prises, and
wanting money, they sold, trucked, and pawned their Lands and inheritances at
very low and invallied rates, for that parcel of Land, or houses which were
worth a hundred, they sold often for under ten, so great was their cursed
covetousness and excess of lucre; as if it were not sufficient for men to be
chastised with the sharp and hard scourge of Gods anger, when even all the
Elements, and Creaturs rose up against them, but that man should be a
persecutor, afflicter and tormentor of man; those ingardly, covetuous and
Usurous wretches, foreseeing the occasion for them to do their business, and to
make hay whilst the Sun shines, (at least upon their vices, as they thought)
they would not loose it; but had their Factors and Brokers in the Villages, to
buy the Lands, even at their own prises, the which the poor Countrymen made
over with a good will, that they might get wherewithal to eat, and supply
their necessity, and with them and their furniture and household stuff, and
apparel, and with a free will would pawn even their very entrails and
liberty, that they might not perish with famine; there was a worse thing then
this, and it was that they were forced to take their Corn, without measure, and
as the Sellar pleased to deliver it, to be at adventure; and buy as the Proverb
is, gato por liobre, a Cat for a Hare; I cannot omit to declare, that there
were Usurers that bought Lands cheaper then a Scrivener takes for a Bill of
sale, this is certainly known to be true, but after these manifold and manifest
evils, you might see the poor people cast out of their houses with their wives
and children, and dying in Hospital; for want of food, and all by means of
these rigid Usurers, and false purchasers; causers of their ruins and deaths;
and I fear they must one day give account of them, as if they had been their
actual murderers; and that before that righteous and just Judge, from whom no
secret can be hid.

Now having particularly given ye an account of three principal ways of
punishment, with which God (being inceased) with us for our many sins and
transgressions) uses to chastise his Creatures, and especially when he sees
them obstinate, impenitent, hardened, and wallowing in their vicious
wickedness; but all this is not so much, when we consider the multitude of
other infirmities to which humane bodies are subject every moment, which puts
the life in hazard upon every occasion; Plynie and many other Greek, and A^^be
Physicians writ, that in two thousand years, there had been discovered above
three hundred kinds of infirmities and maladies, incident to men's bodies,
besides such as are daily discovered, amongst which there are some so cruel and
insupportable, that they cannot well be set down without terror to the
apprehension of nature; besides those which commonly are cured by cauterizing,
sawing off of Limbs; taking out pieces of Skull and Guts out of the belly, as
if they would take an inventory, or anothomize the body alive, also those which
are cured by great strictness of diet, by reason of the fury and vigor of the
disease; as Cornelius Celsus writes, that they have been forced to drink their
Urine to quench their thirst, and many even to eat their Plasters to satisfy
their hungry appetites; others were persuaded that they had swallowed alive
Snake, and told that they could not be cured to affright them; that fear might
facilitate their cure, and then they would secretly put a live Snake into the
close stool, telling them that they had cast that out of their bodies;
Alexander Trali^nus, relates that a young Maid was cured after this manner,
persuading her that she had swallowed a Snake being asleep; others are taken
with a Frenzy, and that in so strange a manner; that they fancy themselves to
be metamorphosed into the shape of some bruit beast; as he of whom Galen makes
mention of, who thought he had been transformed into a Cock, and ordinarily
marched amongst the Poultry, and when he heard them crow he strived to immitate
them, and when he saw them rise up and shake their wings, he would shake his
arms and beat himself with them; others there were persuaded in their minds
that they were turned into Wolves, and never rested at nights, but ran through
the Mountains, Deserts, Valleys and Rocks, after the howlings of the Wolves;
imitating them as near as they possible could, and they had this foolish
infirmity upon them only at nights, such were called in France Loups garans, in
Spanish lobos des carriados, the Greeks lycan tropia, and the English straying
or wandering Wolves, which no Man can take for a tale of old Wives fable; who
has red and considered the sad transformation and conversion of
Nebuchadnezzar, who was turned into a beast and lived amongst them seven
years, eating grass, that he might be brought to know his God; others (as
Galen says) think that they are changed into some brittle earthen Vessel, and
used to walk alone in the Meadows, and if they saw a Tree near, they flew from
it, least touching upon it, they should break to pieces; others have been three
years together, and have not slept nor closed their eyes, as it is reported of
the good Micenas, others are so persecuted and afflicted with sickness, that
they are so far out of their senses, that they run their heads against Walls;
as that Learned man Angelo Policano did even lately, to others, it happens as
it did to the Philosopher Phececides, out of whose body it is reported came many
Snakes; others breed so many Lice all over their bodies, that at last they eat
and consume the flesh, without any possibility to find a remedy against them; I
could easily call to mind, with all these, many other evils and infirmityes,
procured and invented by men against themselves to shorten their own lives, and
that of their neighbors, as if those natural and inherent miseries which
daily succeed them, were not sufficient to destroy and bring them to their
untimely ends; they are venomous poisonous potions, which men at this day know
how so well to hide, dissemble, and order, that a man can hardly find aremedy
or way to escape, neither is there any security amongst men, (especially in
Ittaly) the best remedy is to fly to the deserts, and live amongst the bruit
beasts; in whose company is more security then amongst men of evil minds;
Orpheus, Orus Medesius, Heleodorus, and Frato, with many other ancient Authors,
taught the way to use and mix five hundred sorts of Poisons to prepare and
dissemble them; and others since have increased the number; but if they should
live in our days they would be taken for simple, and unlearned, and
unskilful, according as the malice of men is increased in these practices, in
times past when they would use any drug or any kind of poison, as Ptolomie,
writes of that sort called Marmacia, which is so contagious and pestilential
that the quantity of a Grain of Wheat would kill a man in a moment; it was then
sold for a hundred Crowns an Ounce; and so many more of custom he paid that
bought it; and with this consideration; first they made him swear that he
should not make use thereof in that Province or Country, nor give is to any of
the friends thereof, but to the enemies, and such as lived afar of; But Oh God,
how has the devil possessed himself at this day, of the Bodies, Hearts, and
senses of men; and made them so understanding and expert to act evil, that they
do not only give poisons by the smell, as one Competitor gave to another in the
City of Sena; who having smelt on a Nosegay of flowers presented him by his
adversary, dyed suddenly; A Gentleman of Florence took of his Helmet to take a
little fresh Air and rest himself a while, in the mean time an adversary of
his anointed it within with some kind of poison, with the force of which he no
sooner put it on again, but his soul parted from his body; there is not a
Candle nor a Torch in the which they know not how to dissimulate and gloss over
any sort of Poison, so that the very smoke or vapor shall destroy all that
scent it; in so much that if thou have any enemies, thou dare not light a
Torch by night, even for thy Recreation; it is accounted nothing to give a
venomous potion in meats or drink, this (in these latter days) is accounted a
revenge fit to be used by simple maids, or ignorant servants, though informer
times the most wise knew no better; but now in our days, with sufficient shame
I speak it: I shall relate a story which I have read in an Author both grave,
wise, and famous, that men have invented a way to poison Sadles, and raines of
Horses, Boots and Spurs, and Sturups, and which is worse giving the hand and in
delivering closed papers and letters, in opening them, there proceeds an
incinuating vapor to the Nostrils by little and little, which in time pea^eth
the senses and kills; such know the practice which Theophrastus makes mention
of; that poison may be so counterfeited and masked, that it shall not destroy
but when he that mixeth it pleases; for if he will the party shall live three
months, six months, or a year according to the strength of the mixture; and
farther as I understand from persons that know artificially how to prepare the
potion, that they can make it so that it shall endamage no more then one
member, a Leg or an Arm according as they please, which was experimented in a
venomous Fountain on the other side of the River of Reine near the Sea; that
in all the German Army there was not a man that drank thereof but lost all his
teeth; it is a strange thing, that is written by a modern Author that in our
days men have invented a way to forge a kind of steel Collar, and to temper it
with such kind of enchantments, that being put about the neck of a Debtor by a
Creditor, it is impossible to take it off again till the debt be satisfied, or
the party take it off; he farther declares that one Zafarano a Citizen of
Millan dyed of this sort of plot, being betrayed by his Creditor.

What does there want more to the bringing of man to the highest pitch of
calamity and miseries, considering also that all the Elements in their turns do
wage a mortal war against them, even as a testimony of Gods anger against his
sins, and the great hatred he has against our detestable iniquities.

Is there any thing more useful and necessary then water in this life, for
neither men nor beast can pass without it; to wave a large discoursing what an
Ornament it is to the beautifying the Globe of the Earth; and how that it is
the most ancient and powerful Element of all the Four, as Isidore and Pliny
writs, it will undermine and pull down great Hills and Rocks, it is predominant
in the Earth; it quenches the fire, and being exhaled and converted into
vapors, it pearceth into the Region of the Air above, where it ingenders and
multiplieth that it may distill and come down again, and causes the Earth to
produce all things; yet many times the Earth has been (for man's sake) punished
with it; and often has tasted the rigor of this Element, especially when that
great quantity of waters drowned all the earth, that there fell from the poares
and veins of the Heavens such streams for forty days, which by their
inundations prevailed 15. Cubits above the highest Mountain, and destroyed all
Creatures, except what was preserved in the Arc with good Noah: How often has
Egypt been drowned by the inundation of the River Nilus? How many thousand men
have been devoured and destroyed in the waters? How many have been buried in
the Bowels of fishes? what greater testimony of the fury of this Element can be
desired then that particular deluge of Greece when the water devoured the Mayor
part of Ibesalie, in so much that they expected a second general destruction of
Mankind, according to the threatening rage, fury, and malice of it, what a
torment scourge and damage did the Romans find in the year 1530. by reason of
the supernatural overflowing of the River Tiber, that covered the highest
Towers, etc. of the City beside the losses of the Bridges, Gold, Silver, Wheat,
Barley, Movables, Furniture, rich Hangings of Silk, Gold and Silver, which it
carried a way, and Oils spoiled, and many other things with which were valued
at above three Millions, and there were drowned above three thousand Persons,
little and great, men and women all destroyed in this imindation and by the
force and fury of the waters, as all modern Writers do affirm; Garpa Contar in
his Book of the four Elements writes that Valencia a City of Spain was at the
point to be overwhelmed with all the Citizens thereof, it is not many years
since, and if it had not been succored by extraordinary means and diligence
it had been utterly destroyed by the fury of the swelling waters; and if we
should particularize and cast into reckoning the great losses and damages, by
extraordinanary Floods, Raines, Hailes and Snowes, in five or six thousand
years, which is the Worlds age, it were never to make an end? what thing is
there in nature more admirable then Fire, by virtue and operation of which all
our stately Bankets, Feasts, and ordinary food is prepared and made savory to
our Palats, it preserves the life of many Creatures, by means thereof all
metals are Colinated and made pliable for man's use, it overcomes and softens
stones, etc. with which we build Stately Palaces and Houses; yet for all these
and many other benefits which every hour we receive thereby; how many famous
Cities do we see destroyed, made desolate and consumed to ashes by the furious
rage of fire? the most ancient testimony that can be produced to this effect,
is the holy writ, which avers how that God Rained Fire and Brimstone from
Heaven upon the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah; The final destruction of the
whole Earth, we read and do believe shall be by fire, and that the fury of this
Element shall be the principal executioner of the Eternal Justice of God; so
the Prophets do declare, and the Apostles affirm unto us; if I would write and
set down here in order the great number of famous Cities which have been
ruinated and destroyed throughout the World, by reason of cruel Wars, fire
and sword as well in our days as in former time, it would be an exceeding
Tragic Story; those that are curious and desirous to read and understand such
things, let them read the twelfe Book of Strabo, also Rufino in the Apendix of
Eusebus, and the Triparty History of Amiano Marcelino, and they shall find
examples how there has issued Fire, Brimstone, and Flames out of the tops of
Mountains, the Bowels of the earth, and have consumed great Cities with all
their people: In time of Lucius Marcius and Sextus Julius, Consalls, there
brake forth so great a fire from a Cave betwixt two Mountains that it burnt up
and destroyed many Towns and Villages; also with its fury it scortched and
choked the greatest part of the inhabitants thereof; I could spend much time
to relate the Stories of very many famous Persons which have felt the fury, and
been suddenly destroyed by Rays, Thunders, and Lightnings, as Zoroastes King
of the Backtrians, Captain in the War of Thebes; Ajax after the destruction of
Troy, the Emperor Anastasius in the 27. year of his Reign, with many other
Emperors and Kings and Captains who dyed, being smitten and consumed to ashes
by the rage and fury of fi^y flashing lightning.

The Air is a thing so necessary for the conservation of life, that there is
no Creature can live a moment without it, yet often it happens to be so
pernicious and cruel an enemy to Mankind when it corrupts and taints, so that
the greatest part of the Pestilences and raging sickness which I have spoken
of, have proceeded from the putrefaction and corruption of the Air.

The Earth which is more affable and kind then all the rest, the general Mother
of us all, for being born it nurses, maintains, and sustaines us, and at last
receives and wraps us in her Bosom again, as if she were careful to provide
us a bed wherein to repose and take our last sleep in, till God shall be
pleased to call and set us before his Divine Majesty in that great day of his
Judgment, yet it is continually producing venomous poisons and unwholesome
fruits, by means of which our lives are many times cut short and brought to
untimely ends, how often has it happened by Earthquakes, many Town^* Villages,
and strong Fortifications have been overthrown, how often has she opened her
mouth, and swallowed up Cities, Towns, Men and whole herds of Catle, so that
no appearance or hardly memory has remained of them; but as the Spainyard
says, (aqui fue Troyo) here was a famous City once, now Corn fields; in the
days of Mithridates there was an Earthquake so strong and furious, that
besides the sinking downfall of many Cities and Towns there were stifled,
overwhelmed and destroyed above a hundred thousand Persons; In the Reign of
Constantine Son of the Emperor or Constantine the great, there were in Asia
sunk and swallowed up into the most hidden Bowels of the Earth, so many Towns
that the Historians could hardly give account of their number; in the days of
Isocrates and Plato, there opened in Europe so great Caverness in the Earth,
and that with such an infernal force and fury that two of the most Populous
and greatest Cities thereof were devoured with all their inhabitants, and were
never more seen; there is not known, nor do we read of a more wonderful and
horrible Earthquake then that which succeeded in the time of Tiberius Caesar,
with the which the^e were devoured and destroyed in one night twelve great
Cities with their Inhabitants, amongst the which were Apolina, Ephesus,
Cesaria, Philadelphia, etc.

There is another thing both wonderful and strange; which confounds, abates,
and pulls down the vanity and pride of man, it is this, nature produces many
small and weak Creatures which do often manage so fearce a War against
Mankind that it makes them fly and forsake their own natural Country and places
of abode, which might seem to many to be a Fable if it were not backed with
many grave, true and Learned Historians which affirm it; Eliano, writes that
in some part of Italy there was such multitudes of Rats which devoured the
Roots of Trees and Herbs, that they caused a mortal Famine in the Province
where they were, by reason whereof all the Country thereabouts was left
destitute of People, also because there was no remedy to be found against them;
Marcus Varron one of the most grave Latin Authors relates that there was in
Spain a great Town situate and build upon a Sandy ground in the which there
was an exceeding increase of Coneys, which with their diging undermined the
Town so that the Inhabitants were forced to go away and settle in another place
for fear they and their Houses should have been entered, in the vast beroes
which those timorous Animalls had made; the same Authors do write that in
France there was a Village depopulated by reason of the multitude of Froges
which bred therein; In Africa happened the like by Locusts; Theophrastus makes
mention of a Province in the which was left destitute of People caused by the
multitudes of Caterpillars which bred in the Vinyards; Pliny tells us of a
Province on the confines of Ethiopia that the Ants, Scorpions and other vermin
banished the inhabitants; A wonderful number of flies caused the Megarenses in
Greece to fly and forsake their Country; and the Wasps did the like to those of
Ephesus; Anthenor writes that a vast quantity of Bees forced the Inhabitants of
a Village from their dwellings, and made Hives of their Houses: What do thou
think now Courteous Reader of the great pride, valor and vanity of men, what
little cause they have to be so; and what better School then this for man to
learn; consider and understand his own frailty, his feeble and weak estate
naturally, but Oh how great and wonderful are the secrets of our Omnipotent
God, how fearful and terrible are his Judgments, that when he sees man raise
up himself, and steer his course contrary to his command and will, he quickly
represseth, reproves, and puts a bridle in his mouth, a hook in his nostrils,
thereby to restrain and vanquish his foolish audacity and vicious wantonness,
not only by sending those his Messengers, and Heralds or discovers of his
irefull host, which are War, Famine, and Pestilence, but if man forgets
himself and sleeps security in the bosom of his beloved iniquties, then he
sends his Armies in full bodies of Creatures both sencible and insencible, the
Elements, Animalls and vermin; all which do join and rejoice at their
employment, to be executioner of the Divine justice to ruinate obstinate and
rebellious sinners; as we have seen by strange examples out of Heathen
Histories, and from the Sacred Scriptures, especially in those Plagues of Egypt
when the Locusts and Frogs left their own natural habitations to go up to the
Chambers of King Pharaoh; Hitherto we have drawn out at large man's Condition,
so that were not he made as of Iron, or his Heart hardened like a Diamond;
considering the many miseries, calamities, and afflictions which do surround
him, that it seems impossible he should live out half his days, but that he
must stoop and fall under so great and (without Gods gracious assistance)
insufferable loades of punishments, anguishes, sorrows and tribulations, and
those without intermission, yet for all these sadnesses and burdensome
calamities man will not, (or hardly will) be brought to the true knowledge of
God to obey his will, nor unfainedly to humble himself under his mighty Hand,
or with a willing mind to come under or take up the light yoke of his Creator;
for the which and not without desert, God reprehends him by the Prophet that he
has a face of brass, a neck of Iron, and a heart of steel; these gulfes of
miseries in which men fall and are even choked from their births to their
deaths, being misunderstood and mis-interpreted by Plato and Pliny caused them
to chide against nature, calling her a Usurer and a Stepmother to men, because
she exacts so great Intrests, Cambioes, and Recambios, from the excellency and
dignity which has been lent them, holding that any of the bruit Animals were
more happy, and received more favors from her then men, but both the one and
the other, (sure did little understand) that under this denomination of nature
they did blaspheme and foully charge the just and true God, of cruelty and
injustice for all these evils, and this wide Sea of miserys, in which we see
Mankind launched and tossed; and with which we publicly declare him to be
subjected and laden, does not proceed from a hatred or ill will that God has
against mortals, but our own proper malignity and wickedness of will are the
cause thereof; for when man would aspire to equalize himself with his Maker,
he then lost his ancient and inherent Nobility and Dignity, he bloted out that
sacred effigies and Image of God which was stamped in him, and changed it to
that of the devil; it happened to him as the Royal Prophet David speaks, man was
in honor, but he was so bestial that he knew not how to preserve himself in
that estate; for the which he is compared to the beasts that perish; from which
we may easily gather that the pride, haughtiness, and hardness of the first
man, were the sword with which all Mankind born or to be born, were, are, and
shall be wounded; for if our first Father Adam had not been ambitious of
knowledge more then he ought, we had all been innocent like the Angels of God,
covered with Honor and Glory even as those shall be hereafter that lead holy
lives in this World.

But there is no ground for us to dwell any longer upon the infermities and
afflictions of the outward man, which are familiar, dependent and incident to
the bodies of men, but these calamities are but for a short time, and are
nothing in comparison of those of the Soul, which are far more dangerous then
the others; that this is truth is manifest, as Plutarch expresses, for the
infermities of the body give apparent sumptomes of themselves as soon as they
begin to breed, either by the color of the face, the alteration of the pulse,
or by some disequallity of the humors and corporal greifes, aches and pains,
which being presently understood, the Physician makes use of his Art and skill
to stop, temper, and cure that part which is deprived; But the Maladies of the
Soul are not to be known by sumptomes or appearances, and that because the
spirit, that should take cognizance, judge and accuse, is infirm and out of
order; so the Patient not understanding or being sensible of its infermity
seeks no remedy, there is in this matter a thing that is very prejuditial, and
that is, those that suffer any corporal calamities, we give them names derived
from the nature and name of the diseases, as those that are taken with a
Frenzy or a Lithurgie* we call frantic, those that have a stifness o^ joints
we call Goutie, and those that have a Fever or Ague we-call feverish or
aguish: but Oh God, how contrary is it with the infermities of the Soul, those
that are haughty and choleric so that they do even wast their spirits, and in
the fire of revengefull anger d^ beat and abuse some, and murder others, we
call magnanimous, courageous, and such ^ understand what is honor, those that
go about to abuse silly Married woman, and to destowre Virgins we call amorous
and courteous; ^ot the less esteeming them though they pursue dishonest and
lustful loves, those that are ambitious who watch nights and days, and care
not to make use of the waye^ of God* or the devil, to increase their aspiring
Dignity and Honors, we call honorable grave diligent and experient men; those
that are averitious which in a short time by their Neighbors detriment or
downfall do grow rich, uncovering, disclosing, and publishing even to the
utmost their faults and imperfections, not scrupeling or pardoning any thing
either sacred or profane; we say they are good Husbands, thrifty in all, and
men that know how well to manage their negotiations, and so by consequence we
do dissimulate and mask all the other vices of the Soul, for from these and
the like habits, with which we do adorn our wicked vices; proceeds, we do only
by a gay gloss, and bare name, make that praise worthy; which in its own
nature is evil, and worthy of reprehension: If I should endeavor to proceed
so distinctly to relate the great, manifold and dangerous infirmityes, which do
torment and afflict the souls of men; as I have those of the body: What tongue
or what eloquence would it require? What doleful sentences ought to be
expressed to set it forth? For by Gods Eternal decree we live in an age so
overwhelmed in vices, and all manner of wickednesses, that it may be compared
to a Sink or Common-shore; into which all the filthy and enormous wickednesses
of former Ages, is evacuated.

We will begin with Covetuousnesse, who ever saw it more Predominant, or more
embraced then now it is, amongst all estates, conditions and degrees of men;
What are all the Cities, Republikes, Provinces and Kingdoms of the world? but
mere Burses, Shops and Warehouses of Avarice; if we do seriously consider
their Trafficks and dealings, its certainly the time the Prophet Esaiah speaks
of; The Earth is full of Gold and Silver, so that there is no end of the great
Treasure thereof; of these days the Prophet speaks when he says, they join
house to house, and field to field, till they have gained to themselves, and
enclosed all the bounds of their Countries, as if they alone were to inhabit
and enjoy it; from this Pestilential root, as from so natural a vein, do
spring so many evils, as we see do boil and bubble up in all parts of the
earth; from thence proceed and take their beginning: The major part of our
Wars and great effusions of blood, with which we see the earth too often
bathed; from thence comes the multitude of Murders, Treasons, Sacrileges,
Thefts, Roberies, Usuries, Cheats, Perjuries, Pride and suborning of false
witnesses, and procuring depraved or corrupt sentences; from thence comes the
power to hide and interre the vices and knaveries of some men; and to imprison,
chastise, and evil entreat others; from thence comes the great Prolixity or
tediousness, of those never to be ended Law-suites which are daily prosecuted
in the Courts of Christian Princes; to conclude, from thence proceeds all
kinds of corruption and evil: yet for all this, it is a sin, and infirmity so
familiar and common to all, that there is no Estate, or condition of man that
is not entangled therewith, even to Ecclesiastics; Judas and Simon Magus were
the first that trod the way; which men have so exactly learnt, that many have
eaten and will certainly eat of its fruit.

In the Primitive times, when the Church was poor, captivated and persecuted
by Heathenish Tyrants, when poor Fishermen, were her Governors, they were
careful to provide for such as were in danger, necessity and suffered
tribulation, sustained and maintained many poor; they permitted not any to
suffer want, that were in the bosom of the Church; but now that she is in the
highest estate and degree of riches, and is governed by great, rich and
powerful Prelates and Presbyters, they make no account of the need of their
poor Brother; no notice or compassion of the dejected members of Jesus Christ;
for which cause we do not see the Hospitals adorned with Tapestries, or
decently decked, but with deep wounds, rotten members, and bruised bodies;
consumed with Poverty, with an infinite number of Widows, etc. banished; or
forced from their livings and habitations; by the cruelties of merciless Wars;
with many young and helpless children. In the interim that these Pass through
their misfortunes; these Grandees do enjoy with great triumph the revenues of
the Church; the goods, the surplus of which belongs to the Brethren and
Believers; these strive to invent new delights, and how they shall enjoy their
wished pleasures, others there are which heap up riches, and lay them closely
up with much care and diligence; but they will let the poor dye with famine at
their gates, unrelieved; for proof of which I will relate a story, although I
may do it with shame enough to mankind: Of a Person constituted in one of the
places of the highest dignity in the Roman Church, who was so strait and
covetuous, so bewitched with his avarice, that every night, by a private
conveyance he went down to steal the Provender from his own Horses, which
custom he continued so long, that the Groom seeing his horses grow so lean,
resolved to watch if any thief stole away their corn, he catching him in the
action, cudgeld him so soundly, that the poor bastinadoed Gentleman, not to
end his days, told who he was; so they bare him to his Chamber well beaten,
nay half dead, which was a deserved punishment for his disordinate
coveteousnesse. Truly, I should have counted it for a Fable, had not Joviano
Pontano, and Philadelphia affirmed it, and their Book of Liberty. Here you may
see the good, these are the gains and profits which arise, from the covetuous
keeping of Riches, which men gather together, with so much sweat and travel;
keep with so much care and anguish, and leave behind them (after a very short
enjoyment) with double griefs, sighs and tears: I would desire no better
testimony hereof, than the ancient Romans, if we should pro^uce them for it,
they will tell us, That when their Republique was governed by poor
Magistrates, it always increased, and grew greater and better, but after that
they swelled and grew high, proud with ^he victories of their predecessors;
with the destruction of Corinth, Achaia, Antioch, France, Greece, Italy Egypt
and Spain, then it began to grow worse and worse, and fail of its precedent
luster, glory, magnificence and power; For the great Victories, Roberies,
Spoils and prizes that they made; abaited, tainted and corrupted their good
and wholesome Laws and Customs, both Civil and Martial, and were cause and
occasion of cruel civil Wars amongst them, so those that could not ever be
conquered in Battle, were overcome by luxury, ease and superfluities; in so
much that the ill purchased riches, were the avengers of their own, or their
right owners cause upon them; and it happened to them, as to Cloth which breeds
the Moth that devours it, or the Corn which produces the Worm that eats and
destroys it; concerning which, it will not be unreasonable, to use the saying
of wise King Solomon, who being an experienced enjoyer, may prove an expert
Chyrurgion to cure this Malady; who after he had gathered together and
treasured up so much Riches, that his Treasure was more, and his Glory greater
then all the best and greatest luster of other Kings in the World; having
sufficiently tasted and tried the delights and pastimes, which attend
Greatness and Riches, left his opinion thereof in wrighting to after Ages,
saying, viz. in the second of Ecclesiastes, the fourth verse, I made me great
works, I builded me Houses, I planted me Vineyards, I made me Orchards, and
Planted Trees in them of all kinds of Fruits, I made me Pools of Water,
therewith to water the wood that brings fourth trees, I got me Servants and
Maidens, and had servants borne in my house; also I had great possessions of
great and small ca^tell, above all that were in Jerusalem before me; I gathered
me also Silver and Gold, and the peculiar treasures of Kings and of Provinces;
I got me men-singers, and women-singers, and enjoyed the delights of the sonns
of men, more than any man living; so I was so great, and increased more than
any of my predecessors, and whatsoever mine eyes desired, I kept not from them,
I withheld not my heart from any joy, for my heart rejoiced in all my labor;
then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labor
that I had labored to do; and behold all was vanity and vexation of spirit,
and there was no profit under the sun: Let us likewise consider what the
Prophet Baruch says, who applies not so charitable a medicine, as the former
to those that put their trust in, and aim at nothing else but Delights and
Riches, which is of the Princes and Governors of the earth; which do heap up
Treasures, and hide the Gold and Silver from the fight of the Sun; in the
which most men put their confidence, such who desire to attain, get and keep
wealth is endless; are continually careful, and no man can dive into their
secrets, will thou understand where they are? (says he) alive in Hell; and
there remains no trace or memorial of them, etc. Their covetuous Plots,
Designs, or ill gotten Riches: But its time to leave these avaritious
Muck-wormes, Idolizing and adoring their Treasures, with the Patrocho,
mentioned by Aristophanes, the Pigmalion of Virgil, the Polinestor of Persio,
the Ovid of Horace, the Galerano of Martial, and the memorable Rich Glutton in
the holy Gospel; for the souls of men which are naturally Celestial and Divine,
make no more account of the Mettalls of gold and silver, then of the other
excrements of the earth, for certainly they are the superfluity and dross
thereof.

Lets come now to treat briefly of the vice we call Envy; which as Aristipo
says, has as near Relation to Avarice as the Daughter to the Mother, for the
one proceeds from the other; How many are there that are afflicted, and
tormented with this evil? We are fallen into those times, in the which the
world is a mere hillock of Envy; this is the most ancient sin of all, yet at
this day, its of more vigor and strength and I was about to say, it renews and
recovers double force; our forefathers felt the malicious strength thereof,
and experimented its vigor: As example, In Adam and the Snake, Cain and Abell,
Jacob and Esau and their brethren, Saul and David, Achitophel and Hushi, Haman
and Mordecai, all which persecuted one the other, and that out of pure Malice,
which was rooted in their hearts, and out of a covetous and envious desire to
enjoy their Livings, Goods, and Lands: but all this is nothing in comparison of
the disorder which in our days is amongst Christians; for Malice is so
increased and common in our days, that if you shall find any so beautiful as
Absalom, so strong as Sampson, so wise as Solomon, dextrous and light as Azael,
rich as Cresus, liberal as Alexander, a Hector in force and skill, Eloquent as
Homer, as fortunate as Augustus, as just as Trajan, and zealous as Cicero; its
certain he shall not be loved, respected and esteemed by so many, but he shall
be persecuted and Envyed by more; This furious vice does not turn it self only
against those of middle rank or low degree, but against the grandees of the
world, those of high conditions, and that when they least think thereof, or
expect it; and when Fortune has raised them to the height, and when they are,
or think themselves most sure and settled in the Grace and favor of Kings and
Princes; then even then does the Devil set a work, his engines preparations
and subtle devises, to cast them down, lay them low, and frustrate their
designs and purposes, for which cause that wise Emperor, Marcus Aurelius was
wont to say, That Envy was so cruel and venomous a Serpent, that no mortals
that are born into the world can escape from its wounds, its insolences and
its poisonous poisons; for says he, I have read many Books, written by Greeks,
Latins, Hebrews and Caldeans, containing Treatises and disputations betwixt
learned men; endeavoring to procure a remeady against Envious persons, they
found no other remeady to avoid this evil then to avoid, fly, and sequester
our selves from good Fortune, the cause of all this is, because we are the sons
of Envy, born with Envy, and he that most lays a side height, lays aside
most Envy; by reason of this, the ancients permitted the rich men not to live
near the poor, or the poor within the jurisdiction of the Rich; because riches
is the feed of Envy and Malice; by the same consequence, I might here easily
make a large discourse of the Pride, Ambition and Malice, which is predominant
in our days; for who ever saw the so great pompes, and excessive charges, in
all conditions of men as at this day we behold, in so much that we may well
call the present times, the Satin, Plush, Silken, Velvet and Purple Age; in
the which men do employ all their time, labor and pains to adorn, dress and
trick up this miserable and ultimate spoil of worms, the body; whilst the
poor soul goes in rags and sackcloath, patched and mended, and foul, full of
iniquities and vices, cut, slashed, and wounded with the weapons of Satan: but
rather let us open our eyes, and not be so careless, that that may not come
upon us, which the Prophet speaks against the women of Jerusalem, after he had
reprehended their proud carriage, their dishonest casts, and impudent rolling
of their Eyes, their fantastic and wanton Attire, tripping and counting their
paces, their Jewels, necklaces, Bracelets, and Earrings, with many other lose
and fantastical personal attires; that it do not succeed to us (says he)
Iusteed of sweetness and perfumes, stinking and unsavory adours; instead of
Rich girdles, a cord; instead of curled crisped and powdered hair, baldness;
the greatest man shall fall by the edge of the Sword, and the strongest, most
valiant and courageous men shall fall and dye in the wars.

We may well add to the rest of man's miseries, another infermity, which we call
Love; an evil so contagious, that it entraps all estates, degrees, and
conditions of men; it is so contagious and pestilential, that it pardons
neither age, sex, nor degree; venting it self among all sorts, as the devils
do intermeddle in all the Elements, without exception of Person, Estate or
Quality, Old or Young, Wise or Foolish, Fat or Lean; all are subject to its
malice, in the which there is exceeding great danger of turning frantic,
unless at the first feeling the wound; a speedy remedy be applied, which was
the cause that Paulus Egenetus in his third Book; commands to cure such as are
deep in love, with the same diet, government and medicines; as fools, furious
franticks and possessed with evil spirits, the same in effect Empiricles,
following the Doctrine of Plato ordered, saying; That there was two kinds of
madness, one which is called in Greek Eroticon, in Latin Amatorium, and in
English Amarous; the other, is the common Frenzy of foolish madmen; I shall
declare one thing to you of my own knowledge; I have seen many Anatomies made,
of men who dyed of the first kind of this madness; they found the entrails
shrunk together, the poor Heart burnt; the Liver dried up; the Lungs broyled;
the Ventricles and Filmes of the Brains damnified; by which a man might judge
that the sad Soul, departed thence boiled, and fired out, with a continual
burning, and that according as the amorous flames do prevail, so that as the
cure of this disease is dificult, even so are the confirmations of those that
treat of its Original and Cure; The Physicians say, that this fury of Love,
which so evil treats and encounters the World, proceeds from the correspondency
and resemblance of the complexion and blood, for semblance engenders equality
of affection; the Astrologers which also are of this opinion and desired to put
their syeth into the Meadow of Love, declared, that affection was engendered
betwixt two, who have one and the same ascendencie in their births, or have one
and the same constellations, which is the maine causer of love betwixt them;
other Philosophers say, that when we look upon any thing that we desire; there
issues forth by the eyes some part of our spirit which is engendered of the most
pure and perfect blood of the heart, proceeding from the sentment of the thing
which we love, from whence going forth and multiplying by the Air, till it
comes to our Eyes, where it meets and mixeth with ours, like invisible vapors,
and finding the bodies apt, ready disposed and prepared to receive such
impressions, it forces in by them; at which the Eyes remain troubled and
perplexed and full swollen with that sight, like the looking glass, which many
times seems to be covered with cloth or some other thing, the Eyes being dazzled
merely by looking therein; from them by little and little it spreads throughout
all the body, and at last pearceth the heart, wherein few days it increases
so much, that the Eyes are but a small passage for it out, from whence
proceeds, that the poor miserable Lover being drawn and governed, and guided by
these new passions, which desire nothing more than to seek opportunity to
return and be joined with their first ingendrer, which makes Lovers complain,
yet do not understand what it is that afflicts them, and seek after something,
but they know not what; Others who could never find any trace or true account
of the beginning and first breeding of this furious evil of Love, said that it
was, they knew not what it would act, they knew not how, and that it would
scorch, set on fire and consume men, they knew not to express the manner, which
is certain and true; for who shall but consider the gestures, the fancies, the
furious postures, the mild moderation, and the sudden Ecelipses of these
Lovesick passionates, he must needs confess that he never read, heard of, or
saw the like change; and strange transformation, so sad and grievous a
representation; and so ridiculous a spectacle; for if thou see them now even
drowned in tears, making echoes in the air with their sighs, complaints and
groans; casting forth curses and imprecations; upon a sudden thou may behold
them, cold, phlegmatic, foolish; cast down and unadvisedly beyond themselves;
but as soon again they change, if they have received by chance, any favor,
any smile, any amorous answer, or any pleasing word, from the party which they
affect; you shall see them merry, joccund, and joyful, decked with the green
Plumes and Remeralds of hopeful adventures, in so much, as thou would
almost swear they are not the same men which yesterday thou saw; according
as they have changed their hew in all respects; sometimes they are in love with
solitariness, and seek out un wonted places, to contemplate their affections;
meditate privately with their own thoughts; repeat what has passed betwixt
them and their honored Lords, Ladies and Loves; To invent gallanory, new
designs, to prosecute their desired purposes. Thou may afterward, epsy
them passing through, and suffering many inconveniences, break many a nights
sleep, leave the most important negotiations, that they may enjoy a fight of
their beloved friend, they will run through thick and thin, wait long, not
making any account of servants waiting, lacques labor and trouble, or their
own restlesnesse; and if it happen that they do come to be set on fire with
the least spark of lustful zeal and desire, and cannot obtain; here begins
their fretting, their fuming, and their furious madness; here these poor
amorous lovers do waste and turmoyle their spirits; in this consists the most
dangerous point of their infirmity; for here the violence, and force of the
disease battles hand to fist with nature it self: Oh that raging fire, from
whose furious flames is incended, that mortal heat and madness which
scorcheth and consumes them! there is not a member of their bodies but is
grieved with it; and at that season, (although they were faint-hearted cowards)
then thou shall see them boast of Arms and Courage, and be more valiant than
Caesar or Hector; there is no Villainy which they will not atchieve, no art,
cunning, or purpose which they will not attempt for the curing their maladies,
and to obtain the enjoyment of their frantic desires; many have made
themselves dog-whippers, beggars and ballet-singers, transformed themselves
like ravenous hungry Woolves, hunting by night, and all that they might but
attain the enjoyment of their beloveds sight; although this infirmity is of its
own nature sufficiently fantastical; yet it has its various effects, frenzies
and vanities, according to the diverse natural inclinations, constitutions and
affections which it meets with; for if the party in love be poor, there is no
bodily labor and toil, which he will not undertake, be it never so difficult;
employing courageously all his might, even to the hazard of life, and all to
give content to those they so entirely affect; if he be rich, his purse is tied
(as the Greeks use to say) with a leeke, with a spire of grass, which is easily
broken; intimating, although he be never so covetous, he becomes liberal and
prodigal; there is not any, or at least very few, who are stricken with this
furious frenzy of love, but by the powers thereof are brought low, and undone;
the which made Plato say, that love was the first inventor of the budget, scrip
or snap-sack, which may very well be; for the most part (especially in hot
climates) Lovers be they never so rich, come off at last engaged, uncloathed,
and with a Porters sack on their shoulders, and often travailing toward the
Hospital, and if our vicious lover be learned, of good abilities, and engenious
parts, you shall see him, seighning a sea of tears, a lake of miseries,
redouble his sighs and groans, accuse heaven, anatomise his heart, frieze in
winter, burn in summer; adore, idolize, admire, feign a paradise, and
counterfeit a hell, imitate Sifiphus, and dissimulate Tantalus; if he begins to
set forth the praises of his dearly beloved; her hairs are threads of purest
gold, the eyebrows, arches of Ebany the eyes glistering Stars, the locks
flashes of Lightning, the lips Corral, the teeth Oriental Pearl, the breath
sweet Balsome, Musk and Ambar, the throat Snow, the neck congealed Milk, the
breast and paps, apples of Alleblaster, and in fine, all the rest of the body a
Prodigy, a treasure both of Heaven and earth, which they kept and reserved, to
make the most perfect, happy, and blisfull creature in the World to him the
adorer thereof; Here we see how this cruel malady of Love, does miserably
torment and afflict, those that are wounded with its poisonous darts; yet there
is so many Nations, People, and Provinces, marked with Loves mark, and branded
with his iron; that if a general muster should be made of all the amorous
persons of the world, there is no Emperor or Monarch, were he never so
powerful and accompanied with multitudes, that would not admire, and tremble
to meet and behold such innumerable companies of frantic lovesick and mad
people together; this Pestilential evil, has got such a head, so much power
and command over men, that there is not known, nor do men seek after any
certain remedy against it; although many Greek and Arab Physicians, have spent
much time upon it, experimenting and proving all medicinal ways, of Syrrups,
and Purges, dung the uttermost of their art and skill, to free man from so
great a Captivity, Torment and Martyrdom; Samocrado, Nigrid and Ovid, wrote
many and copious Treatises, of remedies against Love, in the which they
prescribed great and cordial cures to others, but used none for themselves; for
all three of them died in banishment, persecuted, and reproached, not for the
faults they committed in Rome, but for the amorous lusts which they invented in
Capua; The Emperor Marcos Aurelius, (knowing that Faustina his Emperesse, was
so far enamored of a Fencer, that she could not hide her affection, and was
almost at deaths door, with the burning desire and unbridled passion which she
had, to have him in her power and enjoy him alone) gathered together a great
number of wise men, read in all Sciences, to find out a remedy to quench this
raging fire, which by degrees fed upon her and consumed her; after great and
various Opinions, Judgments and Cordial Cures, which one and others gave the
Emperor, he took the Counsel of some Empericks, who advised him to kill him
that she loved, and secretly to give her his blood to drink, which was done,
and proved so cordial a medicine, that in a short space her affection or
passion abated; but the mitigation was not so good (as Julius Capitolinus
writes) but it was a detriment to Antonius Commodus the Emperors son, which
was begotten presently after this cruel murder; for he was more like the fencer
then his Father; he always delighted to go amongst fencers, to converse and
treat with them before any others; so that in appearance the affection of the
Mother was naturally fixed in the Son; but all this which has been declared,
is but a Cyser in comparison of what I have read upon this subject, (or rather
master) in Histories; for when this furious malady takes root within us, it
brings us to such a discord, and dissolution, that we become worse than bruit
animals. As it may be demonstrated evidently in that young m^n, descended from
one of the most Noble and Ancient Families of Athens, more rich and known than
any of the said City; the which having sometimes contemplated, and seriously
staid to behold an Image of marble made by the hand of an Excellent Artist,
which was placed in one of the public streets of the City* he was conquered
and enamoured with it, in such a manner, he honored and adored it, that he
would not part from it, but continually embraced it, kissing it; and expressing
his love to it, as if it had been the most beautiful Lady in the World; and if
he were taken from it, he would weep exceeding passionately, and demonstrate
both by word and action so much sorrow, that would make the hardest heart to
relent; this foolish frenzy did so much increase, afflict, streighten and work
upon him; that he petitioned the Governors of the City to sell it him, that he
might carry it home, and embrace it, and enjoy it at his pleasure; which would
not be granted, being a public ornament to the City; and more valued by them,
then he was able to give for it; at the which the youth being vexed; he
commanded a rich Crown of Gold, and costly Vestments to be made, and carrying
it to the Image, he put the Crown upon the head, and the rich robes about the
Body of it, with the which ornaments, it appeared to him, far more beautiful;
which caused him to adore, serve, and with new inventions to wait upon it, not
desisting night nor day; insomuch that the People being angered and offended, at
his foolish and unwonted Love; The Governor strictly upon penalties commanded
him not to come within a hundred Leagues of the said Statue; The discontented
Youth seeing himself deprived of what in this life he most desired, he fell
into such a passion that he slew himself, not being able to suffer the torment;
for, such is the force and power of this malady, after that it once begins to
take possession of the most sensible parts of the body, by little and little,
it gains the chief Fortress of man, the heart; so that its a difficult thing
to be rid of it, or cast it out, except with life it self, and it were better
for many to end their days speedily, rather then to suffer continual groans,
sighs, tears and heavy torments, as they do: That great Philosopher Apolonio
Tianco, being much importuned by a King of Babylon, that he should declare, or
set forth, the most cruel and insupportable torment that could be invented by
the most secret Arts and Sciences of the Philosophers, to punish a young
gallant, who he had taken in Bed with a Lady of his, which he himself had a
great respect for; Answered, the greatest affliction thou can lay upon him in
this life, is, not to take away his life; I can (says he) invent no greater or
more cruel Chastisement than this; You shall see how by degrees, the feirce
burning fire of his commenced and once enjoyed Love will be predominant over
him, so that the torment which he shall suffer will be so great, that it cannot
be imagined and expressed; he shall be combated and surrounded with so many
various Imaginations, that you shall see him consume in the flames of his own
lustful Frenzy, like as a Butter-flye does his wings in a Candle; insomuch
that his life shall be no more a life, but a lingering death, more cruel, than
any bloody Tyrant can command of any Hangman to execute: Here you may see the
sum of all; for I have endeavored to spread the wings of my Pen, suffer it
to soar and wander in this Theme, which is such a general destruction, and
proves to be so great a damage, to the major part of the youth of our times;
who no sooner set footing into the world, and begin to taste the delights
thereof, but they conceit themselves, in love and beloved, being aided and
assisted of youth, liberty and riches; which are the chiefest panders on the
earth; they Commence batchellers of the Art, spending the best part of their
lives, in Loves frivolous toys, commands and occupations.

Old Age.
Now after all this wide and spacious sea of miseries, and tempestious waves of
trouble; in the which man is continually sailing and rowing, with exceeding
danger of his destruction; and when most need is of quiet repose, then old age
steals upon him; he feels the smart of his old sores, his former griefs become
renewed, and the sins of his youth come home to him; here he comes to pay the
charges, intersts, damages and imparements, of all the wanton excesses of his
youth; all the past vices, and pleasant viands devoured, are cast up then; for
the heart is afflicted, the senses grow dull, the spirit is infirm, the breath
smells, the face wrinckles, the body bends, the nose drops, the fight grows
weak and dimn; the hair sheds, the teeth Rot, and in conclusion, they are
never without one malady or other; so that their body seems to be an Effigies
of death, or like a dry Anotomy: This one besides the many infirmityes of the
soul, which do accompany old age; he is soon angry, but hard to be pacified,
he will soon believe a thing, or is credulous, but does not quickly forget; he
praises the former, but contemns the present times and condition of things; he
walks continually sad, infirm, melancholy, averitious, suspicious, and
complaining; in fine, old Age is the necessary Sink or dunghill, where all the
filthy infirmities and iniquities of the past age is emptied and cast out; the
Emperor Augustus having well weighed and considered all this, was wont to say,
that after men had lived fifty years, it were fit they should then dye, or
desire and entreat others to kill them, and end their sinful and miserable
lives, for so long they may attain to live happy and honorably; but all the
rest of their lives, they pass in perpetual afflictions, grievous and
insupportable infirmities; death of Children, losses in Estates, importunities
of Sons and Daughters in Law, interring of friends and acquaintance,
maintaining of Law-Sutes, paying of Debts, and an infinite number of other
sorrows and troubles; that they were better to be at quiet in their graves
then to enjoy this frail life, for so short a space, and so full of sorrows;
this the Prophet well understood, when he prayed to God so earnestly; Lord
leave me not in my old age, when thou shall see me Aged, Infirm and Weak.

Hitherto we have in my opinion largely and sufficiently discoursed of the
miseries, anguishes and afflictions which do besiege, persecute and torment
man; whilst he is acting his tragic part on the Treatre of this World: but
well may we believe one thing, and that without scruple, that if the first
entrance which man makes into this veil of Tears, seems wonderful,
miserable, difficult* and dangerous; no less will appear his end and parting:
for if thou have heard of strange and miraculous births; if thou will, thou
may read of more horrid deaths, with the which I shall put a period to this
narration of all the infelicities, calamities and miseries of man's life: after
that man has labored, sighed, and toyled himself nights and days, to bear to
a good harbor, the fardle of his unfortunate calamnities; it might seem
reason, that nature should give him some repose and quiet? Let him eat one
morsel of bread in peace, but it is ordained, it should not be so; but that he
should be always watchful and with dread expect the doleful parting of the
soul and body, that terrible hour of death, which for the most part is with
anguishes and incredible torments; at the which St. Augustine admiring, he
frames a complaint to God: Lord, after man has suffered so many evils, and
sustained so many afflictions, death follows, which suddenly snatcheth poor
Creatures, and that by diverse, strange and infinite ways: some with grievous
Fevers, others with some great pains, some with hunger, others with thirst,
some in the fire, others in the water; how many with the sword, poisons and
pure fear? some do drown, strangle and destroy themselves, others are torn in
pieces with the teeth of cruel and savage Creatures; some have been wounded and
killed by pecking of birds, and others have been meat for fishes and worms; all
this considered, no man knows what end he shall make, or by which of these
means his dissolution shall be; for when he deems himself most firm, healthy
and strong, then he is most subject to fall, and the saddest change is then
nearest, and then approaching toward him: death the separation of soul and
body, which is most fearful, and of all things most terrible; Therefore to
work upon our apprehension, what sight, what spectacle, is more worth our view
and contemplation, then to see a man cast upon his sick bed, tormented with the
pangs of death, and afflicted to the height therewith; what a horror? what a
change is there in all the joints and parts of his body? what an alteration
there is? the feet grow cold, the face turns yellow, the eye-strings break,
and the eyes sink in, the mouth and lips shrink up, the tongue grows black; the
teeth chatter; their sweat is more cold then ice, proceeding from mortal
griefs, and are the most evident signs of the conquest of death over nature?
for when the soul comes to separate from its so dearly beloved companion? when
these two so ancient friends and consorts comes to take the last farewell,
embraces, there is no joint or limb of nature remains whole or in order, but
they all break; besides there is the furious assaults of the devils, the
wicked angels, the fearful visions and representations, which they make to the
soul and conscience of the poor dying man; its certain, there is no invention,
no false Machination which they do not attempt, to beguile and deceive him,
striving sometimes to make us believe that we have lived well, that we might
assuredly believe, and securely rest upon this false opinion, and not strive
but neglect by a hearty repentance to obtain the mercy of God; other whiles he
sets before us an infinite number of foul and wicked transgressions which we
have committed in our life times, to cause us to despair and distrust our Gods
grace and loving-kindnesse, that is the hour in which that cursed one Satan
bestirs himself, imploys al his force, sharpens his weapons, burnishes his
Arms, and Insinuates secret Ielousies against the power of God; at that
instant of time he strives to disturb the soul, the health, and the peace of
men; then he animates and strengthens himself more then ever; for by how much
the nearer he knows he is to the end of his Kingdom, by so much the more he
rages and grows feirce; for which cause he uses at that hour, the same
practice he did at the time our Savior Jesus Christ was on the earth, when he
drew near to any that were possessed with Devils, they never gave greater
scriks, tormented or afflicted themselves more furiously, then when he came
near them; and that because they knew that the hour was come, that they must
be commanded out of their habitations, and forced out of the persons where they
abode; for this cause the Royal Prophet David so much lamented the death of
his son Absalom, saying, I would I had dyed for thee, oh my son; considering
then he dyed full of wicked vices, and inormous sins, and rebellions, with
which he passed that his sad and last hour.

Those that have gone through that passage, the gate of death, and have
swallowed that thorn with the which they have been strangled; What is become
of their fantastical Pride? What is become of all their Pomps and Trophies?
Where is their Riches, Delights, and Pastimes? Where are the Majesty's, the
Excellencies and Dignities? What is become of all the Gallantries, Courrage and
Inventions of them? They are vanished away like a shadow, as the Psalmist
expresses, They are perished like a Garment devoured with Mothes? and the
Prophet Esayas says, Serpents, Dragons and Worms, have eaten, consumed and
destroyed them; Let us consider a little, man lying in his grave, contemplate
with me his condition there; whoever beheld a more fearful spectacle, or
stinking Monster; is there any thing more horrible, unsavory and vile, then man
being dead and consuming in the earth? see here the Majesty, the Excellency,
the Dignity of this world laid in the dust; behold here the delicious and nice
feeder, the esteemed and honored, even to kissing the feet and hands; how a
sudden and unexpected change, has altered his condition, and made it so
abominable, that it cannot be so closely masked, decked and honored, with
stately Sepulchers of Marble or Porpherie, with glorious Statues of Brass,
Pirameds, Epetaphs, Mournings and other Honorable Pompes, but it may
manifestly appear, that under all this, there is a ghastly, stinking and
deformed Corpse; which few would desire to see, come near or remember; there is
none of the greatest and mightiest Lords of the Earth; of whom it may not be
said, what Solomon in his book of Wisdom writes? What profit have they reaped
of their Pride? What fruit have they gathered, (or carried with them) of their
great riches? all these things are passed like a shadow, like an Arrow shot at
the mark like the smoke which is dispersed with the wind, like the memory of
a Guest in an Inn, which has stayed but one day there; lets now leave the
miserable body in its grave, lets not molest that quiet repose, it has for a
short time, in that little caverne of earth, where it lies as in a bed of Down.

But now here follows the ultimate and most dangerous trial, and passage of
this our humane Tragedy, that which David so much dreaded, that he prayed
exceeding earnestly to God, that he would not enter into judgment with his
servant, for at that instant that the soul departs from the body, she must of
necessity appear before the face of Almighty God in Judgment? what fear? what
horror think you, shall he carry with him that is overclouded with vice and
wickedness? what moment can be more frightfull? what minute ought to be more
feared, contemplated, and profoundly considered? My members all tremble, there is
hardly a hair of my head but stands upright, when I seriously Meditate
thereof: this is the Journey (which the Prophet writes of) that the Lord will
make; when he says, He will descend like lightning; all hearts shall wax
faint, become foolish, and melt away, and all the world shall tremble with
fear, in that day, their griefs, troubles and afflictions shall exceed the
pains of a woman in travel; in this day the Lord will come full of wrath and
anger, to destroy the earth, and root out the wicked thereof: the Sun shall be
darkened, and the Moon and Stars shall withdraw their Light, his irefull fury,
shall break the hinges and destroy the foundations of the earth; lets hearken
also to the words of Saint Matthew, in the language of Christ; As the lightning
rises fourth of the East and in a moment sets in the West; even so shall the
coming of the son of man be: there shall be in those days great
tribulations, such as was not since the beginning of the world until this
time, nor ever shall be, Mat. 24. The Sun shall become dark, the Moon shall
give no more light, the Stars shall fall from Heaven, the Waves of the Sea
shall swell, roar and make a noise, that men shall fall down deadwith fear
thereof; the Powers of heaven shall be shaken, Woe unto them, says he, that are
with Child and give suck in those days: For as in the days of Noah, before
the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage
until the day that Noah entered into the Arc, and knew not till the flood came
and took them away; So also shall the coming of the Son of man be; then shall
all the tribes of the Earth mourn, and many shall run and hide themselves in
the holes and caverns of the earth, they shall say unto the mountains fall upon
us, and to the hills cover and hide us from the face of the Judge that sits
upon the Throne Blow the Trumpet in Sion, sound an alarm in my holy mountain
(says the Prophet Joel,) let all the Inhabitants of the earth tremble, for the
day of the Lord comes, and is nigh at hand, a day of gloominesse, a day of
clouds and thick darkness, all the inhabitants of the world shall be burned,
fire shall scorch and consume the face of the Earth, and burning flames shall
destroy it; His throne (says Daniel, Dan. 7. 10. was like flames of fire, and
the wheels of his Chariot like burning coals, a feirce stream issued and
came forth from before him; this shall be the forerunner and discoverer of his
Camp; now after this irefull vengeance of God is executed and fulfilled
against the four Elements; the dead shall come forth out of their Graves and
monuments, by the wonderful Command, Power and Providence of God; and the
bones with the other parts of the body, shall seek and find out its proper
Veins and Nerves, with the Flesh which has rotted in the Earth; all those
which have been devoured by cruel ravenous Beasts and Birds of the Heaven; all
those which the Sea has swallowed up, and Fishes devoured; all that which has
been turned into vapors by the Air; and all those which the Fire has
consumed, shall be reduced to its first being, and turn to its first proper
shape and essence; all the blood that has been unjustly shed, by Thieves,
Robbers, Murderers, bloody Tyrants, Mercenary and Corrupted Judges; it shall
all appear there, not one drop thereof shall be wanting, from Abel which was
the first that was slain, to the last hair of the head of any of them, which
cannot perish. If it was a strange, dreadful and extraordinary thing to see
how willingly the bruit Animals left the Earth, the natural and common Mother,
fosterer and cherisher of all Creatures, flying from the anger and vengeance of
Almighty God; to put and enclose themselves in the Arc of Noah, as if they
begged succor from him, as if they had had some foresight of the approach of
Gods wrath upon the world; How much more fearful a spectacle shall it be to
see poor miserable and wretched sinners to appear before the dreadful
Tribunal of Gods Justice, where all the Books shall be opened; I mean, that God
and all the world will plainly see the inormous Crimes and Offenses, of which
our Consciences are full, and with which our hearts and souls are cankered,
that which now we so closely mask and hide, shall then be made manifest to all;
If the veil of the Temple rent, the earth trembled, and the Sun hide his face
at the injury done to Christ crucified: With what face, with what shame, with
what horror shall a multitude of impudent careless and unhappy sinners look
upon that just Judge, whom not only every day, but every moment they have
offended, blasphemed, and with a thousand sensual and deceiptfull fooleries
displeased? If the sight of one Angel alone does astonish us, so that its
insufferable, as St. John affirms, who not being able to behold so great a
brightness, fell down with his eyes toward the Earth, as if he had been dead;
And Esayas after he had seen an Angel, confesses, That all the joints of his
body were loosned with fear: The children of Israel merely out of exceeding
dread, said to Moses, Speak thou to us, and we will hear thee; for we cannot
suffer this voice which comes from heaven, it makes us ready to dye with fear;
(although the speech of Angels have been so very gracious and mild on some
occasions) how shall miserable sinners abide or endure the terrible voice, the
exceeding glory of the Majesty of God, seated in the Throne of his Power, when
he shall say what the Prophets writ; The hour is come to avenge me of my
Adversaries, now will I satisfy my anger, for they shall know that I am Lord
of all: I will go forth and meet them in the way, and like a Bear robbed of
her Whelps, tear them in pieces, although I have long kept silence; been
patient and hitherto passed by your iniquities: Henceforth I will cry out like
a woman in travel, I will kill and destroy at once, I will consume all Plants
and fruits, make the fruitful hills, deserts, dry up the Rivers, Fountains,
and Lakes, turn darkness into light; I called to them and they would not
hear, stretched forth my hand unto them and they would not take notice, they
despised my council and contemned my correction; I also will laugh at their
destruction, and scoff when I avenge my self on them; when they call upon me
in their troubles, I will stop mine ears, and will not hear them, and when they
seek me they shall not find me; If the heavens are impure in his sight, and
the very Angels are faulty before the rigor of his Divine justice, what shall
betide us poor miserable wretches what shall we find who are a clod of earth,
a small Cottage of Clay, whose foundation is in the dust; and laden with the
blame of original sin, before we were delivered from our mothers womb; and if
the Just shall hardly be saved, what shall become of the wicked and unjust, the
number of which is to great; for as the holy Scripture teaches us, there are
many called, but few chosen; especially in such a strict and dangerous time as
this is, when the secrets of all hearts shall be manifestly laid open; Here the
great Monarchs and Princes, shall give an account of the great taxes which
unreasonably they have exacted of their Subjects; but especially Usurpers and
Tyrants; who have much more to answer for; besides the multitude of Gods poor
sheep, which in stead of shearing they have slain; the innocent blood which
they have caused to be spilt: Here our Merchants, Shopkeepers and Traders, in
this our Theater of the World, must set down a discharge, of the corrupted,
sophisticated, and depraved Wares; sold with false measures and weights, even
to the satisfying the utmost farthing of any abuse, or cheat, here the
Avaritious, the Thieves, the Usurors, which have undone some, destroyed some,
and Pil'd others, must pay in the same coin, the damages and evils which they
have done; at this day the mercenary Judges, which corrupted, violated, or
blinded the eyes of Justice; shall vomit up the gifts and bribes for which they
did it; Here the Orphans and widows shall put up their complaints with other
afflicted persons, declaring before Gods Judgment Seat, the exceeding injustice
done to them.

Then the time is come, in the which the Shepherds and Prelates shall give an
account of their flocks, recommended to their charge, of the true and false,
good and bad doctrine, with which they have fed them? Oh what care ought men to
have of taking charge to teach Gods people, for God will have a strict account
of his flock; at that time, the evil Shepherds will say, but with sufficient
grief of soul, and trembling with terrible fear; Behold those which we
mocked, scoffed, little esteemed, and continually reprehended, esteeming them
fools and infamous, in their course of life; see how God has received them for
sons, giving them part amongst his Saints and holy ones, this will be the hour
says St. Jerome, in the which many, Stammerers, Dumb and Unlearned people may
be more happy, then the most Eloquent and Learned; many Shepherds and Herdsmen
may be preferred before great Philosophers; many poor beggars, before rich
Princes and great Lords; many simple Rusticks, before the subtle, nice and
delicate; which being seriously pondred by St. Augustine said; The foolish and
senseless robbed heaven, whilst the wise with their Doctrine went to Hell. Oh
good Christians, lets open our eyes both of soul and body; and walk with
continual circumspection, and care, that we, I mean every one of us in
particular, may not come at last to incur that most terrible sentence that
ever was pronounced, or can be possible, or immaginable to be Paralleld; for in
comparison of the evils and miseries which will certainly come to us thereupon;
all humane Calamities, Vexations, and afflictions, which in this Treatice I
have mentioned, are delights, pleasures, and pastimes, in respect thereof; I
mean that final sentence, which is the end and doleful conclusion of the
Theater of many a man's misery mentioned by Saint Matthew, 25th Chapter saying,
Go ye cursed of my Father into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, before the foundations of the World was laid; where they shall be
tormented endless, they shall desire and seek after death, but shall not find
it, death shall fly from them, and their infirnall habitations, from which,
good Lord deliver us, Amen.

A short DISCOVRSE Of the Excellency and Dignity of MAN: By Pedro Bouistau;
called Launay, Translated out of French into Spanish, by the Master Baltazar
Peers del Castillo:

And lastly, Translated out of Castillian into ENGLISH,

By Francis Farrer, Merchant.

London, Printed for Samuel Ferris and are to be sold at his shop at
London-stone in Cannon-street, 1663.

TO THE Courteous Reader.
THe Author considering (as I suppose) that he had obligation to satisfy in
some thing that Honor which in the foregoing Treatise, many will object he had
detracted from the Dignity of mankind; He composed this short discourse, in
the which, he does not only satisfy what he never took, but puts men into such
a condition, the which all ought to seek, and strive to attain; Receive it
therefore, gentle Reader, as thou would any thing which thou esteemest or
have had experience of, for in this short Tract is contained, what Antiquity;
and what the present, could honor, or can admire in men.

Vale.
The Theater of the World.
AFter that God had with wonderful providence and excellent knowledge, Created
the World; which is the most exact setter forth, of the Greatness, Wisdom,
and Power of its Creator; he placed man therein, that he should be King,
Emperor and Lord overall that he had made in it; that he contemplating the
Excellency, and greatness of the works, might render Love, Duty, and Reverence
to that great God, who has made all these things for his use only, to appear
grateful for this high favor bestowed upon him, by his Creator, and that
without desert, which sets forth not only the magnificence of our God, but
declares his bounty and favor toward mankind; for above all creatures, he
would that the manner of his Creation and beginning, should be different from
all others, that he had made, that this is true, no man of discretion can deny,
for to create the light, give being to the Stars, even the greatest and most
excellent Creatures, that those from which men do receive most profit and
outward refreshment, which are the Sun, the Moon, and the seven Planets; He
only said, Let there be Light, a Sun, a Moon, and immediately they appeared in
their several spears in the heavens, in obedience to the command of their
Creator, with the like words, he parted light from darkness; he enclosed the
waters that covered the face of the Earth in one place; his only will and
pleasure it was to set them bounds which they never did, or ever shall pass
without his command and pleasure; finally, his omnipotent power and holy will
alone, gives being to all that ever was or shall be under the cope of Heaven,
all Plants, Trees, Seeds and Animals, enjoy life at his pleasure; they shall
live no longer, than his divine bounty pleases; but esteeming and affecting
man more than all the works of his hands; and resolving to imprint upon him
with the pencil of his sacred wisdom, an exact Effigies of his divine
likeness; and that not without mature and deliberate counsel; but he would
create in another, new manner, the best and most excellent of all his Creatures
here below, saying; Let us make man in our Image and likeness, that shall be
lord of the Fishes of the Sea, of the Birds of the Air, and of all the
Creatures that move upon the face of the earth; giving us with those words to
understand the great Honor and Dignity, which he gave to that little clod of
clay, which he had molded with his own hands, and that he would not any of the
other creatures should equalize or compare with man: If we proceed in this
contemplation, we shall find one thing worth admiration, in the manner of man's
Creation, and it is that to all the Animals of the Earth, to all the Birds of
the Heaven, and to all the Fishes of the Sea, he gave body and soul together,
when he created them, which he did not to man, that he might exalt him, and put
him in the highest place of dignity and honor, here below; He first created
the body, and after by his divine inspiration infused the Soul; giving to
understand, that the Jewel which he put in that Cabinet, was not terrenal, nor
derived from any of the four Elements, as many doting Philosophers have
imagined; amongst the which some thought that the blood was the Soul; and
their Reason was, because it often departed by means of some wound and rupture
of Veins; or that it consumed away with some strong Fever; others were of
opinion that it was fire, for being gone, the body, which was warm and flexible
waxes cold and stiff; others said, that it was air, for by breathing and
gathering in air we live; Asclepiades said, That it was only the exercising
of the five senses; Idiarco, That it was but a Harmonious concord of the four
Elements; Hipocrates understood that it was only an Air or pure Spirit;
spreading throughout the whole body: Amongst all these foolish opinions, the
greatest and most blasphemous, was that of Crates the Thebane and his
followers, who held, That there was no soul in the body, but that it moved
naturally of it self: No less false was that of Cratipo, who said, That men
were created and formed in the wombs of their Mothers, as the Plants and Trees
are in the womb of the Earth: Even that filthy gormandizing Epicurus, failed
not to declare his Invention, That although the soul were not wholly corporal,
yet it dyed with the body: These are such rotten false opinions or arrows, no
better can be expected out of the Quiver of the Devil, who is the father of
all lies and deceipts that are; who blinded the eyes of these and other vain
glorious men, desirous to be esteemed wife and great inventors of new and
difficult things; these he has cunningly led on, with subtle and false
suggestions, that with the subtilty of their reasons, and fair speeches, they
might cover many other and worse lies, to purchase from men a fear, a
reverence and esteem, as if they had been Auditors, or Presidents (with
reverence be it spoken) of the Counsel of God: For like such they treated of
his most secret mysteries, as if at the time of the Creation of the world, they
had assisted at man's Creation; and thereto had been called, to be assistants,
Counselors and Overseers of his works: But we that are Christians, and have
been in several schools better taught, ought not to contemplate, nor suffer
our thoughts to wander upon such vanities, falsities, and lies, but firmly
believe, that when our Lord and God Created man of Clay, he inspired into him
the spirit of Life, and man became a living soul: It is not to be understood,
that this inspiration was a blast that proceeded out of the mouth of God, and
entered into the mouth of man; for God is simple, and without composition or
compound matter, he has no figure, member or form; so the soul that God
infused into man, is a Spirit adorned with reason and divine understanding; as
Moses in Geneses writes, God first made the body; and after infused the soul;
to give us to understand, that the soul does not participate, nor has any
natural being or affinity with the body, which is made of the earth, only for
its habitation, so long as it shall please the most high God; and till he shall
command, or give license to it, to return ^o its first lodging from whence it
came; like the Soldiers of an Emperor, King, or Prince, that are upon duty,
which cannot return to their houses till they have leave; not without cause
did God Create man of two natures so different, the one from Heaven, and the
other from earth; it is humbly conceived he did it, because if man should wax
proud, grow high minded, or set too high esteem of himself, he might,
(contemplating the lowliness and baseness of his Corporal being) which is
nothing else but a little rotten earth, ashes or dust, abase himself, prostrate
his flourishing Plumes, disown, depresse and lay aside his foolish and vain
imaginations; Now if man comparing himself with other creatures, and
considering his weak and frail condition, should thereupon murmer against God,
and speak evil of his Creator; let him contemplate the dignity of his immortal
soul; he will suddenly be rapt up as in an ecstasy, (like Saint Paul with an
earnest desire to be in heaven;) to attain a more perfect knowledge of his
Creator; and perpetually to enjoy him.

Only this contemplation would I recommend to those which shall read this
short discourse; Which is the excellency and dignity of the soul and its
faculties, of which, many Authors both Ancient and Modern have written much,
and to the purpose; amongst them, Lactantius, Firmianus in Latin, Gregory
Niceno in Greek, and Bartholmew Facio in French, against the new opinions of
many; But above all, the Writings of I heodoritus Bishop of Syria, Of the
nature of man, Translated out of Greek into French by Pedro Roldan, which have
been in great esteem with all that have perused them, and indeed they are
worthy of perpetual memory; for which cause, I shall not stay long, to make a
large volume of this matter, but rather I shall strive to be short or
compendious herein, that I may take off something of that ill savor, which I
seemed to have left in the precedent discourse, of the miseries of mankind;
which perhaps, may have appeared, very rough, sharp and rigorous; and for it I
may be accounted a cruel, feirce, and austere judge of the works of God;
Therefore I shall with as much gentleness as I can, discover here something of
the excellency and dignity of man, that all people may understand, my opinion
in this case, and how much I esteem of his dignity and worth; for the foregoing
discourse which I wrote against him, it was rather to put a bridle to some
vices, with the which I saw most men possessed then to derogate from his honor.

There is nothing more certain and confirmed, for a truth, then what I shall
now declare, that the greatness and worth of the soul of man is more
excellent then all that is contained in other creatures, its of more pure
substance then both the heavens or the earth; setting aside the hope it
enjoys by the resplendent light of christianity, which is an eternal and
future happiness, of so much value, worth and esteem; that though all the men
in the world should join together to extol and set it forth, they are not
able to declare or conceive the half, of what is prepared for those happy souls
that shall, by says and good works enter thereinto; What greater or better
testimony can I or any desire to prove, the excellency and dignity of man, then
to see the exceeding love that God bears toward him, who descended to the
earth, and clothed himself with his humane nature and livery; and became a
mortal Man, who is the immortal God, and not contenting himself with this; In
sign of his greater affection to man; (who by sin, had lost that stamp, that
divine likeness, with which he was created, defiling it with multitudes of
iniquities and vices,) he gives him his hand, and helps him out of the mire,
washes and purifieth him, and makes him Heir of his kingdom, as if he were a
lawful Heir, Subjected to his command and Dominion, all things under heaven;
makes choice of him for his continual habitation on earth; reveals to him the
great secrets of his Divine Counsel; in fine, he gives him to understand, that
he created all things for his use, and for his respect he had given being to
all Creatures. At consideration of which, the Royal Prophet David being
astonished, cried out: Lord what is man that thou art so mindful of him, or
the s(...)f man that thou do so much value, esteem or regard him; the wise
Ancients admired much, when they considered the greatness, and beauty of this
world, and certainly not without good reason, being as it is of the first and
greatest works that God made, they could not find out or understand, how it
continued so long after one manner, without decaying, loosing its vigor or
changing that great and concordant order, which there is in it; they
exceedingly wondered at the plentiful virtue and fertility of the earth, how
it never grows weary, but is continually engendring, and producing trees,
plants, corn, grass and innumerable swarms of vermin; and how it does not
corrupt, and rott, with that continual increase of such a diversity of things
in its bowels, the Springs and Fountains never grow weary, but are continually
flowing forth, and gushing out, by the same passage they began at, and from the
same place, where they were appointed at their creation; they marvelled and
that justly how the Sea receving into it, such abundance of waters, from so
many such principal and large Rivers, as there are in the earth, yet seldom
or never overflowes its shores, or passes the limmits, which the Creator
thereof bounded it with: They also admired, how the Sun appearing so small,
should be far greater then all the Earth. These and the like considerations,
caused wonder in them; and made them set a high esteem on ^hese sublunary
things, and not without just cause; but with what greater esteem and admiration
(think you if they but looked thereinto) did they love, reverence and respect,
the cause for whose use so many excellent things were created and made, the
which God was pleased to exalt, and put in so high degree, that he made him
Lord of all his Works, Emperor, King and Captain of all his visible Creatures;
for well may he be compared to them, considering the favors that Almighty God
bestows upon man, allowing him (in stead of soldiers, and Yeo-men of the Guard
which Kings take with them for their defense and safety) a guard of Angels, to
accompany, Council and Defend him, from all assaults visible and invisible, and
temptations of the world, the flesh and the Devil: Furthermore endowing him
with that Divine care and excellent knowledge of all things present, a perfect
memory of what is past, and a strange providential and evident understanding by
conjecture of things to come: what shall we say of his care and incredible
knowledge of all the Virtues, Properties and Natures of Trees, Herbs, Stones
and Animals, of his understanding and knowledge which is good or bad, which is
vicious, which is virtuous; What is honest and what is dishonest; yet not
contenting himself with the knowledge of the essential of all the Creatures,
and things in the world; he soars with a lively, quick agility of wit, more
divine then humane to heaven, and with most acute reasons, treats, disputes,
and holds arguments of the things thereof, as if he had consulted them with his
Creator, yet secretly, covertly and inwardly in heart confessing, that man is
the likeness and image of God, or at leastwise a book full of divine emblems,
who living here below, elevates himself with a strong and nimble activity,
through the air, and descends by the subtilty of his ingenuity to the
profundity of the Sea; so that the depth of the one, nor the height of the
other, but are as plain to his contemplation, as the earth he lives in, the
greatest obscurity and grosenesse of the air, he peirceth at his pleasure, the
thickness and firmness of the earth cannot defend, but he will take what he
pleases, out of the deepest concavityes thereof; no whirle-poole or gulf of
water affright or hinder his passage over it, even when and how by his
ingenuity he pleases; for which cause that excellent Poet Homer called men
(Alphestas) that is to say, discoverers; for man only being borne strives to
attain to the knowledge and understanding of the original cause, growth virtues
of all things; with this insatiable desire of knowledge, and extreme diligence
that men use to that effect, were found out and invented in less then a
thousand years the greatest part of the Machanick Arts, and diversity of
Sciences, which are used in the world as Marcos Varron and others do affirm;
some wise writers, called man (Phos) which signifies light and knowledge, from
that ardent desire that he has to see and understand all things; the which
caused very many Philosophers to err, and that only by this natural
inclination that is in man to know; they believed that the excellency and
principal being of our souls was the light of understanding, there is nothing
that man more abhors, then the darkness of ignorance and folly, nor any thing
that encourages his endeavors and labors more then desire of knowledge, from
whence is gathered, that man is of a divine and heavenly spirit; who knows the
virtues of the Stars, the influences of the Planets, and the qualities, forces
and virtues of the four Elements: in fine, all Creatures both Celestial, and
terestrial assist and serve man; at the which some of the wise men of Egypt,
being with admiration astonished, they declared man (though audatiously
expressed) to be God upon earth, a divine and heavenly creature; a messenger of
the gods, lord of all eternal things, a companion of the gods, and the wonder
of nature; but what adds more Glory and Majesty to him, is, that many times,
God by his hands brings wonderful things to pass, as has been seen, strange
things done by many; which man could not do without Gods Divine assistance, as
we read in Ancient Histories Clasomeno, and Aristeo did both, the which often
fell into Trances and Extacies, and being in these fits, their spirits departed
and went to diverse places; and being returned to their first senses, they
related strange and incredible things, that they had seen in the Countries
where they had been; all which appeared to be truths, afterward by others
relations; one Cornelius a Priest of the gods in Padua, living in the days, of
Caesar and Pompey; he was put in to such an ecstasy with the profound
meditation, of the cruel battle, that betwixt these two, the Father and the Son
in Law, was in hand to be given; he though far distant, the same day the
battle was fought, gave such an exact account of what passed therein, of the
order and manner thereof of those eminent men that were there, and those that
were slain in it; as if he had been present, or General and Commander of both
the Armies; Also Apolinus being in the City of Ephesus, gave account thereof,
what had happened that day at Rome to the Emperor Nero; the great Philosopher,
Socrates fell every day into a kind of a retired trance, to converse with his
soul, at which time or hour, he neither saw nor understood what was done by
another before him or near him; the Divine Plato was ravished in contemplation
at a certain hour of the day, all his life time, even till his death; the
Poets which are surprised with that divine Rapture, when their Genious would
write any excellent thing, they compose Verses, and indite such strange
expressions, that they themselves being come to themselves nor others, can
amend or hardly understand them; the which we plainly see, verifyed in that so
wonderful as rare, Poet Homer, which may serve for an example of all the rest,
of whom many wise men were bold to affirm, that if the wisdom and
understanding of all the other Poets that before him, nor after him were or
shall be, could be joined together in one; they would come short of the
admirable excellency of his works; the which (though of one blind from his
mothers womb) were such, that there is none in the world comparible to them;
nor do I believe, if he himself should arise from the dead, that he could make
another work like the first; by this example (not to weary you out with many
others that there are) we may clearly see, that man is the most complete work
that God made in the world; and that with his many favors and blessings
bestowed upon him; he gives us to understand, that man was drawn with a
Celestial Pencel, and a Divine hand; the Ancient Philosophers, although they
knew much, either they could not compass or understand, or if they did
understand, there was such diversity of opinions of the original of him that
no certain resolution can be taken hold of out of their writings, for all or
the most part of them, thinking that they had sufficiently found out and
avouched the true Principium of man, they did only beat about the bush,
inventing things full of lies, falfities and fooleries, masking them with the
fair gloss of quaint words, and the glittering show of gallant language, but
not being able to hit the white, or find out the true beginning of man, they
much wondered and admired at the great wisdom of the chief artificer and
inventor of such a curious piece of work, which alone being seriously
considered by its parts, figures, and proportions, it causes a suspense in the
senses of the most understanding men.

Head.
Who is there so stupid or senseless that contemplating the miraculous
composure of man's head, is not ravished; considering that in this small part of
the body is contained, a great proportion of Divinity; Here we will fix our
discourse, without running through all the rest of the parts of the Body; not
to tire the Readers, What beauty is there created that can be compared, with
that of the Head of this Creature? With what fairness can ye compare so great
beauty? this the Tower of the Fealty of this little world, this is the defense
of the Reason; the seat or habitation of the understanding; from hence as from
a fountain, flows all that varity of works of the five Senses; How is it
possible, that by one and the same pipe or conveyance, should come forth so
many, and so various commodities, furtherances and profits; who can but wonder
at the strange nature of humane memory? the which as Plato says, is the
Treasurer, Secretary and Scribe, which never departs from this Tower, ever
retaining and keeping things, although they pass in a moment, whose Office it
is to conserve and lay up in its Register, like a trusty Scrivener, an
innumerable multitude of things, very strange and different one from the other;
and that without confounding or mixing the one with the other; but it rather
refines, purifies and puts each in its place, to make use thereof, each in its
time, when he shall have occasion to relate any thing, although he has heard
it and laid it up in store many years past; then we may see a multitude of
things, various and strange, related in such order and method, that they do
neither confound, mix, or disturb one the other, striving forcibly to come
forth one before another.

Eyes.
What a strange wonder is the purity, subtilty and agility of our Eyes, which
were placed in the highest Belcon of this Tower, to be Scouts and Sentinels, to
behold and contemplate the most high and celestial Objects: Just over the sight
there is a thin skin so transparent, that they glister like some precious
stone, they are round, for more sharp and deep aspect, and beholding of things
that are set before them; and for that cause they are clear and shinning like
to a looking-glass; they are also movable, and are never quiet, that they may
not look upon any thing, that may offend them against their wills; therefore
they move to what side they please; and if they epsy any thing that molests or
troubles them, then are they covered, clothed and adorned, with lids and
brows, as with Bulworks and Baricados, to defend them from any danger that may
succeed: Over the eyes are placed the brows, like a bow that they might receive
no detriment from the sweat or any other humor that might descend from above.

Nose.
What Spectacle, what fight more worthy of admiration, more beautiful and
comely, can be found or seen, than the frame of the Nose? Does it not seem to
be a Baricado also made to defend the Eyes; the which although it be small, has
three Offices, the first to Breathe, take in Air and Spirit; the second to
smell; and the last to cast forth at its passages, the superfluities of the
Brain and of the whole Head; which are conveyed down thither as to a common
shore, by those ways and grots which nature has made.

Lips, Mouth, etc.
With what a concordant order are the Lips placed, as embosments and ornaments
to the mouth? with what art are they cut and joined; and with what a pleasant
Vermillion are they dyed; within the which is contained that admirable
Instrument the Tongue; the motion alone of which converts the Air into words,
is a true Interpreter of the most secret Conceptions, and thoughts of the
soul; and for that cause is seated in the Porch of Gate of this Fortress,
which is the mouth, and therein serves as a Porter, bringing and carrying of
messages to and from those that are called and spoken to; Who can but wonder,
seriously considering so small a piece of flesh; and being as it is one of the
least members of man, it is the most magnanimous of them; it praises God;
disputes of all things created; speaks of their being nature and
delectablenesse; discourses of heaven, of earth, of the four Elements; Of all
that is in them and created of them; its true, it cannot well form words
without the Gums or Teeth, which may in part be seen in Children which speak
not till they have Teeth; and in old men, who stammer that one can hardly
understand their words, after they have lost their teeth, they become like
Children in speech.

Beard
Moreover nature has adorned and decked the head of man (as Lactantius
Firminius says) with a comely Beard, to distinguish man from woman, to set
forth man's age, and to be an ornament to him.

Ears.
The Ears also were not made in vain, nor fixed in so high and eminent a place
to no purpose, but to receive more clearly the sound of voices, etc. which
naturally do ascend in the Air; they are continually open and ready to
receive the voice or found, by those wreathed creeks, and in those secret
corners is the hearing retained and kept, nature also ordained that there
should be wax and filth at the entrance of those Caverns, that if any small
creature should presume to enter or do any detriment to the bearing, (which is
the most excellent of all the five senses) should be made a Prisoner there,
till it dye.

Its but brief what has been spoken of the several parts of man's principal
member the Head; much more might be related thereupon, especially if we should
at large consider those parts joined together, and in them two wonderful
things; the first is, that amongst infinite multitudes of people that are
living, you shall not find two so exactly one like another, as that there
shall not be some distinction betwixt them, and this difference consists only
in a thing of so small circumference as the Face; so that none or very few, are
to be found amongst so many millions, that have one and the same kind of
tokens or signs of similitude:

The second thing that Nature made, placed and set forth in so little a compass
as the face, in which is showed all the rest of her Arts, is that she has
endowed some vissages with such an excellent and supernatural beauty; that
oftentimes man himself, to possess, enjoy, and partake thereof, puts himself
in hazard of a thousand deaths, lays his life at stake; and if he chance to
despair thereof, he will sacrifice his honor, his life; desires to dye, loose
and forego all his estate, to prosecute, and obtain his desire, and sometimes
forced, transported and deceived, by his own immagination; he loses his
senses for this thing called beauty, in testimony of which I could nominate
here many illustrious persons, in all ages; that aspired to robb or spoil
heaven of the choycest of its glorious beauty, to extol, flourish, and mask
over, the spacious fields of the earth, thereby to immortalize themselves, and
their works, only invoking this beauty, as if that alone were the Star and
guide, that should lead them to obtain perpetual bliss, fame and glory, the
beams that do issue forth from some fair and glistering faces, are of so much
force and vigor, that they do overcome the inward intellectualls, as suddenly
as lightning, over powering and taking possession of the greater and better
part of the soul, and makes the poor distressed and afflicted lover, to feel
its great force and power; with contemplation and admiration; with which they
do deliver up their wills and affections to the thing esteemed and affected;
Making themselves of Lords and Masters; Servants, of Freemen, slaves, of
joyful, jocund and impassionate, most patient Martyrs of love, and most
obedient sufferers of such cruel and bitter torments and pains, that none can
believe them, but such as have felt their smart; If their affections be
sincere, they do not content themselves thus far to have gone; but they would
willingly if they could, transform their own nature into that beauty which they
so much admire and adore; also we find another great and marvelous rariety in
the face, which though it be not a Foot in magnitude, we may see, or come to
know, by the different changes thereof, not only the natural conditions of
men, whether they are sad or merry, melancholy or sociable; but the affections
of the soul, whether they are cowards, valiant, fearful, merciful, cruel,
amorous, or free from love; whether they are possessed with hope or despair, be
in health or infirm, alive or dead, and an infinite number of inclinations,
affections and desires of the soul and body; for which cause that great
Priest, King, and Philosopher; Hermes Trismagistus, after he had wearied and
perplexed himself with the profound contemplation of the wonderful make of
man; cried out with a loud voice, where is that most excellent Former or
Producer of this so glorious a work? who is he that so well knew how to set
forth, in such lively Colors, so admirable a picture; Who drew the portracture
of those so beautiful eyes, resplendent lights of the whole body* and bright
speculators of the soul; who spread the lips as curtains to the mouth? Who so
excellently knit the sinnews together? Who interwove* and mixed so many veins,
which are as so many little brooks; by the which, the blood is conveyed; and
thereby sustaines, strengthens and refreshes with its humidity and substance;
the whole body? Who made the bones so hard and strong? Who engrafted, joynted,
and fixed them, as if they were Sentinels, or Halberdiers, to keep within
compass the thoughts when they would swell and aspire; run out of order and
measure, and to harden themselves against Reason and moderation? Who covered
the flesh with so soft and delicate a skin? Who distinguished and parted the
fingers, with their several joints? Who stretched forth the feet, in so sit a
proportion, causing them to serve as a foundation to the whole body? Who so
closely pressed the milt together? Who gave that Piramidel shape to the heart?
Who wove so many nets and roots in and about the Liver? Who made the passages
and holes in the lungs? Who ordained so large a room for the Belly, with such
a spacious, capacity? Who put the most honorable Members in the most eminent
places, to be exposed to the view of all, and reparted the most unworthy
members and dishonorable, in stations more private; where the covering should
add value and repute to them; Contemplate, says Hermes, how many and what
exact pieces were formed, to make up so perfect a creature? What proportionable
beauty there is in each member; with what curiosity and art, so many different
proportions are fitted and put together; each observing its service, its
office, and all procuring the benefit of the whole? Who think thou made and
finished such famous works? Who do thou hold for Father and inventor of
them, or who the Mother, producer and projector; but the invisible, omnicient,
and most omnipotent God?

Hitherto we have spoken enough Phylosophically of the Essence, Magnificence
and dignity of man; Therefore now it will be reason that we spend a little more
paper in the further prosecution of the work, in proving how there never was,
nor will be found any Art, Science or other thing wherein men have not excelled
all other creatures; some more then others, and that as it has been granted
them from above; Now to add something to man's Value, Esteem and Reputation; I
shall not treat of the seven liberal Sciences, nor of Mechanic Arts; the
invention of which we all certainly know was from man; Not to be tedious and
troublesome, I shall only hint upon some divine particularities; which have
been experimentally found in men; and thereby to demonstrate how far the power
of man exceeds it self; and how great is the subtilty of his wit; With very
much reason we ought to admire the magnanimous spirit of Alexander the Great,
who in his Childhood and most tender years, hearing a relation of the many
great Victories which King Philip his Father had won, he wept bitterly; and
being asked by his Tutor and Favorites, the cause of this his so sudden and
passionate tears, in time of so much Feasting and Rejoicing; For grief and
vexation (says he) that my Father gained so many Battles, Conquered so many
Cities, People, and Enemies, that there remains little or nothing for me to
act, or any unconquered adversary against whom I should exercise that fervent
desire I have in me of Warlike exployts, that I might attain to and gain part
of that honor, which my Father got? What greater Testimony of an Heroyick
mind? What greater or more true Prognostication of the generosity of Spirit;
which would possess or lodge in the breast of this youth, when he should come
to maturity of years; the which was plainly verified afterward, for before he
had attained to thirty years of age, he had subjected so many nations, gained
and conquered so many Towns, Castles and Cities; that finding no resistance, or
against whom to bend his might; He went to the Deserts of Africa, to fight
with the bruit Beasts, to satisfy that hungry appitite he had of combat and
conquest, the Historians relate one thing more of him, as strange as any we
ever heard of; That seeing himself peaceable Monarch, and absolute Emperor of
the World, He called to mind the saying of Democritus the Philosopher, that
there was many other worlds, he for the Conquest and winning of them, caused to
be brought together an infinite number of Engineirs and Pioniers, to dig, delve
and endeavor to find and pluck, those Worlds out of the bowels of the earth,
and that all those that they should discover, they should reduce them to
obedience, under his Empire and Command.

I could here relate the Noble Acts and Exploits of Caesar and Pompey, for
Caesar (setting aside the Famous Victory in the Civil Wars) he is found to
have presented and given fifty field Battles, and caused the death of a million
one hundred ninty and two thousand men.

Pompey, Besides nine hundred and forty ships which he had taken at sea from
diverse Pirates; He is storied to have gained and Conquered by force of Arms;
Nine hundred and sixteen Walled Towns, from the Alps, to the consines of Cadiz.

It will not be proper to hide or omit here, that immortal Honor and Renown,
which Marcus Sergius gained, after he had lost his Right hand, and received at
several times twenty three wounds; He entered into Battle four several times
with only his left hand, the which being disabled and made useless to him; He
commanded one to be made of Iron, having it fixed and cunningly joined to the
stump of his Arm, with which he after raised the Seige of Cremona, defended
Placencia, and gained in France twelve Principal Garrisons; For brevity sake,
we will leave the Fame and Renown that men have gained by Arms; For it would
be tiresome to relate the multitude of examples I could produce to this
purpose; But lets proceed to what they have gotten, by the Arts that to this
day are in great esteem, which are Painting, Graving, Carving and Limning; What
divine mystery must there needs be in the Art and Fancy of that Famous Painter
Zeuxes, who drew a Vine with its bunches of Grapes so lively, that hanging it
out of his window to dry, the birds came down to eat of the fruit, thinking
they had been natural Grapes.

Apelles, Though ten years he was in portraying and finishing of Venus, he at
last set her forth so exactly and lively; That many young men at first sight,
fell in love with her, as if it had been a living woman, for which cause the
Magistrates commanded him to keep it private, that it might not corrupt the
dispositions of youth.

Who can but wonder to hear what Pausanias, a Greek Historian writes, of an
engenious piece made by a cunning workman in Eraclea, a Province of
Piloponesis, it was a Horse of Copper, whose Main, Tail and limbs, were so
subtly and artificially made, that all the Horses that saw it, raged to come
unto it, as if it were a live Mare, and very many with that furious and often
getting up and down, broak their Hoofs, Knees and eyes, slipping on the smooth
burnished Metal; and those that once saw it could not be parted from it with
swords or staves, as if it had been a hot Maire; Tell me seriously, what
secrets or enchantments? What hidden Virtue, or what secret thing could Art
have put into that Horse, to deceive the others, or how can it force creatures
enjoying life, to be taken with so much affection toward an inanimate thing,
that they should love, and hazard themselves for it, being only a brazen
Effigies, without soul or sense.

Plutarch, Praising the excellency of man, relates that the great
Mathematitian, Archimedes drew through the chief place of Saragosa in Sicilia
with only one hand, and one cord, a great Ship laden with Merchandises, and
with as much ease as if he had led a horse or mare by the Reins, and this he
did only by the Mathematics; the which Leon Baptista, who was a great
Architeckt and a rare Artist, proposed he would easily do, if any great Lord*
would please to be at the Cost thereof; What greater wonder of Nature can there
be found, then that subtle device which Sabor King of Persia ordered to be
made of a Glass, the which was of so large an extent, that setting himself
down in the midst thereof, as upon the rotun ditude of Heaven, he saw under his
feet the rising and setting of the Sun, the Moon, and all the Planets, and
Stars; So that in this his so pompious a Seat, he seemed not to be a mortal
man, but an immortal God, under whose Power and Command, that Glorious Starry
Cannopy was subject? What greater pattern of Divinity can man give, especially
a powerful King; then to see himself set in appearance over the Sun and the
Stars, which really is the proper Throne of God.

What Divine wit invented that Statue of Mennon, which seemed to be miraculous,
for always at the rising of the Sun, if it shon upon it, it made an exceeding
noise, as if it had within it some living soul or divine spirit of
inspiration, it was the device of man as Cornelius Tacitus and Strabo say; Who
can but admire of that Wooden Pigeon, which Archito the Tarentine made; the
which as Historians report was composed by the Mathematicial Art, with such
constellations, such influences and charracters of the Plannets, that it flew
to and fro amongst the Pigeons in the air; In immitation of which Albertus
Magnus framed a head of Copper, which spoke as exactly as if it had been a
living man.

Gallen an Author worthy of credit, relates, that Archimides made a
Looking-glass, with such influence of beams, that from the shore, it fired the
enemies Ships two Leagues off; the which may not appear strange, nor from the
way of truth; if we call to mind that Spanyard which not many years past made
such strange Looking-glasses, that they represented to the spectators, two
different shapes at once; one of life, the other of death, a thing so marvelous
and rare, that many modern Philosophers not being able to find out the natural
reason, of such a representation, they remained in suspense, commending both
the Artist and the work, many other, and very strange looking-glasses have been
made, amongst the which we must not forget that of which Ptolomy makes mention,
that looking therein, it represented to the view, so many faces as there had
passed hours in the day: Can there be a greater cunning in any creature then
that which was in the hand of a man, who wrote the Iliads of Homer, which are
many thousand Verses, in so small a quantity of paper, as would be contained in
the shell of a nut, as Pliny expresses; Another made a ship with all its
furniture, as Sails, Cordages and Tacklings in so small a compass, that a Be
might cover it with its wings; But methinks sufficient has been spoken,
because they are examples of most luster, honor and esteem amongst the
Ancients, also by them admired, and set forth as proofs of the excellency and
glory of the spirit of man, and how God has endowed him with divine wisdom.

Now I shall in few words express some Acts of the most famous persons of our
times, that their honorable deeds may not be buried in the profound pit of
Oblivion, nor yield the glory thereof to the Ancients; Amongst all the
Trophies, Honors, Triumphs, Glories, Spoils, and Exployts acted by our
forefathers; I find none can be compared with the Art of Printing, for this
so wonderful as strange invention, is of so profitable a use; that the best of
former inventions cannot be equalized with the dignity thereof; or dare to
appear before it, this only keeps, conserves and ayds, all our conceptions,
inventions and projects from the dangers of forgetfulness, its the trusty
treasurer of our immaginations; it makes the memorial of our ingenuity and
wisdom immortal, and adds eternal being and glory thereto; it goes on
perfecting from age to age the fruits, labors, and profitable studies which
men produce, wearying searching and spending their brains and times in the
Schools and Universities; all other inventions, how fine and exactly soever
they appeared, men have continually gone adding something to them, toward
perfecting the first grounds and foundation of them, and that is done by the
quaint wits, which every day arise; but this was so happy an invention, brought
to light with so much perfection and desire, so well ordered, polished, and
beautified, that they cannot add to it, nor deminish from it, any thing of
luster, or worth esteem; the works thereof are so strange and quick; executed
with such diligence and celerity of action, that one man alone can make in a
natural day more Characters and Letters in Printing, then the nimblest and most
deligent Scrivener in the world can write in two years: Who now can but laugh
at (the ancient manner of writing) (though not condemned) the miserable
barbarism, and weak inventions of the ancients; who (as Strabo writes in his
Book of Sita Orbis) wrote first in Ashes, afterward on the bark of Trees,
after that on Laurel leaves, after that on sheets of Lead, then on Parchment,
and afterward in Paper. If there were changes then in the things upon which
they wrote, there was also in the Instruments with which they wrote; for on
Stones they wrote with Iron; with a Pencil on the Laurel leaves; with the
Finger on the Ashes; and with a Knife on the bark of Trees* with Canes on the
Parchment, and on the Paper with Quils; the sorts of Ink also were diverse, the
first was a liquor of the Fish which we call Turtle, after that joyce of
Mulberries then Smut or Soot, and after that of Vermillion, was made that which
was compounded of Gum, Gaul and Coppers I have made so prolix a story of this,
tha^ men might see what pains and l^bour, that famous Germain did free us from,
who in the year, one thousand four hundred ninety and three, Invented the Art
of PRINTING: I could if I would, next to the former invention give the second
Crown (Invention of Powder) to the Friar that found out the mystery of powder,
and shot off Cannons, Muskets and Pistols, which are cruel instruments of War,
were it not that I have declared, in my former Treatise, of the miseries of
humane life; that this imagination, was more prejudicial then honorable, more
hurtful than profitable to mankind: Yet its a strange thing what Brasava
writes of a Citizen of Ferrara, who found out the way of making Powder, that
should not sound, or make a noise, though it be shot out of Cannon, Gun or
Musket: But we will leave these thundering flashes of Jupiter, invented by the
suggestions of the Devil, for the destruction of mankind; and return to the
consideration of the subtle and divine wisdom of the men of latter times
amongst the which, we ought to esteem the cunning of that Italian, who
presented to the Duke of Vrbane a ring of Gold with a precious stone set in it;
the which he had made a perfect Dial, with which the hand gave a blow, to
advertise the hour to him that wore it; who can but admire at what an Author
worthy of credit writes? He saw publicly done in Millain, a man wash his
hands with melted and boiling Lead, having first washed them over with the
juice of a certain herb: What greater wonder in Art or Science can we behold,
then this? That man should make his face and hands, which consist of flesh and
skin, so tender, soft and delicate, as nothing more, to become so strong, hardy
and defensible, that they are able to resist the grand force and violence of
fire, and of so penetrating and burning liquor as lead is; what can man's
ingenuity do more, or his Art achieve further, since he dare adventure to put
his naked limbs in the Fire, and it does not burn or consume them? If perhaps
this seems impossible, and you think that man is not able to resist the fire?
what will you say of that which Alexander, and above fifty other Historians
relate, happened in their times in Secilia, that there was a man called
commonly by all, the Fish Colax. For from his youth he was accustomed to swim
in the Sea, he proceeded so far therein, that the greatest part of his time he
lived in the water, turned into the nature of a Fish, or creature of that
Element; he would stay five or six hours under water, after that whole days;
and by degrees he brought himself to stay eight days without coming forth; so
at last he accustomed himself to live under water the most part of his life,
which was above eighty years; many times he appeared when he came into any
ships way at Sea, he would go aboard, eat and drank what the Mariners gave
him; sometime he came to land into his own Country, where he stayed but
little; because great pains of stomach possessed him if be stayed out of the
water. The which also Pontano affirms for a truth: What more wisdom or divine
ingenuity can possess man to pierce the four Elements, familiarly to make use
of them, and serve himself of them, as of other Creatures; except he should
soar in the air, and through it to pass, both Soul and Body to Heaven: Nay,
there has not wanted some, who have attempted it: For Leonardo Vincio invented
the art of Flying, and exceeded therein, to the admiration of all; I need not
mention here of a multitude of Vaulters and Juglers, who with so much dexterity
and boldness do act their parts, that (especially those which to this day
vault upon Cables, etc. do often cause Kings, Princes and Commons to retire
themselves from Balcones, and Windows and avoid the sight of so desperate,
horrible, fearful and supernatural actions; insomuch that the Actor often
remains alone, because the people cannot endure to behold the desperate and
unfortunate condition to which they exposed themselves: For which cause, that
great Philosopher Mercurius Trismagistus endeavoring to extol the subtilty of
man's ingenuity; yet admiring at the divine agility and quickness with which it
acts, declares to his Son these following words; What think thou at this? or
what treasure think thou? Have thou shut up within the members of thy body?
Command thy soul that it cross the main Ocian, and thou shall perceive how
soon it will pass overs nay, in a manner before thou can imagine, without
changing its place of abode; Command it to ascend to Heaven, and there thou
shall apprehend it to be in a moment, and that without any wings; for it has
none; yet there is nothing that does disturb or impede its flight, no not the
wide and large tenebrosity of the Air can hinder its carreare, the burning
heat of the Sun, the swift motions of the starry heavens and Planets, it
penetrates all, even to the most pure, celestial and excellent species of them:
If thou find not contentment in this, if thou will not abide amongst: the
spears and heavenly bodies, search out and understand what vastness there is
beyond those heavens we see; sure thou may easily do it, consider then what
the agility of thy soul is? hold thy self immortal, and believe that thou art
able to understand all the Arts and Sciences of the world; ascend above the
highest Elements, descend to the deepest Gulfs, think upon and call to mind,
what passages thou have met with, and what thou have acted, search out the
effects of Fire, Water, Air, of the drouth and moisture that goes through all
parts of the World, fix thy self in Heaven, on Earth, in the Sea, in the Air,
and dwell if thou please without the body; Sure then by this we may collect
that the nature of man is a strange and miraculous thing; for although it has
one part of its being mortal, decaying and perishable, the other and more noble
is Immortal; derives its original from heaven, very well remembers its splendid
Country, the glorious gifts and graces which it has received from its Creator;
and so despises all terrenal enjoyments; but fighs and groans for those of
heaven, with an earnest desire to purchase those felicities which it left
there, for certainly in it self it knows, that its Principal, Parents, Friends
and Aliance, are there, and that naturally is the country where first it
received its being; The which if it could clearly see with its eye of reason
which is a power of the soul, that never can or does part from it; more then
the light from the Sun; and from hence sweetly enjoy, without this clod of
earth, or spoil of worms! Oh what wonderful things would it act; how rare and
strange would its designs be, but this lump of clay, the body weighs it down
and hinders, which Mercurius calls a Tyranical Prison of the soul; for that
ever impeds, when this would, set forth its divine Essence; but when it goes
forth of this body by contemplation and meditation, and freeth it self from the
weighty burden thereof subjecting the vicious appetites of it, it no sooner
remains at liberty, but receives the Noble influences of Heaven, and being
purified and cleansed from the filthiness of these earthly members, goes
skipping in the Air from Element to Element, holds communication and converse
with the Angels, and can Penetrate even to the Throne of the most high God;
Whence being inflamed with a divine fury or Zeal acts here below strange and
wonderful things; as Moses relates of himself, that after he had parted from
men to converse with God, and stayed some few days, his face was so bright and
shining; that the Children of Israel could not behold him: St. Paul was caught
up into the third heaven: Socrates often being elevated in serious
contemplation would earnestly behold the Sun for the space of an hour without
motion, so that he seemed rather dead then a live: Alexander the great, being
once in exceeding danger of his life, surrounded with enemies, his Army almost
lost and discomfited, he fell into such a furious and passionate rage, that he
sweat throughout his whole body drops of blood, which appeared to his
adversaries as flames of fire that issued from his face and eyes, at the which
being frighted, they began one by one to fly, and left him alone, without any
hurt: By which we may clearly discern the power and command that the soul has
over the body's Sepulcher, in the which it lies buried in this life, and how
many times it freeth it self from the chains, with which it is bound, and in
spite of the body, goes to visit her ancient habitation which is heaven,
leaving in a manner for that time the body as dead; the which St. Augustine
very well asserts, in a Priest of Calamensa, that always when he would wrap
himself up in contemplation, he did it with so much gust, delight and so
profound a forgetfulness of things here below; that he remained stretched out
upon the ground without any sense or motion, and although they applied to his
most tender and sensible parts, cauterizes of burning fire, he felt no more
pain, nor made any more motion then a dead corpse, and after that he had come to
himself again, he gave wonderful, strange and incredible relations of what he
had seen: Herodoto affirms, that a Philosopher called Atheo, vanished after
such a manner, that the soul many times, leaving the body at home, wandered
through strange Countries, from Province to Province, and related at its return
very strange things which it had seen, which appeared afterward to be true by
experience thereof made; A child after he returned from such a rapture of
spirit, Prophesied the death of Julian the Emperor, with the whole Tragical
misfortunes which afterward happened to him how his enemies would come, and whom
they were that should kill him, without ever hearing, or being adverted thereof
by any person: Another Philosopher showed in a glass the host of his enemies,
set in order, and prepared for the Battle, such so wonderful and strange are
the opperations of the soul of man, so great is its power, when it escapes and
freeth it self from the Prison of the body, when it maks a stay in the
contemplation of Caelestial things; which many times (because its not common,
and it seems to cast off nature,) the simple vulger do attribute to the devils,
which certainly is nothing else but the supernatural divinity of man that does
these things, and that by reason of its great affinity it has with the deity;
is there any thing more certain then that which is related of Leonardo
Pictorio, who so strictly began to tame his flesh, with abstinence, that he
brought himself to eat but once a week, and to this day many report, that the
Scithians can go ten or twelve days without eating; sustaining themselves
with the juice of a certain herb which they carry in their Mouths.

What more can be added to set forth the excellencies, and praises of this
creature Man, but Divinity it self? If we should in particular treat of its
wonders, the Histories are full of them; Paper expressions and Ink would fail,
before the marvelous things that are to be spoken of it; There have been many
that no kind of Poison could damnify, and that for some secret misterious
virtue which was hidden within them; King Mitridates, seeing Himself overcome
by Pompey, had rather die, then fall into his hands alive; he therefore took and
made proof of the most desperate and pestilential potions tha^ in those days
were known, but that did not hurt him, being preserved by his own nature, which
served him as a sovereign medicine against all Poison; so he was forced to kill
himself with a dagger: Galen that Prince of the Physicians writes, that a Girl
which was bred up and fed with that veriomous herb called Napellus or Hemlock
it was converted into the substance of the body, that afterward no kind of
Poison would do her harm, but all those she lay with, were poisoned with her
breath: Auiscene writes that in his time, there was a man, from whom all
venomous beasts did fly; for if it happened he bit or touched any, they presently
dyed; he also says, that he had seen a sort of men which the Greeks called
Ophergines heal venomous beasts by touching them with their hands, and extract
the Poison out of any body, only by putting the hands upon the place
damnified; the very same virtue have the Psilos and Marcians people of Africa,
whose Ambassador was seized to make proof there of in Room, his name was
Xagon, who was put into a vessel full of Vipers, Snakes, and little Serpents
and other venomous Creatures; he was no sooner put therein, but in stead of
biteing and afflicting of him, they began to lick, to fawn and make much of
him, each in its nature; in conclusion, we find in man strange, marvelous and
monsterous things; in so much, that many of the Ancients, considering the
Excellency of his nature, but not finding any thing that can be compared to the
exquisite and industrious providence of him; they commanded them (that is the
most learned) to be called gods, even for such they esteemed, honored and
adored them: Some there were so constant in their opinion that they never
laughed, as Marcus Crassus for which he was called Agelasto (as much as to say)
one that never smiled but was even in one constitution, others never vomited,
as Pompey; some never spit, as Antonio the second; some never found sickness
in their bodies, as Pontano writes of himself, for he many times wittingly let
himself fall from his condition, yet felt no pain or grief, nor found any
detriment; others there were who enjoyed so sharp and peircing a sight, that
they could discern things that were fifty or sixty leagues distance, as if
they had been much nearer; Solinus and Pliny, do affirm of one who was called
Strabon, that in time of the Punicke War; he saw from one of the high Rocks or
Promontories of Sicilia, ships set sail out of the Port of old Carthage, which
is above a hundred Leagues distant; Of Fiberius the Emperor (its said) that
wakeing at a certain hour of the night, he could see all things as clearly as
if it were day; in the Country of the Cardelin^s (says Pliny) there are a
sort of men that will run as swift as Greyhounds, and that its impossible to
come near or take them; unless it be by reason of age or infirmity; Quintus
Curtius and many others write; that Alexander the Great, was composed of such a
temprature and strange equality and harmony of humers, that his breath
naturally surelt like Balsome, and that when he sweat, he cast such an
oderife^ous scent from him, it seemed as if there had flowed Musk and Amber
through the pores of his body; Yet they relate a more strange thing then this,
and more hard to be believed, that his body dead smelt sweetly, as if it had
been embalmed, or filled with the most precious perfumes of the world: Cayus
Caezar was so excellent a Horseman, that causing his hands to be tied behind
him, without Bridle or Saddle, (a wonderful and almost incredible thing) with
only his knees, he would make the horse run, stop, turn, leap, gallope and
curvet, as well as if he had bridle or sadle: Marcus Paulus a Venetian writes
that the Tarters are so great searchers into the secrets of Nature, and have so
much power and command over the Devils, that they can darken the air when they
please and that he once being beset with Thieves, made an escape by this means:
Haytomus an Author of singular repute and great authority, in the History that
he wrote of the Sarmatans affirms the same; and goes further, relating that
the Army of the Tartars being almost routed and overcome, was succored and
preserved by a Enchantment of one of their Ensigns, casting a mist and
darkening the air, about the host of their Enemies: I have read in many
ancient Authors, that those of Ethiopia, who with a hidden virtue of some
herbs, gathered at certain set hours, dried up Ponds and Moats, almost empty
Rivers, and open any Lock: What shall we say more, to set forth the excellency
and dignity of man?

There have been in the world such excellent Musicians, that with their
Harmonious mellody have changed the conditions, desires and affections of the
hearers; nay more, their inclinations and wills; it makes those that are
mellancholly and sad, to become chereful and merry; those that are valiant and
stout, to become toward, to dance, leap and tremble with fear; it causes
others to make gestures and strange postures, according as the sound rises or
falls: Terprando, Metimeo, Empedocles, Orpheus, Amphion, were all such
exquisite Musicians, that in their times, they cured many that were Frantic,
Lunatic and possessed, and that only with the sweet harmony of their
Instruments: Pythagorus only with the deep experience and understanding he had
in this science, cured a young man that was near dead with Love, he eased him
of many cares, evil desires, and carnal appetites, which did continually
torment and molest him; causing him to forget them all, as if he had never
known them, and that in few days; and all his time afterward he lived very
pleasant and contented: All the Historians both Greek and Latin, which treat
of the life of Alexander, make mention of the excellency of the hand of
Timotheus his Musician, of whom I shall declare only one thing, that at a
Banquet being playing on his Instrument, before his Master and many other
guests; He began on a sudden to sound an alarm, so furiously and exactly, that
the magnificent Alexander, little considering his action, hastily arose from
the Table, and called for his Arms, being forced into a rapture with the
Harmony, and exquisite harping of his excellent Musician: The great King
Agamemnon being obliged to go to the Wars of Troy, and not confiding in the
honest retirements of his Wife; he left her in the custody of a famous Harpist,
who when he saw her pensative, idly discoursing, or transported with the
darts of Love, would take his Harp, and with the harmony thereof, so
entertained that great Lady, that all those carnal appetites and motions,
vanished and fled from her: Insomuch that Egistus though her darling, could not
obtain any favor from her, until he procured the death of him, who with his
science and skill, was the trusty defender, keeper and preserver of the
Chastity of that otherwise lascivious Queen: Sure we may with greater reason
insert that example of the Royal Prophet David, who with his skill, art, and
harmonious Music, caused the evil spirit to depart from Saul, as it is more
at large expressed in the book of the Kings.

But that we may draw toward an end of this Labyrinth, which we do but in
short express, concerning the praise of man, and that we may set to the last
seal, in his commendation; I will conclude with this that there is nothing in
him, either joint or member how despicable soever it be, which is not proper
for some use, profitable to some end, and from which may not be extracted some
singular Medicine, Remedy and benefit; as Gallen and many other Physicians do
affirm; the spittle fasting, is very good against the biting of Venomous
beasts, and helps against the inflammation of the eyelids; the eare-wax applied
to the nostrills provokes to drowsiness and sleep; his Urine besides many
other things, for which it is commodious, its good for those that are
Dropsicall, his fat or grease applied to any kind of Gout, very much asswageth
it; the blood of man taken while it is warm, heals those which are smitten
with Love; which several Authors do write, Faustinia the wife of the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius did, his flesh embalmed for how many excellent uses does it
serve and for how many infirmities is it? (and not in vain) used; many Arabian
Physicians made profitable use of the Pith, Nerves, and Marrow of his bones,
and also of his Entrails, they beat the bones to Powder, and give it to their
Patients to drink, only to try new and strange experiments; Orpheus and
Argelous, cured a disease called the Squinancie or Queenzie with the blood of
man, and even with the pairing of the nails, they were wont to cure Agues, as
Pliny affirms; not neglecting the use of the meanest and most despicable
parts or members of his body; to gather thereby, the precious fruit of health;
In the sweat of Man, says Gallen, there is some strange secret, and its
certain, that his breath being healthful and well tempered, is very helpful
to such as are Leperous; and what is more strange, although it cannot be spoken
without shame his dung or ordure was wont to be very much prized, esteemed, and
used anciently in Physic, as Xenocrates affirms; so that finding so many
profitable benefits in this creature, they accounted it no shame to make use of
the most vile and despicable excrements that proceeded from him; and that by
reason of the great profit, benefit and commodity, they experimentally found
thereby. And now seeing man is composed of so much good, excellency, dignity
and deity, being descended in his better part from heaven, we will leave off to
compare him with other creatures; the which though God gave them what was
necessary, moderately to pass over their lives, in quiet security, as giving
to some a hard, tough, and impenitrable skin; to others, a long and thick set
hair to defend them from cold; and other inconveniences of Air and Earth;
to others Horns, Teeth, Claws and several more sorts of Arms, offensive and
defensive; to others nimble, light and active limbs to fly from the enemy; to
some craft or subtilty, to hide themselves in the bowels of the earth; to
others wings, and light spreading feathers with them to fly in the Air; and by
soaring above to avoid the anger and fury of man.

Yet all this is nothing, or of small moment, in comparison of those favors he
bestowed upon man, for although he created him naked, and destitute of those
conveniences of nature; covered only with a tender and delicate skin, that by
every small occasion is subject to be broken; he did it not without some great
divine providence; God did not make him so, but with mature and deliberate
Counsel; for he knew full well, with what diligent care and quickness man
would benefit himself of the exterior sensative enjoyments of other Creatures,
and how the senses should be subject to the quickness of humane understanding,
the which has no sooner projected any thing, but they are ready to obey and
fulfill its desires; it was thought necessary, that the Instruments that were
to be put upon such employments should be more delicate, subtle, tender,
pliable, and not so stiff or strong, and that the blood should be more pure
and hot; for as the temperature of the blood in the Veins is, such is the
constitution of the body: If man were composed of a hard hide and gross
humors, without doubt he would be of a rude, blockish and unpolished
understanding, as we see to this day; the fattest and most personable men
generally are most blockish, slow and sottish: Therefore it appeared better
that man should be created of flesh, etc. more delicate, lively and tender;
that it might not be too heavy a clog, or hindrance in the understanding and
knowledge of things to the soul; but that (as it does) it might act the more
freely, in the which is palpably seen the sovereign wisdom of the Artificer,
or framer of this so excellent a work; as also in other things, which he would
not give to man at his Birth, which are such conveniences and defenses, as he
bestowed upon the Animals* because he knew well that man with his natural and
providential industry would obtain and purchase what they enjoy with any other
thing whatsoever; and that he would accommodate himself better than all the
other Creatures; although he were created and born, naked and void of all arms,
either offensive or defensive; and they came into the world, decked, adorned,
and endowed, with horns, teeths, beakes, poisons, stings, scales, and shells:
Instead of which, God bestowed upon him the Government of Reason, the weapons
of the understanding, with the which the soul, not the body is armed and
defended; and are sufficient to tame, subject and bring under foot all the
other creatures; the great power and force of Beasts, cannot resist this thing
called Reason, neither the sharpness nor hardness of their Horns and Claws,
nor those great bodies composed of flesh and bones, it forcibly subjects them,
not with greater strength, but with subtilty, cunning and activity, whereby it
serves and benefits it self of them at its pleasure; For there is no creature,
how great, strange, hardy, bold, feirce, furious or fearful soever it be; Yet
when it sees man, although it never had seen him, or his like before, but it
trembles and is fearful, or at least shows respect, this Majesty he retains
still, which he inherited from that first impression which God stamped upon
Adam in Paradise, which the Ancient Cabilists called in their Language Phahat;
With this confidence, the first man did boldly live amongst, and converse with
so many Savage, strong and feirce Beasts, giving a name to each, according to
its kind, Hereby he purchased so great a power and dominion over them, that
they all did fear, honor and reverence him as sovereign Lord, and absolute King
over them.

But so soon as he was negligent, and forgetful of himself, proved in
grateful and sinned against his God; that image was blurred, though not
totally blotted out, and he lost almost all that power and command, which he
had over the creatures; from the root and relics of which remained, and we
inherited of this Character; proceeded, that many holy men inhabiting the
Deserts, slept, eat, and securely conversed with feirce Beasts, without
receiving any harm, Entered into their Dens or Caves, as into their own houses,
and lived amongst them, as in company of Parents and Friends, without any fear:
We read of Samson, David and Daniel, who went amongst Lions as amongst Lambs;
Elisha commanded the Bears, as if they had been his slaves, and St. Paul
received no hurt from the Viper.

Now it will be convenient in a few words, to give answer to what we alleged
in the former book of the miseries of this life; When we set forth the vile and
despicable estate of man; saying, that he was of so small a value and short
continuance, that many of the Animals far exceeded him; Sure there will be none
so foolishly bold, that dare to say, God bestowed more benefits and favors
upon other creatures then upon man. I believe not, for although he created him
of so base and low a substance as the dust of the earth; Yet he lost not
thereby one point of his dignity, authority and grandeur; for we know he made
him of so vile and invalied a matter; Not because he wanted more noble
Elements, out of which to form him, for the creation of the Sun, the Moon and
the Stars, does sufficiently declare the contrary; but He was pleased to
create him of clay, to be a clog, to abate his Pride and vainglory; which were
the total destruction, and first cause of the banishment of Adam, and all his
posterity out of Paradise; also to give him to understand, that there is within
him something that cannot employ, and detain it self in sublunary and terrenal
things, nor place its end, felicity and bliss upon them; as brute beasts do,
that enjoy all their happiness in this life, and it ends with them; but man,
all his conveniencie, his life, his honor and perpetual bliss and quiet,
consists in setting all his thoughts and meditations on heaven; lifting up his
eyes to the Hills, from whence comes his help, and where he has a place of
perpetual abode and habitation, a certain house of pleasure and rest, where he
ever ought to be purchasing lands and inheritances, by his provident life and
good conversion, and thereby to obtain everlasting happiness, and eternal
glory; If I said, he was laden with miseries, and subject to an infinite number
of infirmities, troubles, and sorrows, its true, I do not deny it; But God did
not create him at first subject to so many mishaps, disasters and casualties;
he made him a free denizen of this world; not to pay tributes or excises, for
he placed him in the highest dignity and degree therein; if he be miserable, if
he suffers evils, if he be subject to weakness, infirmities, and sorrows, he
brought them upon himself; he sought them out with his own hands so soon as he
parted from his creator; by not endeavoring to follow that holy vocation unto
which at first he was called; if he had known how, (or to say better) would
have known how to have kept that excellent treasure of grace that then was
bestowed upon him; his omnipotent creator would have maintained him, in
perpetual felicity and honor; Yet such is the abundant mercy of God, that
although for his offenses, he brought him under so many miseries and
afflictions, he did it not for any rancor or odium against him; for only in
regard of his love and affection toward man, he did not pardon his only Son,
but delivered him into the hands of his enemies, which so barborously murdered
him, as by sacred writ we certainly know and believe; paying with so vile and
horrid a death temporal, the price of that otherways irrecoverable death
eternal which we owed, and deserved: If he made us of earth, it was to bring
down the exceeding hautinesse, of men's fancies, to pluck out from our hearts by
the root, that pestiferious herb of Pride, and vanity, which the devil our
envious adversary planted in them, to keep us captive under his command and
will; this is the main cause why man is so overcharged with troubles and
sorrows, so full of grief, anguish and afflictions, made corruptible and
mortal; but if man knowing himself to be a captive, a slave, and subject to
such and so many vexations, considering himself so miserable, sorrowful and
afflicted, is so boasting and hauty; What would he do if he were immortal,
impassible* and incorruptible I without any misery or sorrow and all things
succeeded to him as he could wish or desire? For this cause God with a mighty
hand subjected him to miseries and afflictions; yet for all, hitherto he has
kept, and ever hereafter will maintain in this mortal, weak, and frail vessel
of earth, so sweet an according harmony, conformity and unity, that its
impossible to imagine any thing so beautiful, exact and complete; But to be
brief, I will express in few words what I have declared in many, to place man
in his last, greatest and highest perfection, and set him forth with the most
exquisite praises that we can; therefore lets consider him in that perfect
estate and condition, in the which he was created, and we shall find man alone
to be the work which God made, to show his great magnificence, wisdom and
power, the immensity of his knowledge, and the infiniteness of his bounty; But
if we contemplate him in the estate of general corruption, which Adam left us
as a legitimate inheritance, a spot (far worse then that of oil) which is
continually shed upon all his posterity, we shall find it very foul,
monstruously unclean, low, filthy, and deformed, subject to a thousand
miseries, banished from all good, maimed, foolish, inconstant, a hypocrite, and
in conclusion, instead of King and absolute Lord (as he was) of all the
creatures, a slave and a servant of sin with which he was conceived and borne.
But if at last we seriously contemplate and consider him renowned, by the
virtue and power of the word of Almighty God, we shall find him not only
reestated, and reinthroned in those pristine graces and dignities, which he at
first enjoyed, but much more exalted in harmony, might and preferment; for
where there is the greatest abundance of sins, there (if a true strength of
contrition) is found the most full and overflowing current of grace, mercy and
favor of our God, to wash away the spots blemishes and deformities made by
sin, and to renew the creature, as St. Ambrose expresses at large in his book
of the Vocation of the Nations, chap. 3. and St. Austin in his Book of Grace
and Correction, chap. 10. We all of us ought, as Plato says, seriously
considering and acknowledging, the multitude of mercies God has bestowed upon
us; to bless, praise, magnify and give him thanks that we were borne men and
not beasts; and although in this mortal fragil and perishable life, we may
meet with many thorns, prickles and afflictions; which we cannot so easily
digest as we ought, besides those civil Wars waged betwixt the soul and the
body, in which it lies shakled as in a prison, or buried as in a Sepulcher; yet
that he is pleased to give us grace always to be striving, laboring, and
endeavoring, and that with unwearied afflictions, to run that Race, to walk in
that Path, which leads us to the holy City of our God, that heavenly Jerusalem,
where there is no hunger or thirst, no colds or heats; there we shall be free
from all the evils, miseries and calamities, which in this world do attend us;
yet its certain, walking in this valey of sorrows, sailing in this frail body,
as in a ship made on purpose to transport the soul to that haven of
quietness, rest and happiness, while she stays here, she must trip, stumble,
fall, rise and fall again; such is the variableness of our being in this life;
nay rather the mutability of this shadow of life; But once arriving into that
harbor where all safety dwells, and unto which all hope to attain, that is, to
a final perfection, she shall be immortal and impossible, full of those
flourishing joys which shall never fade or wither away, full of perpetual
peace, rest and glory; enjoying that Ancient and Original degree of Dignity and
Honor; which her malicious and cursed enemy the Devil, would have deprived her
off; Unto the which felicity and eternal happiness bring and conduct us: He who
with the Father and the holy Spirit of Grace, lives and Reigns, ever one
God, world without end, Amen.


