RELIGIO LAICI. Written in a Letter to JOHN DRYDEN Esquire.

Juvenal, Sat. 8. Quod modo proposui non est Sententia, verum
Credit me vobis folium recitare Sibyllae.
LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, and S. Magnes, in Russel street, in
Covent Garden. 1683.

TO HIS Much Honored Friend JOHN DRYDEN Esquire.
SIR,
THE Value I have ever had for your Writings, makes me impatient to peruse all
Treatises that are crowned with your Name; whereof, the last that fell into my
Hands, was your Religio Laici; whieh expresses as well your great Judgment in,
as Value for Religion: a thing too rarely found in this Age among Gentlemen of
your Parts; and, I am confident, (with the Blessing of God upon your
Endeavors) not unlikely to prove of great Advantage to the Public; since, as
Mr. Herbert well observes, A Verse may find him, who a Sermon flies,
And turn Delight into a Sacrifice.


We read in Ancient Times, before the Institution of Moral Philosophy by
Socrates, that Poets in general were to the People in stead of their Sacred
Writ, from whom they received their Divinity, and Opinion concerning the Gods;
as, who, and how, to be worshipped, how pleased and pacified, by what Prayers
and Ceremonies, together with such Rites and Ceremonies as were the Dionysiaca,
Cybeliaca, Isiaca, Eleusiniaca, and the like, Instituted by Orpheus. All which
were built upon this Ground, That there could be no true Poet but must be
Divinely inspired; and if Divinely inspired, then certainly to be believed.
This we find largely disputed and asserted even by Philosophers of best Account
in those Days. But the two main Arguments induced them to that Belief, were;
First, That extraordinary Motion of Mind wherewith all good Poets in all Ages
have been possessed and agitated: And, secondly, The Testimony of Poets
themselves, who professing themselves Inspired, have made particular Relations
of strange Visions, Raptures, and Apparitions to that purpose: So that as the
Beginning, Growth, and Confirmation of Idolatry may be ascribed (as by many it
is) to Poets, and their Authority; so also to supposed Enthusiasms and
Inspirations, upon which that Authority was chiefly grounded. Hence it is, that
many Ancient Authors, as Aristotle, Strabo, and others, affirm, That Poetry (in
matter of Writing and Composition) was in use long before Prose: which might
seem strange, if not incredible, did we judge by the Disposition of later
Times; but of those Enthusiastic Times, not less probable, than certain, as
our Learned Casaubon well observes. And this I thought fitting to premise, in
Answer to that Obection which your Modesty is so apprehensive of, viz. That
being a Laick, you interpose in Sacred Matters.

Rapin ( in his Reflections) speaking of the necessary Qualities belonging to a
Poet, tells us, He must have a Genius extaordinary, great Natural Gifts, a Wit
just, fruitful, piercing, solid, and universal; an Understanding clean and
distinct; an Imagination neat and pleasant; an Elevation of Soul, that depends
not only on Art or Study, but is purely a Gift of Heaven, which must be
sustained by a lively Sense and Vivacity; Judgment, to consider wisely of
Things; and Vivacity, for the beautiful Expression of them, etc. Now this
Character is so justly yours, as I cannot but think that he described what a
great Poet should be, by hearing what you were; and the rather, since I have
been informed by some English of his Acquaintance, That Monsieur Rapin was
studious in our Language, only for your sake: Nor would his Pains be lost.

It Is a Question not easily to be decided, Whether you have been more
serviceable to the Peace of the State in your Absalom and Achitophel, or to the
Church in your Religio Laici, or to the Nobility and Gentry in the innocent
Recreation of your Plays? A Country-Retirement, like that of Ovid's, to one
that has led the Spring of his Age, and Vigor of his Youth, among the Noise
and Pleasures of the Town, is certainly a Transformation no less disagreeable,
than that which the Poets feign of Acteon, or Sacred Writ of the Assyrian
Monarch, who grazed with the Beasts of the Field; and to abandon a
Covent Garden Society for the Insipid Dull Converse of a Country Village,
(where the Nomination of New Healths is the height of their Invention) would
render a Rural Life to be no less than a Civil Death, were it not for Mr.
Dryden's Writings, which keep us still alive, and, by a most Natural
Representation of the Humors of the Town, make us flatter and fancy our
selves (like the Enjoyment of a Lover's Dream) to be still there.

But I shall wave these Acknowledgments to you, as things too general to be
engrossed by me alone: And will now spend the Remainder of this Epistle in
informing you of the Occasion of my troubling you with this small Piece, which
I Entitle by the Name of Religio Laici, from a Treatise of the Lord Herbert of
Cherburie's so called; whose Notions I have often made use of, and grounded the
Chief of my Discourse upon his Five Catholic or Universal Principles: Wherein
my only Aim is, to assert an Universal Doctrine, such as no ways opposes the
Religion Established among us, and which may tend both to the Propagation of
Virtue, and Extirpation of Vice, as well as to the Reconciliation of those
Dissenters now in England, who have of late so disturbed the Quiet of this
Realm, and who, under the Pretense of Religion, would exclude all Governors
but themselves. For, as a late Author well observes, Every Opinion makes a
Sect; every Sect, a Faction; and every Faction (when it is able) a War: and
every such War is the Cause of God; and the Cause of God can never be
prosecuted with too much Violence: So that all Sobriety is Lukewarmness; and to
be Obedient to Government, Carnal Compliance. Which are the Opinions of those
that would rob Caesar of his Due, as well as remove the Peoples ancient
Landmarks.

But for my part, as in Civil Politics, I would not, in this so Ancient and so
Lineal a Monarchy, abandon the Beams of so fair a Sun, for the dreadful
Expectation of a divided Company of Stars; so neither, in Ecclesiastics, do I
covet to be without the Pale of the Church: since, though I will not
Dogmatically affirm, (as some do) That Episcopacy is Jure Divino; yet (with the
Lord Bacon) I say, and think ex Anim, That it is the nearest to Apostolical
Truth, and the most coherent with Monarchy: Wherein, I know, you will not
differ from me.

And therefore, Sir, at this time, when the Name of Christ is made use of to
palliate so great Villainies and Treasons, under the Pretext of God's Cause,
against both King and Government, I thought I could do no less than snatch up
all Weapons that might defend the Public, and hope I have not lighted upon one
with a double Edge.

I have endeavored that my Discourse should be only a Continuance of yours;
and that, as you taught Men how to Believe, so I might instruct struct them how
to Live. For, as Dr. Done well observes, Though Christianity is the Fort or
Citadel, yet Virtue and Moral Honesty are its Fences and Outworks, whereby
alone it is teneable. Wherefore, I designed this Treatise of mine to be only
an Addition, or rather the Consequence of yours; encouraging Men to Live up to
the Virtue of that Doctrine you teach. Which, with your Pardon for the present,
and Friendship for the future, is the highest Ambition of,

SIR, Your most Faithful Friend, and Servant, C. B.

Religio Laici.
The Occasion of this Treatise.
THere is not any Meditation has given me greater trouble, than when I think,
That a Doctrine so necessary, as the Knowledge of God, with the true Way to
serve and worship him, together with the Means to attain everlasting Salvation,
should be so variously delivered and taught in diverse Ages and Countries; as
also urged in such perplexed and difficult terms; (which by the many Volumes of
this Argument, in several Languages, may appear;) and after all this, yet to
find it presented to me under such terrible Menaces and Execrations, as if,
among the many Churches in the World, I did not adhere to the right, (which
each claimed to be theirs) I could not justly hope for salvation; but, on the
contrary, expect eternal Torture, without any prospect of Relief.

Being therefore in this doubtful and dangerous condition, I did at last
conclude with my self, that one of these two things was to be done: Methods of
Enquiry into Religion.

First, That (notwithstanding the Affronts and Threats wherewith with the
Priests on every side would deter us from all other Religions, as well as
Invitations, Promises, and comfortable Doctrines, by which they would draw us
to their own, in any particular Church,) I was bound, either to study with an
impartial mind, not only all the several Religions; but likewise the
Controversies amongst them in diverse Ages, Languages and Countries. And for
this purpose, not only to acquire the Tongues used heretofore, or at this
present time throughout the Universe: But also to read the several Authors that
have written upon these Arguments; and together with them to confer those
Learned men, who (though they had not published any thing in writing) might yet
be no less able to edify me, than the former. Or,

Secondly, To fix upon some Fundamental Articles agreed upon by all that I
could meet with, and consider afterward how far they might conduce to my
salvation.

The former of these two I soon perceived to be impossible; for, whose private
Affairs at home, or public Duty to his Native Country, will permit him to take
such Journies to all the Quarters of the World? Whose Estate or Revenue will
furnish him with Money for so long and great an Undertaking? Or whose
Constitution is of that strength and ability, that, were he to escape all the
Dangers he must inevitably meet with, could yet undergo so immense a travel and
labor? Whose Memory could either contain all the Works of the several
Languages and Religions; or Judgment decide the different Opinions and Faiths
pretended under the Authority of so many great Churches? which course yet
unless he pursued to the end, he could not with Justice say he had performed
his Duty. For since the determining finally of any matter of Importance, where
Parties are not heard on all sides, is not only against common Reason, but
contrary even to the ordinary practice of Justice in all other cases; he must
think himself, in that the most important and serious business that can befall
Mankind, obliged to make as particular and exact a search and examination of
Religions, as is possible.

But here we will suppose, that after diligent Enquiry, one might learn what
was taught in this or that Country, under some general Notions; (though no
where sufficiently, according to all the Tenants, Rites, and Ceremonies taught
or practiced amongst them,) yet how could the knowledge of any one Religion
alone give him satisfaction, especially when he should find it controverted in
some other Country, and where as able men, at least in all other points of
Learning, might in great numbers be found? Shall he, because his Birth or
Affection enclines him to one Country or Religion more than another, so
factiously embrace it, as to think no other to be good or acceptable to God,
where men do the best they can to serve him, and live well? Must he prejudge
all other Religions as erroneous and false, when as yet he has not heard what
they can allege for the justifying of their Faith? No; but too too many are
guilty of this Partiality; for that, till we receive a Spirit of Judgment to
discern the right way, every way is thought to be wrong, but that which we are
brought up in: And pious Education does the same in this latter Age, which
Miracles did formerly; as the Learned Gregory well observes.

Howbeit, because something here must be attempted, lest we should seem wholly
to forsake our selves, I did in my particular conceive nothing so proper for my
purpose, as to look upon those Countries chiefly from whence all other Learning
and Sciences did originally flow; which consideration, as it brought me to
those Provinces wherein the Greek Tongue did anciently flourish, as containing
in it self alone almost all humane Literature: So, when I found the Inhabitants
thereof in so miserable an Estate, that there was little more than Ignorance,
Captivity and Barbarism amongst them, I did not think fit to insist there;
since, however their wits might be as excellent now as in former times, they
seemed to want not only the Means which might enable them to find out any
Learned Truth, but even the heart to believe it. Neither did their Ancient or
almost universally taught Religion (being Ethnic and Pagan) any way affect me
there, or in any Country else: since being now intermitted, and discontinued
for many Ages, I could not but think it built in great part upon weak and
uncertain Principles, more especially in those Points, which are now wholly
antiquated and abolished.

From hence therefore I cast mine Eye upon Italy; as the Country wherein, not
only all the Ancient Learning of the Greeks, but also of the Romans, was
carefully preserved and taught; But as here again I found almost all they
produced in point of Religion to be controverted among other Nations in Europe,
with much acrimonie and Bitterness; and that besides among the several Opinions
and Sects the subequent times have brought forth, the latter for the most part
have dissented more from them than the former; insomuch that the Puritan has
departed more from them than the Protestant, and the Protestant than the
Lutheran; I could not so safely rely upon them, as not to enquire, why the
Tenants of the Church of Rome are so much deserted? But as here again I found
my self entangled in Controversies, I thought fit to make a pause before I
engaged my self too far in those Tumultuous and uncharitable Disputes. And the
rather, because I found that even the knowledge of the different Sects of
Christian Religion alone, took up more time in the study of them than I could
possibly hope to obtain, although I should live beyond the ordinary age of man;
so that whereas I thought my self obliged for the discharge of my Conscience to
study not only all Religions that have been or are in the World, I found the
Romanish Religion in its diverse Sects alone of greater Intricacie, than that I
could by any Reason or Authority dissolve or unty the many Scruples or Knots in
them: since flying sometimes from Reason to Faith, and then again from Faith to
Reason, with a singular agility in both, I found my self unable to follow them
in any one certain way. I confess, that if they had adhered singly to either of
these two, nothing could have scandalized me; since that which was delivered
upon Reason, I should have examined, and finally accepted upon the same ground:
and as well should I have believed those Points of Faith, which were delivered
me upon the Reverend Authority of the Church; especially, when it could have
been proved, that any former Church or Congregation had under their hands and
Seals, or in any other Authentic manner subscribed, as Eyewitnesses to that
they consigned unto Posterity, and not as Hearers only; it being of great
moment in the affirmation of things past, to set down what they knew certainly,
and to come afterward to what was told them by others, which they again had
from others, and so perhaps from many descents; especially, if such things were
related, as neither they from whom they heard it, nor indeed any mortal man by
Natural Means could know. Neither would it be sufficient to say, that their
Knowledge was Supernatural or Divine, since as that is more than could be known
in following times, so, when it were granted, it would infer little to me, but
that which I would believe without it: For if any under the name of a Prophet
should bid me do a Sin, or be Impenitent for Sins done, I should not believe
him, though he pretended a thousand Revelations for it: And on the other side,
if he bid me be Virtuous and Penitent, though he had not any shadow of
Revelation for it, I should give entire Credit to him.

The Validity of Revelation proved by its Doctrine.
That therefore the Certainty of that Doctrine, which is called Revealed, or
the word of God in any Age or Country, comes not to me simply either from the
Authority of him that said the holy Spirit did so dictate the word to him: No,
nor from the Authority of them that believed it: (how many or great soever:)
but from the Goodness of the Doctrine it self; without which, I should believe
but little in any extraordinary kind. Every man, in what Age or Country, that
teaches goodness, speaks the word of God to me; and if the Contrary, he shall
never make me believe, he knows God, or heard him speak so much as one
syllable, much less that he is so familiar with God, as to know him by his
Voice.

Four several kinds of Revelations.
The Learned Tostatus mentions four several ways whereby God is said to have
made Revelations in former times; as for Example: First, when God and his
Angels assumed a visible shape, as when he appeared to Gideon, Judge. 6. and to
Manoah and his Wife, Judge. 13. Secondly, When he was not seen, but only heard,
as Numb. 7. and when he called Samuel, 1 Samuel 3. Thirdly, When he wrought only
upon the Imaginations of men, sleeping or waking; as when God told Abimelech in
a Dream, that he was a dead man, for taking away another man's Wife, Genesis 20.
Fourthly, and lastly, When God raises the Understanding to know those things
which otherwise he could not know, either by a kind of Ecstasy, or without; and
of this kind was Paul's rapture into the third Heavens; at which time it may be
doubtful whether the Soul remained in the Body or no.

Having thus now recited his several kinds of Revelations, it will be necessary
in the next place to enquire, whether there might not be Fallacies in all these
ways? And when there was no Fallacy, whether their Proof was not only by single
Witnesses? The Popish Clergy (in such a case) will tell us, That we must
believe reverently of things delivered to us in Holy Writ, for that they have
neither Error nor Fraud in them: And if that does not satisfy you, they will
then tell you, you must come to them for a further Answer: Not considering,
that if the Gentiles should require the same credit to be given to their
Revelations upon their own single Testimony, how we should do to shake them
off: the same Reason lying for us to believe the one, as the other, both
equally depending on Faith.

A Dialogue concerning Revelations.
Therefore in the first place, I should demand in a Rational and Judicial way,
how I could be assured, that the Priests had received a Revelation, and what
was the time, place, and manner thereof? In Answer to which, I conceive the
Priests would tell me; That Laics ought not further to enquire into such
Mysteries than becomes them; that if this their Revelation were not accepted as
an unquestionable and necessary Truth, there could be no cause thereof, but an
obdurate heart, and want of Divine Grace in me; that if the Sacerdotal word
might not be taken concerning the Truth of the said Revelation, there was no
other way to inform me thereof: It being Gods manner to speak to his beloved
Servants, and not to such gross Sinners as I was; and to be brief, that if I
did not give entire credit to this Revelation of theirs, it was for want of
Faith: And therefore, that no better counsel could be given me, than to pray
that all obstructions might be taken away, and instead of my heart of stone,
that I might receive an heart of flesh, such as may be capable of this heavenly
Illumination. Finally, They would reply nothing concerning the time or manner
of their Revelation, but only in general say, that the Place was God's holy
Temple, where none could be partakers of the Word of God, but such only as were
his near Servants, and did ordinarily take their rest and sleep therein.

Now to this I should Answer, That if I might not know the time and manner,
when and how this their Revelation was made, I would yet gladly be informed,
what Language was used betwixt them, and whether the words were of God's
immediate invention, or that there were only certain Notes and Characters in
use betwixt them, whereby they understood one another? Or otherwise, if they
had not a particular Language betwixt them, which was intelligible; whether God
spoke the ordinary Language of that Country, and in what Tone; whether the same
were louder than Thunder, or only the ordinary height, or whether lower yet,
by some close or secret expression, somewhat less than a whisper? To which I
believe the Priests would Reply, That if a King or Principal Magistrate did
send me a Message or Command by some one of his known Officers, I would not
then presume to make all these Questions, they being not only uncivil, but also
impertinent and derogatory to the Supreme Authority, and therefore that they
who were known Ministers of God, did, without giving further account, require
Obeence from me in his Name. But notwithstanding all this, I should again take
the boldness to ask them, (supposing they heard such words) how yet they could
know that God spoke them, and whether they were so familiar with the person of
that God, as to know him by his Voice, and distinguish him from all others? How
they could assure themselves firmly, that it was no inferior Spirit that gave
them this Revelation, there being Spirits of both sorts, both good and bad,
which use to deliver Oracles and Revelations, according to the Doctrine of the
Manichees, who founded their Opinions upon that sentence, viz. that the Devil
is the God of this world. But again, supposing it was a good Spirit that spoke,
whether Camillus, or his Boy who waited on him in the Temple, did hear or
understand the Voice as well as himself? Here I know the Priests Answer would
be, That neither himself, nor any else could come to the knowledge of God's
Will, but by their means and conveyance: And for the rest would again require
my Obedience, on peril of my being condemned as an Infidel; thinking by these
words at least to overawe me.

But this would be so far from terrifying me, that it would but put into my
head more Scruples, concerning the Truth of their Revelation? when pursuing my
way, I should gladly demand of him, how yet I could be assured, that in the
repeating of this their Oracle or Revelation, they had omitted no part thereof
through forgetfulness; or added any thing to it by a Paraphrase, or
Explication; And briefly, whether nothing were interweaved or changed therein?

The Priests would here assuredly reply, That it was but a profane part in me
to doubt any thing were either added to, or taken from the Divine Revelation,
much less any thing mixed or interwoven with it: and that the same God, who
gave them this Revelation, did and would preserve it entire in their memory;
for further proof whereof, they were ready to set it down, and sign it under
their Hands and Seals, that so it might be transmitted to Posterity, as an
Authentic Record: To which also, the Amanuenses or Coppiers of it might repair
to correct all that should be depraved, either by their carelessness, or wilful
perversion of the Sense thereof, that so their Errors might afterward be
rectified, attested and subscribed by sufficient Witnesses, as agreeing with
the Original; there being no other Means so good to ascertain us Laics, that
nothing therein was counterfeit, etc. Which Method (I confess) if it had been
used in all Ages and Countries where Revelations are said to have been made in
private to Priests, would have been much approved; since Copies of Copies,
through many Descents, may be subject to many Corruptions, especially among
those who would draw all things to their own Interest; which might as well have
become these latter Times, as the former; since our Modern Priests (for the
most part) turn Religion into Faction, striving to render all others of
different Persuasions (though in the least matters) odious. Which Bitterness of
Spirit we find not evidently remarked among the Heathen Priests; so that how
Ignorant and False soever they were, yet are they not recorded to have been
Incendiaries, and Persecutors of one another even unto Death, for Religion and
Conscience sake: No, they had no such hellish Contrivances as the Parisian and
Hibernian Massacres; no such Instruments of the Devil, as Ravilliac, Clement,
and the Priest that poisoned our English Monarch in the Eucharist; no such
Traitorous Conspiracies as the Powder Plot: Nor did they use to convert one
another to their Opinions by Fire and Faggot, and Rosting Kings alive, as the
Spaniards did in the Indies. He that compares but the Behavior of those of the
Religious among the Heathens, with the Carriage of our Popish Bishops here in
England before the Reformation, as related by our own Christian Writers, would
take the Heathen Priests for much the better Christians of the two.

So that, notwithstanding all this, I should not give the Priests over so, but
at least tell them, I could have wished they had proceeded more clearly with
me; since the more they debased my Understanding in Divine Mysteries, the more
was I obliged to stand to my Common Reason, until they had made all things
manifest or intelligible to me, without going about to convince me of
Infidelity, because I believed not more than I understood: or when a further
Belief were required, I hoped they would not charge me to believe it any
otherwise than as a thing possible, or at most but likely, since this was all I
could do, when God had given me no sufficient Revelation for the confirming of
theirs. And to affirm it a good Plea in the Court of Heaven, to say, That a Man
began at the Faith that was taught in his Native Country; Who might not then
excuse himself for adhering to the grossest Superstition that can be imagined
in any Age or Country whatever, where no less Esteem and Veneration was given
publicly to their Sacerdotal College, than is now paid to the present Church
of Rome in Italy and Spain. Finally, therefore, I should ask them, How any
Priest could assure and satisfy my Conscience, that the Revelation made to him
did so concern me, that I must embrace it as an undoubted Axiom, or Truth? To
which (I am confident) they would answer, as formerly, That they had discharged
their Duty in delivering Gods Word, and that I ought to take heed lest I be
severely punished for want of Faith, and so leave me, after having with much
gravity expressed their sorrow for my incorrigible stubborn Heart, etc.

But, notwithstanding all this, I do not yet deny, but that Revelations may be
made to Men either sleeping or waking; but where, I suppose, (as we find in
Holy Writ) earnest Prayers have been made beforehand, and some public and
miraculous Confirmation of the thing revealed has followed. However, unless
the thing in it self be right good and honest, I should not conceive it was God
that spoke, but some Evil Spirit that would deceive me; it having pleased God
so to implant the Love of Goodness and Truth in the Soul, that he has made
them a part of Common Reason, and conspicuous by their own Light; from which
therefore if we recede, we shall find our selves cast not only into much
Error and Darkness, but even in the Court of our own Consciences criminal and
condemned: For which Cause also I believe God is so sparing in making public
Relations, because if Men did wholly trust to them, it might be a means of
making them neglect their proper Duties. It would be (as the Learned Gregory in
his Posthuma observes) a Stumbling Block to the Gentiles, when they found it
read in Osea, that God commanded a Prophet to commit Adultery: and in Exodus,
that he taught his own People how to cozen the Egyptians: How could they
believe (says he) that there was no God like the God of the Hebrews, when they
should find in the Scriptures, that even this God had also a Right Hand and a
Son? Or that if he had been so much better than those of the Heathen, was it
likely that Aaron his own High Priest, would have preferred their Apis or
Egyptian Calf before him? But the Reason of all this is, because to
unenlightned Nature these Passages might seem inconsistent with the Attributes
of the Deus Optimus Maximus; and for that (as our aforesaid Learned Author well
notes) all ways of Religion would seem strange, but that we are taught betimes
to fear: and till we receive a Spirit of Judgment to discern the Right way,
every Way is thought to be Wrong, but that which we are brought up in. And thus
much for Public Revelations.

Of Visions and Apparitions.
Now if any Man should say a Vision appeared to him, I should believe him as
far as it was fit to credit a single Witness in so rare a Case; but certainly I
should not depart from my Common Reason, whatsoever he should pretend to teach
upon those Grounds; and from single Witnesses, and no more, the greatest
Miracles in all Vulgar Superstitions are mostly derived, as would appear to any
one that should look back from Age to Age, to the Original of all such
wonderful Narrations: Or, if more Persons than one are said at first to have
concurred in the Relation, it ought again to be considered, whether they that
would establish it did not acquire much Authority, and procure many Advantages
thereby unto themselves; and that either of Honor, or Riches, the one being as
prevalent with the Vainglorious, as the other with the Covetous? The Nature of
Men being for the most part prone always to entertain such Beliefs as turn to
their own Benefit.

Testimonies Weak.
Furthermore, in my Opinion it is to be observed, That as it is not safe to
trust absolutely to any single or weak Testimony in Matters of great
Consequence; so will it be much more dangerous to frame new Doctrines or
Conclusions out of them, for directing of our selves in the whole Course of our
Life; since Error may be thus multiplied without end.

Of Miracles.
These Considerations therefore brought me at last to be more sparing in the
Belief of Miraculous Narrations, and especially for the Building any new
Doctrines upon them; since Impostors, such as Jannes and Jambres, have been
said to do Miracles, whose Egyptian Doctrines I yet should never believe. I
might say something also of Apollonius Tyanaeus and Simon Magus, who (however
they may be believed to have done Miracles) did yet not teach any Universal
Doctrine, to which Assent was given. Neither shall I insist upon the little
Credit given heretofore to the feigned Miracles or Revelations by Pagan Priests
among the more Judicious sort of the Gentiles.

Wherefore, it is no good Argument to say, That such a Man did Miracles, and
therefore I believe all he says: Since those things may seem Miraculous to my
weak Capacity, which appear not so to wiser Men. Besides, things may be done by
Natural Means, which some may mistake for Miracles and Conjuration; as all
Books of Chemistry and Natural Philosophy can testify: And upon this Vulgar
Ignorance it is (says Monsieur Naudaeus, in his Treatise of Magic) that the
most Ingenious and Learnedest Men in the World have been defamed as Conjurers
and Wizards, because their Accusers were Fools and Blockheads. Again, by
Confederacy, where one helps the other to abuse the People; of which kind,
Examples have been frequent, and so well known, that I shall omit troubling my
Reader or my self with them in so small a Treatise.

Of Prophecy and Prophets.
In like manner should their pretended Prophecies draw me as little to any New
Religion; since one shall hardly meet with a Prophecy delivered so clearly and
so perspicuously, as to mark out and distinguish from all others any Person or
Event in subsequent Times. For my part, as I could never yet esteem any thing
to be an undoubted Prophecy, which in the first place was not like a Picture,
(wherein it is not enough to describe or Paint one Member or Part of the Face
or Body, unless the Symetry and other Parts were together represented with the
outward Stature, Color, and Fashion:) so likewise I should not, much regard
the Exterior Form, if his Actions were not represented to future Times in such
manner, as the Prophecy might be like an History, wherein it is required that
the Time, Place, and Manner of all his Actions should be described so
particularly, as to distinguish the whole Course of his Life from all others.
And that therefore many of the doubtful and obscure Predictions that have been
attributed to diverse, who from thence have acquired the Names of Prophets, seem
to be little more than bold Conjectures, which might in some Age or other take
its Events: there being nothing, I will not say, likely or possible, but even
unlikely, and only not impossible, that in some Time, Place, or Manner will
not have its Effect and Fulfilling. Wherefore, if any Man has undertaken
heretofore, or shall yet in this Age undertake to Prophecy, upon what vain
ground soever, yet if he get that Credit among future Ages as to be thought a
Prophet, he will find those that shall apply his Words to some Action or Event
that did or will (in all likelihood) follow; which Motives made me as doubtful
of their Prophecies, as of such Miracles and Revelations I formerly mentioned.
Obsopaeus is said to have put forth Books which spoke plainer of Christ, than
the Prophets of the Old Testament did; which our Learned Critics have
nevertheless rejected as spurious.

The Heavenly Bodies had outward Worship given them from the Excellency of
their Natures; but the Heathen Priests had their chief Credit from their
Prophecies and Predictions: who contented not themselves with the persuading
the People that they had Revelations, unless they could persuade them further,
that they could foretell things to come, and so acquire to themselves the Name
of Prophets. The manner of Prediction among the Jews was by Dreams, Vrim, or
Prophets; and Readiness throwing off his Clothes, lying naked upon the Ground a
Day and a Night, and so Prophesied, 1 Samuel 19. and by the Witch of Endor, to
whom Saul had recourse in his Extremities, who desired her to raise up Samuel
to him, which she doing, Samuel appeared, and told Saul what should follow, 1 Samuel 28. The Vrim and Thummim were two Precious Stones so called, the one
Light, and the other Truth or Integrity; the one an Onyx or Sardonix, and the
other an Emrald; out of the vibration of whose Beauty, Oracles and Prophecies
were called and uttered: In imitation whereof, the Devil and Kelly together
deluded old Dr. Dee with their Angelical Stone (as they called it) in Queen
Elizabeth's time; if you will give Credit to the Record thereof, preserved in
the famous Cottonian Library, and since published in Print by Dr. Casaubon.
Varro says, That the Ancient Priests of Egypt (who were also Judges) wore upon
their Necks a great Emrald, called Truth. Some of the Rabbis attribute not so
much to the Stones, as to certain Writings under them.

Judgments made of future Events by remarquing the Configurations and
Operations of the Planets and Stars, as also Predictions made from Natural
Causes, are, without all question, not only lawful, but commendable, although
of little certainty: But the cunning Artists the Priests, who in Egypt were
anciently Astrologers, used to mingle with their Divinations, Lies of their own
Invention, whereby they acquired more than by their Truths. The word for
Divinations in general is Mantike, which Plato in Phaedro derives from Munike,
signifying furious or mad.

The difference between Prophets, and those that were in Ecstasies or Trances,
was this: The Prophets were said to run up and down raging and crying, whereas
the Extotekoi appearing devoid of Sense and Understanding, seemed little less
than dead, till they awaked out of their Trances; wherein also they remained so
long, that they had time enough to devise something which might delude the
People. By this kind of Imposture, Mahomet did often prevail, when he arose
from his Fits of the Falling Sickness. Also from these sorts of Raptures
anciently it may be supposed the Ethnic Narration of the Elyzian Fields, and
their Separate State of Souls after Death, together with their manner of Reward
and Punishment, were at first devised, and then vented to the People. Neither
have the Christian Times been without such Saints, (I mean not the true and
holy ones:) but some that pretending to Sanctity, have in their Ecstasies
(whether counterfeit, or not) feigned that they had seen Souls in Purgatory;
whereof the Legend will inform you more.

Nevertheless, It is observed, that the Souls of Men, having many more
Faculties than what the Representation of Worldly Objects can excite or call
up, and sometimes freeing themselves from their usual Employments, and the
Objects they meet with in this Life, ascend to the Contemplation and even
Vision of Divine Objects, making themselves thus capable of knowing not only
things past, but those that are to come: to which kind of Ecstasie, whether St.
Paul's Rapture into the third Heavens may be referred, I leave to others to
judge. In like manner, we read of diverse strange and incredible Ecstasies that
have happened to Men in this kind: as (not to mention our Modern Voyages, which
speak of Indians that in their Trances will discover what Ships are coming to
their Islands, and from what Ports, many Months before their Arrival;) the like
happened of old to Pamphilus the Son of Neocles, who (as Plato says) lay ten
days in a Trance, and afterward told Wonders. But to credit these things is
altogether matter of Faith, and not of Common Reason; from whence I cannot
recede, or build any new Doctrine upon such Reports; especially, when there is
no Divine Authority like the Scriptures for it, nor Original Attestation, that
the Prophecy was consigned unto us in those very Words wherein they are now
extant; and for the rest, that they are more obscure than that an
unquestionable Certainty may be built upon them. But herein I am content to let
every Man use his own Judgment, and therefore shall quit this Subject with one
Observation, which is, That by reading Mother Shiptons Prophecies when we are
Boys, we do the better relish Nostredamus when we are Men: especially since
every vainglorious Expositor of such Prophecies looks upon himself as little
less than a Minor-Prophet.

Now All these Points having been for a long time debated and examined by me,
to the best of my Understanding, I did think fit the rather to study and
inquire out those Common Principles of Religion I could any where meet with;
only before I undertook this great Task, I thought it not amiss to advise upon
what Grounds the Controverted Points amongst them did move. But, as here I
observed nothing but matter of Faith, or Belief concerning Things past,
questioned in any Age or Country; so did I the more easily pass by it, to come
to those Articles which were grounded not only upon Reason and Universal
Consent of Religions, but are (I believe) extant and operative in the Hearts of
all Men, which are not prepossessed and obstructed with erroneous Doctrines,
and (I am sure) most deeply engraven in mine. Which being done, I thought it my
Duty to inquire, Whether by an apt Connection of the Parts thereof, I might fix
so solid a Foundation, that I might repose thereon, as the first and principal
Ground of all Religious Worship.

The Articles which I propose, are Five in number; and the same which the great
Oracle and Commander of his Time, for Wit, Learning, and Courage, tam Marti
quam Mercurio, the the Lord Herbert, Baron of Cherbury, delivered; and which (I
am confident) are so Catholic or Universal, that all the Religions that ever
were, are, or (I believe) ever shall be, did, do, and will embrace them. The
Articles are these.

The Five Catholic or Universal Articles of Religion.
I. That there is One only Supreme God. II. That He chiefly is to be
Worshipped. III. That Virtue, Goodness, and Piety, accompanied with Faith in,
and Love to God, are the best ways of Worshipping Him. IV. That we should
repent of our Sins from the bottom of our Hearts, and turn to the Right Way. V.
And lastly, That there is a Reward and Punishment after this Life.
Now of each of these in particular.

First Article, Of One God.
As to the First Article: Tho diverse Godheads or Divine Natures were celebrated
or worshipped in several Ages or Countries throughout the World, yet there is
no Agreement or Consent, but only concerning One Supreme God, under the
Attributes of Optimus and Maximus; the one supposing his Providence, the other
his Power, in the highest degree and extention: and both these together
inferring his Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, and the rest. Thus the Heathens bestowed
several Names upon the Deity, according to the several Parts of the Universe;
calling him, in the Starry Heaven and Ether, Jupiter; in the Air, Juno; in the
Winds, Aeolus; in the Sea, Neptune; in the Earth and Subterraneous Parts,
Pluto; in Learning, Knowledge, and Invention, Mercury, Minerva, and the Muses;
in War, Mars; in Pleasure, Venus; in Corn and the Production of Fruits of the
Earth, Ceres; in Wine, Bacchus; and the like. Under which several Appellations
were signified only the various Operations of the One Immense God: which makes
Minutius well observe, That Qui Jovem principem volunt, falluntur in nomine,
sed de una Potestate consentiunt.

Second Article, That God is to be Worshipped.
As to the Second Article; Tho diverse other Deities, Godheads, or Divine
Natures, have been celebrated or worshipped more or less, in some inferior or
subordinate kind; yet there is no Agreement or Universal Consent concerning the
Worship of any other than the Supreme God; in whom, Authors generally say, all
other Godheads or Divine Natures are worshipped.

Third Article, How God is to be Worshipped.
As to the Third Article: Tho diverse Rites, Mysteries, and Sacra's, (as the
Romans call them)* were introduced to the Worship of the Supreme God; yet that
there is no Universal Consent or Agreement concerning them, but that a pure and
untainted Mind, (as being conscious in it self of no Unworthiness) together
with a Virtuous and Pious Life, (testified by the Expressions of Goodness and
Charity to all Men) and accompanied with Love, Faith, and Hope in God, were
undoubted ways of Serving him: sit pura mente colendus. The Ancient Jews and
Modern Christians have many Rites and Ceremonies common with the Gentiles;
which is more than vulgar Divines do imagine. Most of the Jewish Laws and Rites
were practiced indifferently among the Heathens, or at least did not much vary
from them, as the diligent Searchers into Antiquity well know. The Gentiles, as
well as the Jews, held the most substantial Parts of Moses his Doctrine,
without differing in much more than certain particular Laws, more proper for
that Country than any other; as, their not eating Swines Flesh, and making
Adultery Death. If it be said, That that Precept in the Decalogue (against
Graven Images) was particular to the Jews; It will be found a Mistake: for that
the Persians, and otheir neighboring Nations, concurred therein, as well as
the Jews; as also in most of their other Commandments: Thus Feriari Deo is
accounted a kind of keeping a Sabbath, etc. amongst the Heathens: And St.
Austin (lib. 20. chapter 19. against Faustus) says, That the Gentiles were not so
grievously lapsed into the Worship of False Gods, but that they retained the
Opinion of One True God, from whom every Nature whatsoever is derived. Finally,
Whatsoever tends to Man's Perfection, is eminently and primarily in God: But the
Notions of Providence, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, Love, etc. tend to his
Perfection; Ergo, Hence the Gentiles took their Rise from themselves, as
believing that they were Gods Children, and made after his Image.

Fourth Article, Of Repentance and Sacrifices.
As to the Fourth Article: Tho Sacrifices for the abolishing of Sin of more
than one sort, as also Expiations, Lustrations, and diverse other Rites invented
by the Sacerdotal Order, were used for the purging of Men from Sin; yet was
there no Universal Consent or Agreement concerning them. But that Repentance is
a certain Sign of Gods Spirit working in us, and the only Remedy for Sin that
is declared publicly to all Mankind, and the most rational way to return to
God and Virtue, is by Universal Consent established every where, without so
much as the least Contradiction. Not that I think God's Justice can be
satisfied by mere Repentance, and turning to a good Life; but that a further
Satisfaction or Reparation for our Offenses against the Divine Majesty. is
required. Yet as there is no Universal Agreement concerning the Means how this
is effected, (it being of greater Scrutiny than Man's Reason can attain unto) so
I shall in part wave this Discourse; and the rather, for that many do not see
why (according to the ordinary Rules of Justice) God should punish one Man for
the Sins of another: or, to go further, for that Frailty of our own Nature,
which without our Consent was bestowed upon us? To which, give me leave to add
these few Remarques. 1. Decipimur specie recti: We have not a true Judgment of
of Good and Evil.
Good and Bad; esteeming many things Evil, which in themselves are not so. An
History drawn in a Picture may have in it Representations of Battles,
Slaughters, Drunkards, Harlots, and Firing of Cities, Shipwracks, or the like;
and yet may be as lovely a Piece of Painting, as if it represented an Assembly
of Divines: And so, perhaps, in a Natural Consideration, may be thought an Age
that produces such Actions, as well as if it brought forth none but Examples of
Virtue 2. We denominate Good and Evil only from our particular Interest; so
that perhaps our Virtues may prove but False Money, of no intrinsic Value,
although it bear the Stamp of our Approbation upon it. 3. A Wellbeing is the
primary Appetite of Nature in all things; and so as we judge any thing more or
less agreeing or contrary thereto, so are we more or less inclining or averse
thereto: whereupon our Will, either for or against any thing, to do or forbear
any thing, does always follow our Judgment; which Judgment is framed by several
things, viz. the Temper of our Brain, and our Education, together with the
various Encounters, Successes, and Experiments in the Course of our Lives: all
which (it is manifest) are not in our own power, but proceeds from the Temper
of our Parents, the Diet, Climate, and Customs of our Country, with diversity
of Occurrents and Conjunctures of the Times; which are produced with opportune
Interventions of one another, in a continued Series of God's Providence in the
disposal of them, and of such Idea's as he thereby sets before our Fancy. It Is
apparent that he does thereby lead and guide all our Thoughts, Words, and
Actions; Of Predestination and Free will.
yet not by any violent Protrusion, but by our own Consent, either by way of
Delight, or as to the lesser Evil; and ever by Opinion, whether true or
erroneous. So that our Consent not being violated, but led on by our own
Choice, we justly become liable to Praise or Blame, and yet are in all our Ways
under the Infallible Conduct of God. 4. As our Body is a Portion of the Body of
the World, so is our Spirit, which guides and acts us, a Beam of the Spirit of
God; which also, tho in its own Nature clear, yet is that Clearness in us more
or less, according to our Temper whereinto it shines: Thus we find our selves
of different Fancies, when we are Phlegmatic, or when our Blood is Black and
Gross, from what we are when our Blood and Brain is Pure and Thin; and
accordingly our Judgment grows more or less perspicacious and rectified; and by
consequence the Inclinations of our Will better or worse: yet therein no
violence is offered us. Spiritus in Nobis non manet in Identitate, sed recens
ingeritur, per renovationem continuam, sicut flamma, sed velociore transitu,
quia res est spiritualior. Nos enim quotidie facti sumus ex iis quae transeunt
in nos: morimur and renascimur quotidie, ^eque iidem hodie and heri sumus: and
personam quam transeuntem non sentimus, tandem pertransisse agnoscimus. Nulla
est autem rerum transitio in nos nisi per viam Alimenti: Omne Alimentum
respectu Alimentandi est consimile and debilius: Alimentantis corpus succrescit
nobis in corpus; spiritus in spiritu: non tamen proportio utriusque fit nobis
ad proportionem cibi and potus, aut aeris, nisi a nobis been superantur; aliter
etenim non alunt, ingesta, sed opprimunt si fortiora sunt, corrumpunt si
dissimilia, idque plus minusve pro gradu in utroque: Ideoque quo melius res
procedat multa fieri oportet: primum prudens electio and moderatio eorum, quae
ingerenda sunt; and deinceps debita praeparatio per artem, ut nobis similiora
and debiliora fiant: ex part nostri praecipuum est exercitium frequens, sed
modicum, quo calor naturalis vigeat. Again, The Alteration of our Judgment from
outward Occurrences is also of great importance to present us with new Idea's,
which divert us this way or that way, and so into Mischief or Preservation, yet
always by our own election: As for example, A Man going to London, perhaps
finding the way dirty, leaves it, and takes into a Bie way, whereby he misses
Thieves, who were then on the Road, although he knew not of them; or, perhaps,
lights upon another Mischance in this Way, which he had missed in the other:
Here is God's Conduct of him, either to his Good or Harm, leading him by that
Idea of avoiding Dirt, yet without Compulsion, and by his Free Election;
wherefore he cannot complain but of himself: Yet God did undoubtedly from all
Eternity both foresee and decree this Election, with the Event which should
follow thereon. For thus God does ever manage us by the Temper of our Body,
with his inoperating Spirit therein; and by meeting us from without in such
Encounters and Occurrences, as will infallibly carry us by our own Choice into
such things as from all Eternity he had ordained. 5. Some will here object,
That if God gives us to will or to refuse, and that it were not in our own
power to will or to refuse, then how could we be praised or punished for ought
we do, or neglect to do? To which I answer, Just as well as it befalls us for
having Flesh and Blood: Our having Flesh and Blood makes us subject to much
Pain and Pleasure; and yet this our Body of Flesh and Blood was given us of
God, when we had no power to refuse it: And if we put our Finger or any Living
Creature by force into the Fire, it. will smart and suffer as much, as if it
had gone in by its own desire; for the ground of its suffering is not in the
being willing, or unwilling, but in its disagreeableness to Fire. And so when a
Man takes into debauched intemperate Courses, he falls into Diseases; and
whether God or himself drive him, that is not the Point; the true Cause is, the
venomous and oppressive Humors which by these Courses he puts into his Body,
destructive to its own Nature. 6. And lastly, It was well said of one, who
having contrived and put in execution a great and politic Business, and being
asked, Whether it was his own Care, or Divine Providence, that had brought this
great Work to pass? he replied, Fuit certe Providentia. Divina, sed quae per me
transiit. For if we should see a Sunbeam in at a Hole enlightening a dark Room,
'twould be a very shallow Conception, to suppose that this Beam did move or
enlighten one way or other, otherwise than as it self was continually
enlightened and carried about by its Original the Sun, from whom it can never be
separated, nor have any Virtue apart: And the very same Relation and Condition
has each particular Man's Spirit with the Spirit of God. Dei opus sumus nos
parentibus instrumentis; actionesque nostrae Dei sunt opera instrumentis nobis,
sed per electionem nostram agentibus: Ista vero electio per aptas conjuncturas
and Ideas adeo immissas invitatur and regitur: ideoque nos Creatureae sumus
momentaneae aeterni Dei apparitiones, quas tantum terris ostendunt fata, nec
ultra esse sinunt: veluti effigies in Auleis. This (...), or Divinum aliquid,
is that which actuates all; but our Capacity not being able to discern it,
makes us fasten either upon Elementary Qualities, as Hippocrates and Galen do;
or upon Geometrical Proportions, as the Modern Descartes does. But
notwithstanding we are thus to seek, yet the most probable Conjecture of the
Anima Mundi's Operation, is, That per Condensationem and Rarefactionem parts
Mundi Corporeoe fiunt Spiritus, and spirituales fiunt corpora, sicque aeterne
retro aguntur omnia; and cum Microcosmus a Mundo trahit, vivit Microcosmus: cum
Mundus a Microcosmo trahit, deficit Microcosmus. But now to conclude my
Remarques upon this Fourth Article, Of Repentance.
of Repentance; give me leave to offer these few Considerations following,
which may perhaps not be impertinent for the directing of us in this difficult
Point. First, That he that judges Man, is his Father, and does look on him as
a frail Creature, obnoxious to Sin. Secondly, That he generally finds Men sin
rather out of this Frailty, than out of any desire to offend his Divine
Majesty. Thirdly, That if Man had been made inwardly prone to sin, and yet
destitute of all inward Means to return to him again, he had been not only
remediless in himself, but more miserable than it could be supposed an Infinite
Goodness did at first create, and does still perpetuate Humane kind. Fourthly,
That Man can do no more on his part, for the satisfying of Divine Justice, than
to be heartily sorry and repent him of his Sins, as well as to endeavor
through his Grace to return to the Right way, from which through his
Transgression he had erred: Or if this did not suffice for the making of his
Peace, that the Supreme God, by inflicting some Temporal Punishment in this
Life, might satisfy his own Justice. Fifthly, and lastly, That if Temporal
Punishment in this Life were too little for the Sin committed, he might yet
inflict a greater Punishment hereafter in the other Life, however, without
giving eternal Damnation to those, who (if not for the love of Goodness) yet at
least upon sense of Punishment, would not sin eternally. Notwithstanding, since
these things may again be controverted, I shall insist only upon this one
universally acknowledged Proposition, viz. That Repentance is the only known
and public Means which on our part is required for satisfying the Divine
Justice, and returning to the Right way of serving God.

Of Reward and Punishment after Death.
As to the Fifth and last Article, Of a Future Reward or Punishment: Tho
concerning the Place, Quantity, Quality, Manner, or Duration of Reward or
Punishment after this Life, there is no universal Consent or Agreement; yet
that the Souls of Pious, Virtuous, and Good Men enjoy a better State after this
Life, and Vicious Wicked Men a worse, is universally acknowledged by all
Religions, hardly any of the Indians excepted; it being congruous to Reason,
and the Notions we have of Divine Justice, that Good Men (especially those who
were afflicted in this Life) should receive their Reward hereafter, as well as
that Wicked Men (who were happy here) should have in the next World condign
Punishment. Which I say, because there is no other Universal Rule, whereby to
guide our Belief concerning God's Justice hereafter; but that his Punishment is
proportionable to the Offense: whilst Reward passing all Proportion is given to
us, not only according to his acceptance of our pious Endeavors and Actions,
but also according to the Extent and Latitude of his Infinite Goodness and
Mercy, in Creating, Redeeming, and Preserving us.

Now these Five Points may be matter of great Joy to all Men; since hereby they
may perceive, that the Universal Providence of God has proceeded thus far in
giving Means for Salvation to all Mankind, and therein declared himself
Communis Pater. Neither can I imagine so much as any one Article more in Common
Reason, that could make Man better, or more pious, when the aforesaid Five
Articles were rightly explicated and observed.

Merits and Satisfaction of others.
I did perceive indeed diverse Points added hereunto, which gave much ease and
relaxation to Men's Minds, while they were taught to trust chiefly to the Merits
and Satisfaction of others, for the obtaining of their Everlasting Happiness;
so that although the Doctrine of Good Works and Repentance were seriously
inculcated into Men's Minds, yet it may be found, that they did not usually so
much fix themselves there, as on the aforesaid Satisfaction; while they said,
all their Works were corrupt and abominable, and that (of themselves) they
could not so much as think a good Thought; and consequently pretended to Heaven
out of an Implicit Faith and Belief that this Business was done to their
Hands, rather than out of those Works they seemed so much to disclaim: Like two
Apprentices, both of equal Parts, and bound to the same Master and Trade; when,
nevertheless, one of them, for want of any other Relief, depending wholly upon
his Trade, follows it diligently, and grows vastly Rich; whereas the other (his
Fellow-Prentice) having an Expectation of some Paternal Estate of Inheritance,
does so much depend thereon, as makes him not only neglect his Trade, but fall
into those vicious Courses, as makes him outrun his Estate before he has it:
And the contrary is rarely seen, tho not impossible.

Predestination and Election.
Again, I did find in others a Doctrine of Predestination so taught, that Men
did chiefly trust to God's Eternal Election of them before all Worlds: For, as
they said, there was a certain Mass, from which God (out of his good Pleasure)
chose some, and reprobated others. And these Men I noted to be rather
inquisitive (through the help of their Teachers) whether they were of the
Number of the Elect, than studious to work out their Salvation by the good
Degrees above related: So that, although their Teachers did indeed exhort them
to a Good Life and Repentance, no less than the former, yet as Men derived not
the next Causes of their Salvation from their own good Endeavors or Actions,
so much as from the Secret Counsels of God; so they commonly intermitted much
of their proper Duties, as believing either they could not fall grievously, or
at least that such Remedies are provided for them, as they should not finally
perish; From whence one may observe, that Virtue has suffered no small
Detriment thereby.

Merit by Good Works.
Notwithstanding all which, I would not have Men conceive, that they could by
their Good Works merit any thing of God, (any more than a Subject of England
does of the King, by his forbearing to commit Felony or Treason) but that I
hope Men may assure themselves, that when really they do the best they can, it
were better to trust God's Infinite Mercy for the acceptance of those Good
Works, joined with Faith in and Love to God, than to draw Conclusions of the
Certainty of their Salvation from those secret and hidden Counsels of the Great
God, which no Power of Man can reach unto.

Remission of Sins.
Moreover, I found others, who, though they did not say they could tell who
were Predestined, but, in stead thereof, recommended Good Works, as the most
effectual Means on our Parts for the coming to God, did yet otherwise teach
diverse things, which, being not rightly understood, derogated not a little from
the Severity of Virtue: For, (as they said) they had Power to remit Sins; and
this Remission (again) was granted upon no very difficult Terms: Men did not
fear to return to Sin again, when they found Pardon so easy. Which Abuse, as
also some of those abovementioned, I conceive rather to proceed from the
proneness of Men to Sin, than from the Doctrine of their Priests and Teachers.
I could enlarge my self much upon this Argument, but that I am unwilling to
transgress my Bounds, especially since I believe my self sufficiently
understood. Besides, I find I cannot speak more of these several Doctrines,
without entering into Controversies, and making use of those Polemical Weapons,
and engaging into such a Spiritual Warfare, which as a Laick I mean never to
trouble my self with. However, I hope I may so far express my self, as to wish
all those Points that concern Pardon and Forgiveness of Sins, in any
extraordinary way, (on what Side soever) may be warily taught, and on such
Terms, that upon what Promise or Comfortable Doctrine soever presented to
Mankind, nothing may be detracted from that Virtue and Goodness which ought to
be the perpetual Exercise of our Life; lest occasion be given to make Men more
ready and bold to sin again: since while Men attend chiefly to those outward
Helps or Remedies, they usually comply not so entirely with their proper Duties.

Now these Five Articles being thus declared, which, if Men did embrace, would
alone assert a Catholic Church; and it being likewise demonstrated how
Necessary it is for every Man to begin there, before he descend to the whole
Context or Bulk of any one Religion, which he may find controverted in diverse
Ages and Countries; I shall now deliver the Reasons for which I principally
embraced them.

First, Because there is no other open and manifest Way extant to Mankind,
whereby it is possible to establish God's Universal Providence, which yet is
his highest Attribute.

Secondly, That I find nothing can be added to them, which will make a Man
really more virtuous and good, than the aforesaid Five Articles or Points, when
they are sufficiently inculcated in Men's Hearts.

Thirdly, That however the Doctrines added thereto were indeed comfortable and
full of Promise to those who believe them; yet, since I observed in general,
that Men took occasion thereby to grow more bold in Sinning, I began to doubt
whether they did not derogate from the Severity of Virtue: And besides, I found
that those Points were more controverted, than that the Age of any one Man
could untie and dissolve the Intricacies in them.

Fourthly, That I found all Mysteries, Sacraments, and Revelations, tended
chiefly to the Establishment of these Five Articles, as being at least the
Principal End for the Which those Rites were ordained.

Fifthly, and lastly, That I thought the doing some good Deed, speaking some
good Word, or thinking some good Thought, were more necessary Exercises of my
Life, than that I should omit them for any Consideration whatsoever.

Having thus therefore settled these Five Points, as Fundamental, and together
demonstrated, that we ought to give them the first place in our Religion; I
shall come to that Supplemental Part, called Faith, which Word (as I find among
Authors) is used in two diverse Senses, and thus distinguished: First, As it is
understood to be a firm assent given to Things past, upon the Credit and
Authority of others. And, secondly, As it is taken for a Faculty of the Soul,
laying hold and fixing it self on God's Providence and Goodness hereafter, if
we do the best we can.

Where we must observe; That as the first Faith has its next or most immediate
Testimoney from Man, and consequently is true or false, as they who first
affirmed it were: So the second Faith is by all Churches held necessary to be
used as the best means for the uniting of our Souls with God, when true Piety
and a Good Life do concur; insomuch as I am confident this latter kind of Faith
may be found in good Men, tho no Tradition of former times ever come to their
Knowledge: Whereas the other Faith, depending chiefly on Revelations, Miracles,
and Prophecies, has in it many Difficulties, as I have said before, and is not
only controverted among the stricter Proselytes of it, but in a manner rejected
by those Nations among whom other Faiths have been taught by their Lawgivers;
for all Faiths have been shaken, but those only which stand upon the Basis of
Common Reason.

Notwithstanding all which, as I thought, it concerned me, among those several
and miraculous Traditions, (which were not impossible to have been true, if God
so pleased,) not to distrust and doubt of all, Wherefore I applied my self
chiefly to the Christian Faith contained in the Holy Bible, as having in it
more exact Precepts for the Teaching us a good life and repentance, than any
other Book whatsoever that I could meet with: and besides I found my self
(through Gods Providence) born in the Christian Church, and instructed even
from my Infancy in the Holy Doctrines drawn from thence. But as together I
observed many things taught in the said Church, which were not only vehemently
opposed by other Christian Churches, but also repudiated in their chief parts
among other Nations: So, I found no such solid Foundation to build this my
Faith upon, as the Authority in general of the Christian Church; resolving
according to the saying of a Learned Father, That those things I never had
known without the Church, I never had believed without it. Neither did the
Controversies among them much move me, since being a mere Laick, I had neither
Will nor Leisure to engage my self in the clearing of those doubts; the
scruples of those variously agitated disputes by Men equally Learned, being of
such intricacy, that I saw more and more might be said about them, than that I
should presume to determine any thing by the Judgment of the best Authors I
could peruse on either side: So that for my final resolution, I thought the
best grounds of my Faith ought to be taken from those points which were piously
assented to by all Christians, and might aptly consist with my aforementioned
Five Articles; But for the disputes and controversies of Learned Men, to lay
them aside, until they were agreed amongst themselves; and in the mean while to
attend a good life, and repentance, assuring my self, that in the quality of a
Laick or Secular Person, my time was better employed so, than in the
inexplicable subtleties of the Schoolmen. To conclude, I embraced the five
Catholic Articles for the Reasons above mentioned; from whence coming to the
Doctrines of Faith, I believed piously, upon the reverend Authority of the
Church, that which was unanimously taught by them, without any contradictions:
All which I have here set down, with no intention to scandalize any, but only
to give a Reason as well of those Points which may be known, as of those which
are already believed in the Christian Religion: And also to induce men by these
Principles to the Practice of a good life, and blessed concord among
themselves; since having jointly received these five Catholic Points, there
will be less occasion of hate and dissension about the rest: So that the
different Opinions amongst them might be argued with less violence and passion,
the Points wherein they are agreed being greater bonds of Love and Amity among
them, than that they should be dissolved on any lesser occasion. And certainly,
unless the Method I have here proposed be effectual to this purpose, I see no
hope that any good Reconciliation can follow among the Principal Sects of the
Christian Religion; since the one affirming the Scripture to be the sole Judge
of Controversies, and the other saying that the Church alone should determine
them, they seem like persons in variance, who disagreeing about their
Arbitrators or Judges, are hopeless that the business in Question between them
should ever come to a just Trial, and find an indifferent or equal Decision.
Now upon all that has been said, give me leave to raise these few Queries, and
so conclude.

Queries proving the validity of the five Articles.
1. Whether there be any True God, but he that uses Universal Providence
concerning the means of coming to him?

2. Whether these means appear universally otherwise, than in our aforesaid
five Catholic Articles?

3. Whether any thing can be added to these Five Principles, that may tend to
make a Man more honest, virtuous, or a better Man?

4. Whether any things that are added to these Five Principles from the
Doctrine of Faith, be not uncertain in their Original?

5. Supposing the Originals true, Whether yet they be not uncertain in their
Explications, so that unless a Man read all Authors, speak with all Learned
Men, and know all Languages, it be not impossible to come to a clear Solution
of all Doubts?

6. Supposing all true in their Originals, and in their Explications, Whether
yet they be so good for the instructing of Mankind, that bring Pardon of Sin
upon such easy Terms, as to believe the Business is done to our Hands? And,

7. Whether this Doctrine does not derogate from Virtue and Goodness, whilst
our best Actions are represented as Imperfect and Sinful, and that it is
impossible to keep the Ten Commandments, so as God will accept our Actions,
doing the best we can?

8. Whether speaking good Words, thinking good Thoughts, and doing good
Actions, be not the just Exercise of a Man's Life? Or that without embracing of
the foresaid Five Principles or Fundamentals, it be possible to keep Peace
among Men, that God may be well served?

9. Whether the foresaid Five Principles do not best agree with the Precepts
given in the Ten Commandments, and with the Two Precepts of Jesus Christ, viz.
To love God above all, and our Neighbor as our selves? As well as with the
Words of St. Peter, That in every Nation he which fears God, and works
Righteousness, is accepted of God?

10. Whether the Doctrine of Faith can by Humane Reason be supposed or granted
to be Infallible, unless we are infallibly assured, that those who teach this
Doctrine do know the Secret Counsels of God?

11. Whether all things in the Scriptures, (besides the Moral Part, which
agrees with our Five Principles) such as Prophecy, Miracles, and Revelations
depending on the History, may not be so far examined, as to be made appear by
what Authority they are or may be received?

12. Whether in Humane Reason any one may or ought to be convinced by one
single Testimony, so far as to believe things contrary to, or besides Reason?

13. And lastly, Whether, if it were granted they had Revelations, I am obliged
to accept of another Revelation for the Ground of my Faith? Especially if it
does any ways oppose these Five Articles, that are grounded upon the Law of
Nature, The Law of Nature unalterable.
which is God's universal Magna Charta, Enacted by the All-wise and Supreme
Being from the beginning of the World, and therefore not to be destroyed or
altered by every whiffling Proclamation of an Enthusiast.

Finally, Submitting this Discourse to my Impartial and Judicious Reader, I
shall conclude with the Saying of Justin Martyr, p. 83. (...), etc. That all
those who lived according to the Rule of Reason, were Christians,
notwithstanding that they might have been accounted as Atheists: such as, among
the Greeks, were Socrates, Heraclitus, and the like; and among the Barbarians,
Abraham and Azarias: For all those who lived, or do now live, according to the
Rule of Reason, are Christians, and in an assured quiet condition. Apol. cont.
Tryph.

FINIS.

