BLUNDEL the Jesuit's Letter of Intelligence, to his Friends the Jesuits at
Cambray, taken about him when he was Apprehended at Lambeth, on Monday the
23th. of June 1679.
To Madam Katharine Hall in Cambray.
My Dr. C. Issss. A. Maria.
ON the Thirteenth of June being Friday, Mr. Whitebread. Mr. Harcourt, Mr,
Turner, Fenwick and Gaven of the Society, and Mr. Corker were brought to the
Bar in the Old Bailey, Mr. Corker moved the Court for a longer time being only
warned the night before, whereas the other Prisoners had eight days warning to
prepare themselves, whereupon he was remanded to Prison till the next day then
was the Indictment read against the five above named Jesuits, for conspiring
the Kings death, Subversion of Government and Protestant Religion then Mr. Oats
swore that on the 24th. of April there was a consult held in London, where the
death of the King was conspired, and that he carried this Resolve from the one
to the other, for their subscribing, and swore particular circumstances against
each: to corroberate this Testimony, other Witnesses Bedlow, Prance, Dugdale
and Chetwin came in with overtures to the Matter sworn by Oats, then did the
Prisoners (after a most solemn and Religious protestation of their Innocence
and ignorance of any conspiracy against his Majesty) desire that their
witnesses might be heard, which could demonstrate that Mr. Oats was actually
at S. Omers all the whole time, but the Judge Scroggs asked each witness as he
did appear, of what Religion he was, and upon answer that he was a Roman
Catholic, the whole Court gave a shout of laughter, then the Judge would say
to them; well, what have you been taught to say, and by many scoffing questions
(which moved the Court to frequent laughter) he did endeavor to take off the
credibility of the witnesses; then the Butler, Tailor, and Gardener of St.
Omers, offered to swear that they saw Mr. Oats all the time at St. Omers, when
he swore he was at London, after that the Prisoners at the Bar produced
sixteen witnesses more that proved Mr. Oats for sworn in Mr. Irelands Trial,
because he was in Shropshire, when he attested he was in London, then did Gaven
one of the Prisoners with a great deal of clearness and eloquence and with a
cheerful countenance draw up their justification, showing the face of their
Evidence, and how fully their witnesses had proved Mr. Oats purjured. Then he
did lay open the improbability of such a Plott, and how unlikely Mr. Oats
should be entrusted in delivering Commissions to persons of Honor, and
Estates, whom he never (as he acknowledged) had seen before or since, this was
delivered by Mr. Gawen with a countenance wholly unconcerned, and in a voice
very audible, and largely and pertinently expressed, the Judge was incensed at
this speech which he often interrupted him, but Gaven still urged my Lord, I
plead now for my Life, and for that which is dearer to me then life, the honor
of my Religion, therefore I beseech you have a little patience with me.

After this Plea of Mr. Gavens the Judge made his Arrayne to the Jury telling
them that what the Prisoners had brought was only the bare assertions of boys,
who were taught it as a point of their Religion, to lie for the honor of their
Religion, whereas Mr. Oats Mr. Bedlow and others were upon their Oaths, and if
Oaths were not to be taken no Courts could subsist. Then Mr. Oats brought in
four Witnesses which he had kept in reserve, an old Parson in his Canonical
Gown, an old Dominican Priest: Proh dolor and pudor! and two women that swore
they saw Mr. Oats in the beginning of May 1678. at this the whole Court gave a
shout of laughter and hallow, that for almost a quarter the Cryers could not
still them; never was Bear-bayting more rude and boisterous then this Trial:
Upon this the Judge dismissed the Jury, to consider and bring in their Verdicts,
who after half an hours absence brought in the five Prisoners at the Bar all
Guilty of High Treason; thereupon the whole Court clapped their hands and gave a
great hallow, it being now eight at night, the Court adjourned till next day at
seven a Clock which was Saturday, I was present from five in the morning till
the Court broke up, the Prisoners componed themselves most Apostolically at the
Bar, not the least passion or alteration appeared in them, at the invectives
of the Judge, or at the clamours of the people, but made a clear and candid
defense, with a cheerful and unconcerned countenance, (as a stander by said) if
they had been a Jury of Turk they had been quitted, I was with them both
before and after their Trial, and had the Honor to be in my Function
serviceable to them, which I look upon as that God favored me in, I hope for
my future good: Next day Mr. Langhorn a Lawyer, Sir George Wakeman, Mr. Cooker,
Mr. Marsh, Mr. Rumbly, the three last Benedictines, were brought to the Bar,
where the Indictment being read against them for conspiring the King's Death
etc. they pleaded all not guilty, then was Langhorn first tried, whose Trial
held so long, that they had no time to Try the other four, and the Commission
by which they sat, expiring that day, the Judge adjorned the Trial of the
other 4 till the 14th of July, and then the Judge commanded the Keeper to bring
the five Jesuits, whom with Langhorn were Sentenced to be Hanged, Drawn and
Quartered, Mr. Corker and Mr. Marsh are close Prisoners, and have been so this
eight months, with whom I have been, God has fitted and is still fitting them
as sacrifices for himself, they are very well disposed and resigned to God's
holy will, Mr. Rumbly has the Liberty of the Prison, with whom is Mr. Eskett,
all cheerful and expect the good hour; On Thursday the day before the five
Jesuits were Executed, my Lord Shaftsbury was with Turner and Gaven, promising
the Kings Pardon if they would acknowledge the Conspiracy, Mr. Gaven answered
he would not murder his Soul to save his Body, for he must acknowledge what he
knew not, and what he did believe was not.

On Friday the 20th. of June Mr. Whitebread upon one Sledge with Mr. Harcourt,
Mr. Turner and Mr. Gaven upon another Sledge, Mr. Fenwick upon a Sledge by
himself, were drawn from Newgate to Tiburn, Mr. Langhorn is for a time
Repreived and promised Pardon, if he will (as it is Reported) discover the
Estates of the Jesuits, he was their Lawyer it is certain, my Lord Shaftsbury
has been often with him.

In the way they comported themselves seriously and cheerfully, Mr. Gaven had
smug'd himself up as if he had been going to a Wedding; when they arrived at
Tiburn they each made a Speech, first, all averring their ignorance of any
Plott against His Majesty, secondly, pardoning their Accusers, thirdly, heartily
p^aying for them.

But Mr. Gaven in his Speech made an Act of Contrition which was much liked by
all, for he was an excellent Preacher: then they all betook themselves to
Meditation, for more then a good quarter, the multitude was great, yet there
was a profound silence, and their most Religious comportment has wonderfully
allayed the fury of the People; when they had ended their Prayers, and the
Ropes were about their necks there came an Horseman in full speed from White
Hall, crying as he Rode, a Pardon, a Pardon, so with difficulty he made through
the Press to the Sheriff, who was under the Gallows to see Execution performed;
then was the Pardon read, which expressed, How the King most graciously and out
of his inclination to Clemency had granted them their lives, which by Treason
they had forfeited, upon condition they would acknowledge the Conspiracy and
lay open what they knew thereof. But they all thanked his Majesty for his
inclination of mercy toward them, but as to any Conspiracy they knew of none
much less are guilty of any, so they could not accept of any Pardon upon those
conditions, after a little Recollection the Cart was driven away, after they
were dead they were Quartered, but their Quarters were given to their friends,
Sanguis Martyrum sit semen Ecclesiae.

I sent to you an account of Mr. Puckerings death, and will tell you what may
happen, but I know not if they come to you, you may cover your Letter to me,
for Mrs. (...) at my Lady Drummonds in Queen street, London.


Printed in the year 1672.


