portrait of Charles II over royal coat of arms Carolus Secundus Dei Gratia
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE F. H. van Houe fec.


document title embellished by images of battle CLAVSTRVM REGALE RESERATVM or
The Kings Concealment at Trent: By A. W. In vmbra alarm tuarum Sperabo donec
trans eat miquitas
London Printed for Henry Brom.

F. H. Van. Houe. Sculp:



BOSCOBEL: OR THE Complete History Of His Sacred MAJESTY'S Most Miraculous
Preservation After the Battle of Worcester, 3 Sept. 1651.

^^troduced by an exact Relation of that Battle; and Illustrated with a Map of
the City.

The Third Edition with Addition.

JOEL 1. 2. Hear this ye Old men, and give ear all ye Inhabitants of the (...):
Has this been in your days, or in the days of your Fathers?

LONDON: ^rinted by M. Clark, and to be sold by H. Brom and C. Harper, at
their Shops in S. Paul's Churchyard and Fleetstreet. 1680.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
SIR,
AMong the many Addresses, which every day offers Your Sacred Majesty, This
humbly hopes Your particular graci^us Acceptance; since it has no other am^tion
than faithfully to represent to Your Majesty, and, by Your Royal permission, ^
all the world, the History of those mi^culous Providence that preserved You ^
the Battle of Worcester, concealed You ^ the Wilderness at Boscobel, and led
You ^n Your way toward a Land, where ^ou might safely expect the returning
faours of Heaven, which now, after so long ^ trial, has graciously heard our
Prayers, ^d abundantly crowned Your Patience.

And, as in the conduct of a great part o^ this greatest Affair, it pleased God
(the more to endear his Mercies (to mak^ choice of many very little, though fit
Instruments: So has my weakness, by thi^ happy President, been encouraged to
hop^ it not unsuitable for me to relate, wha^ the wisest King thought proper
for the^ to act; wherein yet I humbly beg Yo^ Majesty's pardon, being conscious
to m^ self of my utter incapacity to express, e^ther Your unparalled Valor
in the da^ of Contending, or (which is a virtue fa^less usual for Kings) Your
strong and eve^ Mind in the time of Your Sufferings.

From which sublime Endowments ^ Your most Heroic Majesty I derive the^
comforts to my self; That whoever u^dertakes to reach at Your Perfections must
fall short as well as I, though not ^ much: And while I depend on Your Roy^
Clemency more than others, I am mo^ obliged to be

Your Majesty's Most Loyal Subject, and most Humble Servant Tho. Blou^*

TO THE READER.
BEhold, I present you with an History of wonders; wonders so great, that, as
no former Age can parallel, succeeding Times will scarce believe them.

Expect here to read the highest Tyranny and Rebellion that was ever acted by
Sub^cts, and the greatest hardships and per^cutions that ever were suffered by
a King; ^t did His Patience exceed His sorrows; and His virtue became at last
victorious.

Some particulars, I confess, are so super^tively extraordinary, that I easily
should ^ar, they would scarce gain belief, even ^om my modern Reader, had I not
this ^rong Argument to secure me; That no inge^uous person will think me so
frontlesse, as ^nowingly to writ an untruth in an History, ^here His Sacred
Majesty (my dread Sove^ign and the best of Kings) bears the prin^pal part, and
most of the other persons con^rn'd in the same Action (except the Earl of
^arby, Lord Wilmot, and Col. Blague) still alive, ready to pour out shame and
confusion on so impudent a Forgery.

But I am so far from that foul crime (...) publishing what is false, that I can
safely s^ I know not one line unauthentick; such h^ been my care to be sure of
the truth tha^ have diligently collected the particula^ from most of their
mouths, who were the ve^ Actors themselves in this Scene of Miracl^

To every individual person (as far as ^ industry could arrive to know) I have
giv^ the due of his merit; be it for Valor, Fi^lity, or whatever other quality
that any w^ had the honor to relate to His Majesti^ Service.

In this later Edition I have added so^ particulars, which came to my knowledge
since the first publication, and have observ^ that in this persecution, much of
His M^jesties Actions and Sufferings have run^rallel with those of King David.

And though the whole Complex may w^ elegance and politeness of style (which
Nature of such Relations does not prope challenge) yet it cannot want Truth,
chief ingredient for such Undertakings. which assurance I am not afraid to
venture self in your hands.

Read on and wonder.
map of Worcester An Exact Ground-Plot of ye City of WORCESTER, As it stood
fortified 3. Sept. 1651.
1 The Cathedral, or College Church 2 S.t Peter's Church 3 S.t Andrews Church 4
S.t Martins Church 5 S.t Nicholas Church 6 S.t Clements Church 7 S.t Albans
Church 8 S.t Helens Church 9 S.t Swithins Church 10 S.t John's 11 All S.ts
Church 12 The Fort Royal 13 Castle hill 14 Bishops Palace 15 Castle-Gate 16
Colledge-Gate 17 Sudbury-Gate 18 S.t Martins Gate 19 Fore-Gate 20 Friers-Gate
21 Frog-Gate 22 High-Streete 23 Friars Street 24 Pitch Croft 25 Bridge over
Severn 26 The Water house 27 The Key


Burnford sculp.


map of Boscobel House and surrounding grounds 1 Boscobel House 2 White Ladies
3 Boscobel garden 4 The Arbor, and Mountin ^ Garden wherein his Md. sa^^. 5 The
back door through when his ^a.^ ^ast to go to the Oak. 6 Boscobel Wood. 7 A
Stone Table in the Wood 8 The Royal Oak in (...) his (...) and Coli Carlos
sat 9 Spring Coppice 10 His Na.^^ and Rich. Pond^rel under a Treathere 11 His
Na.^^ Troop marching from White Ladies 12 The plain^ between Boscobal Wood,
and Spring Coppice.


Burnford fecit.


THE HISTORY Of His Sacred MAJESTY'S Most miraculous Preservation after the
Battle of WORCESTER, etc.
IT was in June in the year 1650. That CHARLES the Second, undoubted heir of
CHARLES the First, of Glorious Memory, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, (After his Royal Father had been Barbarously murdered, and Himself
Banished his own Dominions, by his own rebellious Subjects) took Shipping at
Scheveling in Holland, and, having escaped great dangers at Sea, arrived soon
after at Spey in the North of Scotland.

On the first of January following, His Majesty was Crowned at Scoon, and an
Army raised in that Kingdom, to invade this; in hope to recover His Regalities
here, then most unjustly detained from him by some Members of the Long
Parliament, and Oliver Cromwell their General, who soon after most traitorously
assumed the Title of Protector of the new-minted Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland.

Of this Royal-Scotch Army the General Officers were these, Lieutenant Genesis
David Lesley, L. Genesis Middleton (who is sense created Earl of Middleton, Lord
Clarmont, and Fettercairn) Major. Genesis Massey, M. Genesis Montgomery, M. Genesis
Daliel, and M. Genesis Vandrose, a Dutchman.

The first of August 1651 His Majesty with His Army began his March into
England, and on the fifth of the same Month, at His Royal Camp at Woodhouse
near the Border, published His Gracious Declaration of General Pardon and
Oblivion, to all His loving Subjects of the Kingdom o^ England and Dominion of
Wales, tha^ would desist from assisting the Usurped Authority of the pretended
Commonwealth of England, and return to the obedience they owed to their
Lawful King, and to the ancient happy Government of the Kingdom; Except only
Oliver Cromwell, Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw, John Cook (pretended Solicitor,)
and all others, who did actually sit and vote in the murder of His Royal Father.

And lasty did declare, that the Service being done, the Scotch Army should
quietly retire, that so all Armies might be disbanded, and a lasting peace
settled with Religion and Righteousness.

His Majesty, after the publication of this gracious Offer, marched his Army
into Lancashire, where He received some considerable Supplies from the Earl of
Derby (that Loyal subject,) and at Warrington Bridge met with the first
opposition made by the Rebels in England, but His presence soon put them to
flight.

In this interim his Majesty had sent a Copy of His Declaration, enclosed in a
Gracious Letter to Thomas Andrews then Lord Mayor, (who had been one of his
late Majesty's Judges) and the Aldermen of the City of London, which, by order
of the Rump-Rebels then sitting a Westminster, was (on the 26. of August*
publicly burnt at the Old Exchange by the Hangman; and their own Declaration
Proclaimed there and at Westminster* with beat of Drum, and sound of Trumpet;
by which His Sacred Majesty, (to whom they could afford no better Title than
Charles Stuart) His Abetters, Agents and Accomplices, were Declared Traitors,
Rebels, and public Enemies. Impudence and Treason beyond Example!

After a tedious March of near 300. Miles, His Majesty, with His Army, on the
22. of August, possessed himself of Worcester, after some small oposition made
by the Rebels there commanded by Col. John James. And at his entrance the Mayor
of that City carried the Sword before His Majesty, who had left the Earl of
Derby in Lancashire, as well to settle that and the adjacent Counties in a
posture of Defense, against Cromwell and his Confederates; as to raise some
Auxiliary Forces to recruit His Majesty's Army, in case the success of a Battle
should not prove so happy as all good Men desired.

But (such was Heavens Decree) On ^^e 25 of August, the Earl's new raised
^orces, being overpowered, were totally ^efeated near Wiggan in that County ^y
Col. Lilburn, with a Regiment of Rebellious Sectaries. In which conflict ^he
Lord Widdrington, Sir Thomas Tillesly, Colonel Trollop, Colonel Bointon,
Lieutenant Colonel Galliard, (faithful Subjects and Valiant Soldiers) with
^ome others of good note, were slain; Colonel Edward Roscarrock wounded, Sir
William Throkmorton, (now Knight Marshal to His Majesty) Sir Timothy
Fe^herstonhaugh, (who was beheaded by the Rebels at Chester, on the 22. of
October following) Colonel Bains and others taken Prisoners, and their General
the Earl of Derby (who charged the Rebels va^iantly, and received several
wounds) put to flight with a small number of his men; In which condition he
made choice of the way toward Worcester, whither he knew his Majesty's Army
was designed to march.

After some days, my Lord, with Colonel Roscarrock and two Servants, got into
the Confines of Staffordshire and Shropshire near Newport, where at one Mr.
Watsons house he met with Mr. Richard Snead, (an honest Gentleman of tha^
Country, and of his Lordships acquaintance) to whom he re-counted the
Misfortune of his Defeat at Wiggan, and the Necessity of his taking some rest,
if Mr. Snead could recommend His Lordship to any private house near hand, where
he might safely continue, till he could find an opportunity to go to His
Majesty.

Mr. Snead brought my Lord and His Company to Boscobel-house, a very obscure
habitation, Situate in Shropshire, but adjoining upon Staffordshire, and lies
between Tong-castle and Brewood, in a kind of Wilderness. John Giffard Esquire;
having built this house about thirty years since, invited Sir Basil Brook with
other Friends and Neighbors to a housewarming Feast; at which time Sir Basil
was desired by Mr. Giffard to give the house a Name, He aptly calls it BOSCOBEL
(from the Italian Bosco-bello, which in that language signifies fair-wood)
because seated in the midst of many fair Woods. It is now the Inheritance and
dwelling House of Mr. Basil Fitzherbert, by Jane his Wife, daughter and heir of
Mr. John Cotton, by Frances, daughter and heir of the said John Giffard.

At this place the Earl arrived on the 29. of August (being Friday) at night,
but ^he house at that time afforded no Inha^itant except William Penderel, the
housekeeper and his Wife, who, to preserve so eminent a Person, freely
adventured to receive my Lord, and kept him in safety till Sunday night
following, when (according to my Lords desire of going to Wercester) he
conveyed him to Mr. Humphrey Elliots house at Gatakar Park, (a true hearted
Royalist) which was about nine miles on the way from Boscobel thither. Mr.
Elliot did not only cheerfully entertain the Earl, but lent him ten pounds, and
conducted him and his Company safe to Worcester.

The next day, after His Majesty's arrival at Worcester, being Saturday the 23.
of August, He was Proclaimed King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, by Mr.
Thomas Lisens Mayor, and Mr. James Bridges Sheriff of that Loyal City, with
great Acclamations.

On the same day His Majesty published this following Manifesto or Declaration.

CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the faith, etc. To all whom it may concern Greeting. We desire not
the effusion of blood, We covet not the spoil or forfeiture of our people, our
Declaration at our entry into this Kingdom, the quiet behavior and abstinence
of our Army throughout this long March, and our own General Pardon declared to
all the Inhabitants of this City, without taking advantage of the opposition
here made us, by a force of the Enemy over-mastring them, until we chased them
away, have sufficiently certified both what we seek in only that the Laws of
England (which secure the right both of King and Subject) may henceforth
recover their due power and force, and all past bitterness of these unnatural
Wars be buried and forgotten. As a means whereunto, We ^ave by our Warrants of
the date hereof, and do hereby Summon, upon their Alle^iance, all the Nobility,
Gentry, and others of what degree and condition so^ver of our County of
Worcester from ^ixteen to sixty to appear in their persons, and with any
Horses, Arms and Ammunition they have or can procure, at Pitch-croft, near the
City, on Tuesday next being the 26th of this instant Month, where our Self
will be present that day (and also the next, in case those of the further parts
of the County should not be able to come up sooner) to dispose of such of them
as We shall think fit, for our-Service in the war, in defense of this City and
County, and to add unto our marching Army, and to apply others (therein
versed) to matters of Civil advice and Government. Upon which appearance We
shall immediately Declare to all present and conforming themselves to our Royal
Authority, our Free Pardon not excluding from this Summons or the Pardon held
forth, or from trust and employment in our service, as we shall fin^ them
cordial and useful therein, any person or persons heretofore or at this tim^
actually employed in opposition to us, whether in the Military way, as
Governer^ Colonels, Captains, Common souldier^ or whatsoever else; or in the
Civil, ^ Sheriffs, Undersheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Collectors, High
Constables, ^ any other of higher or lower quality; f^^ securing of all whom
before mentione^ in there Loyal addresses, and performa^ces, (besides our Army
(more than on^ successful since our entrance) which w^ be between them and the
Enemy, and t^^ engagement of Our own Person in the defense,) We have directed
this City be forthwith fortified, and shall use su^ other helps and means as
shall occur ^s in order to that end: but on the other ^ide, if any person of
what degree or qua^ity soever, either through disloyalty and disaffection, or
out of fear of the cruel ^^surpers, and Oppressors, accompanied ^ith a
presumption upon our mercy and ^oodness, or lastly, presuming upon former
^ervice, shall oppose or neglect us at this ^ime, they shall find, that as We
have Au^hority to punish in life, liberty, and estate, ^ we want not now the
power to do it, and ^ if overmuch provoked) shall not want ^he will neither,
and in particular un^o those who have heretofore done and ^uffered for their
Loyalty, We say it is ^ow in their hands either to double that ^core, or to
strike it off; concluding with ^his, That although our disposition a^ound with
tenderness to our people, yet ^e cannot think it such to let them lie under a
confessed slavery, and false peace, ^hen as We well know, and all the world may
see, We have force enough, with t^ conjunction of those that groan under t^
present yoke (we will not say to dispute for that We shall do well enough wit^
those We have brought with us) but clearly (without any considerable opposition
to restore together with Our self the Qu^et, the Liberty, and the Laws of t^
English Nation.

Given at Our City of Worcester the 23th of August 1651. And in the Third year
of Our Reign.

Upon Sunday the 24. of August, M^ Crosby (an eminent Divine of that City^
preached before His Majesty in the C^thedral Church; And in his Prayer, stile^
His Majesty, in all causes, and over all persons, next under God, Supreme Head
a^^ Governor: At which the Presbyteria^ Scots took exception, and Mr. Crosby
w^^ afterward admonished by some of the^ to forbear such expressions.

Tuesday the 26. of August was the Rendevouz in Pitcheroft of such Loyal
Subjects as came into His Majesty's aid, in pursuance of His beforementioned
Declaration and Summons: Here appeared

Francis Lord Talbot, now Earl of Shrewsbury, with about 60. Horse. Mr. Mervin
Touchet, his Lieut. Colonel. Sir John Packington. Sir Walter Blount. Sir Ralph
Clare. Sir Rowland Berkley. Sir John Winford. Mr. Ralph Sheldon of Beoly. Mr.
John Was^burn of Witchinford, with 40. Horse. Mr. Thomas Hornyold of Blackmore
Park, with 40, Horse. Mr. Willian Seldon of Finstall. Mr. Thomas Acton. Captain
Benbow. Mr. Robert Blount of Kenswick. Mr. Robert Wigmore of Lucton. Mr. Edward
Pennel the Elder. Captain John Kingston. Mr. Peter Blount. Mr. Edward Blount.
Mr. Walter Walsh. Mr. Charles Wash. Mr. William Dansey. Mr. Francis Knotsford.
Mr. George Chambers, etc. With diver^ others, who were honored and enco^rag'd
by His Majesty's presence; Notwithstanding which access, the numbe^ of his Army
both English and Scots, wa^ conceived not to exceed 12000. men (viz.) 10000.
Scots, and about 200^ English; and those too not excellentl^ Armed, nor
plentifully stored with Ammunition.

Mean time Cromwell (that grand Patron of Sectaries) had amassed togethe^ a
numerous Body of Rebels, commande^ by himself in chief, and by the Lord Gr^^ of
Groby, Fleetwood and Lambert under him, consisting of above 30000. me^ (being
generally the Scum and Froth o^ the whole Kingdom) one part of which were
Sectaries, who, through a Fanatique zeal, were become Devotes to the great
Idol; the other part seduced persons, who either by force or fear we^^
unfortunately made Actors or Partic^pants in this so horrible and fatal a
Tr^gedy.

Thus then began the Pickeerings to the grand Engagement, Major General Massey
with a commanded party, being sent by His Majesty to secure the Bridge and Pass
at Vpton upon Severn, 7. miles below Worcester, On Thursday the 28. of August,
Lambert with a far greater number of Rebels attaqu'd him, and after ^ome
dispute, gained the Pass, the river being then fordable. Yet the Major General
behaved himself very gallantly, received a shot in the hand from some
Musketeers the Enemy had conveyed into the Church, and retreated in good order
to Worcester.

During this encounter, Cromwell himself, (whose Head-quarter was the night
before at Pershore) advanced to Stoughton within 4. miles of the City on the
South Side, himself quartered that night at Mr. Simons house at White
Lady-Aston, and a Party of his Horse faced the City that Evening.

The next day (August the 29.) Sultan Oliver appeared with a great Body of
Horse and Foot on Redhill within a mile of Worcester, where he made a
Bonnemine, but attempted nothing; And that night part of his Army quartered a
Judge Barkleys house at Speachley. The same day it was resolved by His Majesty,
at a Council of War, to give the Grand Rebel a Camisado, by beating u^ his
Quarters that night with 1500. selec^ Horse and Foot commanded by Lieutenant
General Middleton, and Sir William Keyth; All of them wearing their shirt^ over
their Armor for distinction; which accordingly was attempted, and might in all
probability have been successeful* had not the design been most traitorously
discovered to the Rebels by one Guyse a Tailor in the Town, and a notorious
Sectary, who was hanged the day following, as the just reward of his treachery:
In this Action Major Knox was slain, and some few taken Prisoners by the Enemy.
A considerable Party of the Rebels commanded by Colonel Fleetwood, Colonel
Richard Ingoldsby, (who is since become a real Convert, and was created Knight
of the Bath at His Majesty's Coronation) Colonel Goff, and Colonel Gibbons
being got over the Severn at Vpton, marched next day to Powick Town, where they
made an Halt, for Powick Bridge (lying upon the River Team, between Powick Town
and Worcester) was guarded by a Brigade of His Majesty's Horse and Foot,
commanded by Major General Robert Montgomery, and Colonel George Keyth.

The fatal 3d. of September being come, His Majesty this day (holding a Council
of War upon the top of the Colledge-Church-steeple, the better to discover the
Enemies posture) observed some Firing at Powick, and Cromwell making a bridge
of Boats over Severn, under Buns-hill, about a mile below the City toward Team
mouth; His Majesty presently goes down, commands all to their Arms, and marches
in Person to Powick Bridge to give orders, as well for maintaining that Bridge,
as for opposing the making the other of Boats, and hasted back to His Army in
the City.

Soon after His Majesty was gone from Powick Bridge, the Enemy assaulted it
furiously, which was well defended by Montgomery, till himself was dangerously
wounded, and his Ammunition spent; So that he was forced to make a disorderly
retreat into Worcester, leaving Colonel Keyth a Prisoner at the Bridge. At the
same time Cromwell had with much celerity finished his Bridge of boats and
planks over the main River, without any considerable opposition; saving that
Col. Piscotty, with about three hundred Highlanders, performed as much therein
as could be expected from a handful of men fighting against great numbers: By
this means Oliver held communication with those of his party at Powick Bridge,
and when he had marched over a considerable number of his men, said, (in his
hypocritical way) the Lord of Hosts be with you, and returned himself to raise
a Battery of great Guns against the Fort-royal on the South Side the City.

His Majesty being returned from Powick Bridge, marched, with the Duke of
Buckingham, Lord Grandison, and some other of His Cavalry, through the City,
and out at Sudbury gate by the Fort-Royal, where the Rebels great shot came
frequently near His Sacred Person.

At this time Cromwell was settled in an advantageous Post at Perry wood within
a mile of the City, swelling with pride and confident in the numbers of his
men, having besides raised a breast-work at the Cockshoot of that wood, for his
greater ^ecurity; But Duke Hamilton (formerly Lord Lanerick,) with his own
Troop and ^ome High-landers, Sir Alexander Forbus with his Regiment of Foot,
and diverse English Lords and Gentlemen volunteers, ^y His Majesty's command and
encou^agement, engaged him, and did great ^xecution upon his best men, forced
the ^reat Sultan (as the Rhodians in like case ^id the Turk) to retreat with
his Jani^aries, and his Majesty was once as ab^olute master of his great Guns,
as He ^ught then to have been of the whole ^and.

Here His Majesty gave an incompara^le Ps. 86. 14. O God the Proud are risen
against me and the Assemblies of violent men have sought after my Soul, and
have not set Thee before them.
Example of valor to the rest, by ^harging in Person, which the High-lan^ers
especially imitated in a great mea^ure, fighting with the but-ends of their
^uskets, when their Ammunition was ^pent; but new Supplies of Rebels being
^ontinually poured upon them, and the ^ain Body of Scotch Horse not coming up
^n due time from the Town to His Ma^esties relief, His Army was forced to
re^reat in at Sudbury gate in much disorder.

In this Action Duke Hamilton (wh^ fought valiantly) had his horse kill'^ under
him, and was himself mortall^ wounded, of which he dyed within fe^ days; and
many of his Troop (consistin^ much of Gentlemen and diverse of his ow^ name)
were slain; Sir John Dougla^ received his deaths wound; and Si^ Alex. Forbus,
(who was the first Knigh^ the King made in Scotland, and commanded the Fort
Royal here) was shot through both the Calves of his legs, lay in the wood all
night, and was brough^ Prisoner to Worcester next day.

The Rebels in this Encounter had great advantage, as well in their numbers, as
by fighting both with horse and foot, against His Majesty's foot only, the
greatest part of his Horse being wedged up in the Town; And when the foot were
defeated, a part of His Majesty's horse fought afterward against both the
enemies horse and foot upon great disadvantage. And as they had few persons of
condition among them to lose so no Rebels, but Quartermaster General Moseley
and one Captain Jones, were worth taking notice of to be slain in this Battle.

At Sudbury gate (I know not whether by accident or on purpose) a Cart laden
with Ammunition was overthrown and lay cross the passage, one of the Oxen that
drew it being there killed; so that His Majesty could not ride into the Town,
but was forced to dismount and come in on foot.

The Rebels soon after stormed the Fort royal (the Fortifications whereof were
not perfected,) and put all the Scots they found therein to the Sword.

In the Friars street His Majesty put off his Armor, (which was heavy and
troublesome to him,) and took a fresh horse; and then perceiving many of His
Foot-Souldiers begin to throw down their Arms and decline fighting, He rode up
and down among them, sometimes with his hat in his hand, entreating them to
stand to their Arms and fight like men; other whiles encouraging them,
alleging the goodness and justice of the Cause they fought for; but seeing
himself not able to prevail, said, I had rather you would shoot me, than keep
me alive to see the sad consequences of this fatal day: So deep a sense had His
prophetic Soul of the miseries of his loved Country, even in the midst of his
own danger.

During this hot Engagement at Perrywood and Red-hill, the Rebels on the other
side the Water possessed themselves of S. John's, and a Brigade of His Majesty's
Foot which were there, under command of M. Genesis Daliel, without any great
resistance, laid down their Arms and craved Quarter.

When some of the Enemy were entered, and entering the Town both at the Key,
Castle-hill and Sudbury gate, without any Conditions; The Earl of Cleveland,
Sir James Hamilton, Col. Tho. Wogan, Col. William Carlis (then Major to the
Lord Talbot) L. Col. John Slaughter, Capt. Tho. Hornyold, Capt. Tho. Giffard,
Capt. John Astley, Mr. Peter Blount, and Capt. Richard Kemble (Capt. Lieutenant
to the Lord Talbot) and some others rallied what force they could (though
inconsiderable to the Rebels numbers) and charged the Enemy very gallantly
both in Sudbury-street and High Street, where Sir James and Capt. Kemble were
desperately wounded, and others slain; yet this Action did much secure His
Majesty's march out at St. Martins gate, Who had otherwise been in danger of
being taken in the Town.

About the same time the Earl of Rothes, Sir. William Hamilton, and Col.
Drummond, with a Party of Scots, maintained the Castle hill with much
resolution, till such time as Conditions were agreed on for Quarter.

Lastly, Some of His Majesty's English Army valiantly opposed the Rebels at the
Town Hall, where Mr. Coningsby Colles, and some others were slain, Mr. John
Rumney, Mr. Charles Wells, and others taken Prisoners; So that the Rebels
having in the end subdued all their Opponents, fell to plundring the City
unmercifully, few or none of the Citizens escaping, but such as were of the
Phanatique party.

When His Majesty saw no hope of rallying His thus discomfited Foot, He marched
out of Worcester at S. Martins gate (the Fore-gate being mured up) about six of
the Clock in the evening with his main body of horse, as then commanded by
General David Lesley, but were now in some confusion.

The Lord St. Clare with diverse o^ the Scottish Nobility and Gentry were taken
Prisoners in the Town. And the foot Soldiers (consisting most of Scots) were
almost all either slain or taken and such of them (who in the Battle escaped
death) lived but longer to die for the most part more miserably; many o^ them
being afterward knocked of the head by Country people, some bought and sold
like slaves for a small price, others went begging up and down, till Charity
failing them, their necessities brought upon them diseases, and diseases, death.

Before His Majesty was come to Barbon's bridge, about half a mile out of
Worcester, He made several Stands, faced about and desired the Duke of
Buckingham, Lord Wilmot, and other of his Commanders, that they might rally and
try the fortune of War once more; But at the Bridge a serious consultation was
held, and then perceiving many of the Troopers to throw of their Arms and shift
for themselves, they were all of opinion, the day was irrecoverably lost, and
that their only remaining work was to save the King from those ravenous wolves
and Regicides; Whereupon His Majesty, by advice of His Council, resolved to
march with all speed for Scotland; Following therein the steps of King David
his great Predecessor in Ro^al patience, who finding himself in circumstances
not unlike to these, said to all 2 Samuel 15. 14.
his servants that were with him at Hierusa^em, arise and let us fly, for we
shall not else escape from Absalom, make speed to de^art, lest he overtake us
suddenly and bring evil upon us, and smite the City with the edge of the sword.

Immediately after this Result, the Duke asked the Lord Talbot, (being of that
Country) If he could direct the way Northwards? His Lordship answered, that he
had one Richard Walker in his Troop (formerly a Scout-master in those parts,
and who since dyed in Jamaica) that knew the way well; who was accordingly
called to be the Guide, and performed that duty for some miles; but being come
to Kinver heath, not far from Kederminster, and daylight being gone, Walker
was at a puzzel in the way.

Here His Majesty made a stand, and consulted with the Duke, Earl of Derby,
Lord Wilmot, etc. To what place H^ might march, at least to take some hou^
rest; The Earl of Derby told His Majesty, that in his flight from Wiggan to
Worcester, he had met with a perfect honest man, and a great convenience o^
concealment at Boscobel house (before mentioned) but withal acquainted the
King, it was a Recusants house; And i^ was suggested, that those people (being
accustomed to persecution and searches) were most like to have the readiest
means, and safest contrivances to preserve Him; His Majesty therefore inclined
to go thither.

The Lord Talbot being made acquainted therewith, and finding Walker dubious of
the way, called for Mr. Charle^ Giffard, (a faithful Subject, and of the
ancient Family of Chillington) to be Hi^ Majesty's conductor, which office Mr.
Giffard willingly undertook, having one Yates a servant with him, very expert
i^ the ways of that Country; and being come near Sturbridge, it was under
consideration whether His Majesty should march through that Town or no, and
resolved in the affirmative, and that al^ about His Person should speak French,
to prevent any discovery of His Majesty's presence.

Mean time General Lesley with the Scottish Horse, had, in the close of the
Evening, taken the more direct way Northward, by Newport, His Majesty being
left only attended by the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Derby, Earl of
Landerdail, Lord Talbot, Lord Wilmot, Col. Thomas Blague, Col. Edward
Ros^arrock, Mr. Marmaduke Darcy, Mr. Richard Lane, Mr. William Armorer, (since
Knighted) Mr. Hugh May, Mr. Charles Giffard, Mr. Peter Street, and ^ome others,
in all about 60 Horse.

At a house about a mile beyond Stur^ridge, His Majesty drank, and eat a crust
of bread, the house affording no ^etter Provision; and as His Majesty ^ode on,
he discoursed with Col. Ros^arrock touching Boscobel house, and the ^eans of
security which the Earl of Der^y and he found at that place.

However Mr. Giffard humbly propo^ed to carry His Majesty first to Whitela^ies
(another seat of the Giffards) lying ^ut half a mile beyond Boscobel, where He
might repose Himself for a while and then take such further resolution, a^ His
Majesty and Council should think fi^*

This house is distant about 26 mile^ from Worcester, and still reteins the
ancient name of Whiteladies, from its having formerly been a Monastery of
Cistertian Nuns, whose habit was of that color.

His Majesty and his Retinue (being safely conducted thither by Mr. Giffard
alighted, now, as they hoped, out o^ danger of any present surprise by pursuit
George Penderel (who was a servant in the house) opened the Doors, and after
Hi^ Majesty and the Lords were entered the house, His Majesty's horse was
brough^ into the hall, and by this time it wa^ about break of day on Tursday
morning Psa. 142. 6. Attend O Lord unto my Cry, for I am brought very low,
deliver me from my persecutors for they are stronger than I.
Here every one was in a sad consult ho^ to escape the fury of blood-thirsty
Enemies, but the greatest solicitude was ^^ save the King, who was both hungr^
and tired with this long and hast^ march.

Mr. Giffard presently sent for Richar^ Penderel, who lived near hand at Holbal
Grange, and Col. Roscarrock cause^ Bartholomew Martin, a boy in the house, to
be sent to Boscobel for William Penderel, mean time Mris. Giffard brought His
Majesty some Sack and Biscuit, For the King and all the people that 2 Samuel 1^.
14.
were with him, came weary and refreshed themselves there: Richard came first,
and was immediately sent back to bring a suit of his Clothes for the King, and
by that time he arrived with them, William came, and both were brought into the
Parlour to the Earl of Derby, who immediately carried them into an inner
Parlour (where the King was) and told William Penderel, This is the King
(pointing to His Majesty) thou must have a care of Him, and preserve Him as
thou did me; And Mr. Giffard did also much conjure Richard to have a special
care of his Charge, to which commands the two Brothers yielded ready obedience.

Whilst Richard and William were thus sent for, His Majesty had been advised to
rub his hands on the back of the Chimney, and with them his face, for a
disguise, and some person had disorderly cut off His Hair: His Majesty (having
put off his Garter, Blue Ribband, George of Diamonds, Buff-coat, and other
Princely Ornaments committed his Watch to the custody of the Lord Wilmot, and
his George to Col. Blague, and distributed the Gold he had in his pocket among
his Servants, and then put on a noggen coarse shirt which was borrowed of
Edward Martin, who lived in the house, and Richard Penderels Green Suit, and
Leather Doublet, but had not time to be so exactly disguised as he was
afterward; for both William and Richard Penderel did advertise the Company to
make haste away, in regard there was a Troop of Rebels commanded by Col.
Ashenhurst, quartered at Cotsal, but three miles distant; some of which Troop
came to the house within half an hour after the dissolution of the Royal Troop.
Thus David and his men departed 1 Samuel 23. 13.
out of Keilah, and went whithersoever they could go.

Richard Penderel conducted the King out at a backdoor, unknown to most of the
Company, (except some of the Lords and Colonel Roscarrock, who with sad
hearts, but hearty prayers, took leave of Him) and carried Him into an adjacent
wood belonging to Boscobel, called Spring Coppice, about half a mile from
Whiteladies, (where He abode, as 1 Samuel 23. 15.
David did in the wilderness of Ziph in a wood) whilst William, Humphrey and
George, were scouting abroad to bring what news they could learn to His Majesty
in the Coppice, as occasion required.

His Majesty being thus, as they hoped, in a way of security, the Duke, Earl of
Derby, Earl of Lauderdail, Lord Talbot, and the rest (having Mr. Giffard for
their guide, and being then not above 40 horse, of which number His Majesty's
pad-nag was one, ridden by Mr. Richard Lane, one of the Grooms of the
Bedchamber) marched from Whiteladies Northward by the way of Newport, in hope
to overtake or meet General Lesley with the main Body of Scotch horse.

As soon as they were got into the Road, the Lord Leviston (who commanded His
Majesty's Lifeguard) overtook them, pursued by a party of Rebels under the
command of Col. Blundel; the Lords with their Followers faced about, fought and
repeld them, but when they came a little beyond Newport, some of Col. Lilburns
men met them in the Front, other Rebels from Worcester pursued them in the
Rear, themselves and horses being sufficiently tired, the Earl of Derby, Earl
of Lauderdail, Mr. Charles Giffard, and some others were taken and carried
Prisoners, first to Whitchurch, and from thence to an Inn in Bunbury in
Ches^ire, where Mr. Giffard found means to make an escape; but the noble Earl
of Derby was thence conveyed to Westchester, and there tried by a pretended
Court Martial, held the first of October 1651. by virtue of a Commission from
Cromwell, grounded on an execrable Rump-Act, of the 12. of August then last
past, the very Title whereof cannot be mentioned without horror, but it
pretended most traitorously to prohibit correspondence with CHARLES STUART
(their lawful Sovereign) under penalty of High Treason, loss of life and
estate, -- Prodigious Rebels!

In this black Tribunal there sat, as Judges, these Persons, and under These
Titles:

Colonel Humphrey Mackworth, President. Major General Mitton. Colonel Robert
Duckenfield. Colonel Henry Bradshaw. Colonel Thomas Croxton. Colonel George
Twisleton. Lieutenant Colonel Henry Birkenhead. Lieutenant Colonel Simon Finch.
Lieutenant Col. Alexander Newton. Captain James Stepford. Captain Samuel Smith.
Captain John Downs. Captain Vincent Corbet. Captain John Delves. Captain John
Griffith. Captain Thomas Portington. Captain Edward Alcock. Captain Ralf
Pownall. Captain Richard Grantham. Captain Edward Stelfax.
Their Cruel Sentence.
Resolved by the Court upon the Question, That James Earl of Darby is guilty of
the Breach of the Act of the 12. of August 1651. last past, Entitled An Act
prohibiting correspondence with CHARLES STUART or his Party, and so of High
Treason against the Commonwealth of England, and is therefore worthy of Death.

Resolved by the Court, That the said James Earl of Derby is a Traitor to the
Commonwealth of England, and an Abetter, Encourager and Assister of the
Declared Traitors and Enemies thereof, and shall be put to Death by severing
his Head from his Body at the Market place in the Town of Boulton in
Lancashire, upon Wednesday the 15th. day of this instant October, about the
hour of one of the Clock the same day.


This was the Authority, and some of these the Persons that so barbarously, and
contrary to the Law of Nations, condemned this noble Earl to Death,
notwithstanding his just Plea, That he had Quarter for Life given him by one
Captain Edge, who took him Prisoner. But this could not obtain Justice, nor any
Intercession, Mercy; So that on the 15. of the said October, He was accordingly
Beheaded at Boulton, in a most Barbarous and Inhumane manner.

The Earl of Lauderdail, with several others were carried Prisoners to the
Tower, and afterward to Windsor Castle, where they continued diverse years.

Whilst the Rebels were plundering those noble Persons, the Duke, with the Lord
Leviston, Col. Blague, Mr. Marmaduke Darcy, and Mr. Hugh May, forsook the road
first, and soon after their horses, and betook themselves to a by-way and got
into Bloore Park, near Cheswardine, about five miles from Newport, where they
received some refreshment at a little obscure house of Mr. George Barlows, and
afterward met with two honest Laborers in an adjoining wood, to whom they
communicated the exigent and distress which the fortune of war had reduced them
to, and finding them like to prove faithful, the Duke thought fit to imitate
his Royal Master, delivered his George (which was given him by the Queen of
England) to Mr. May (who preserved it through all difficulties, and after
restored it t^ his Grace in Holland) and changed habit with one of the Workmen;
and i^ this disguise, by the assistance of Mr* Barlow and his wife, was, after
some days, conveyed by one Nich. Matthew a Carpenter, to the house of Mr.
Hawle^ an hearty Cavalier at Bilstrop in Nottinghamshire, from thence to the
Lady Villiars house at Booksby in Leicestershire and after many hardships and
encounters, his Grace got secure to London and from thence to His Majesty in
France.

At the same time the Lord Leviston, Col. Blague, Mr. Darcy, and Mr. Man, all
quitted their horses, disguised themselves, and severally shifted for
themselves, and some of them, through various dangers and sufferings, contrived
their Escapes; In particular Mr. May was forced to lie 21. days in a haymow
belonging to one John Bold, an honest Husbandman, who lived at Soudley; Bold
having all that time Rebel-souldiers quartered in his house, yet failed not to
give a constant relief to his more welcome Guest; and when the ^oast was clear
of Soldiers, Mr. May ^^me to London on foot in his disguise.

The Lord Talbot (seeing no hope of ^^llying,) hasted toward his Fathers ^ouse
at Longford near Newport, where ^eing arrived, he conveyed his horse ^^to a
neighbors barn, but was imme^iately pursued by the Rebels, who ^ound the horse
sadled, and by that ^oncluded my Lord to be not far off, so that they searched
Longford house nar^owly, and some of them continued in (...) four or five
days; during all which ^ime my Lord was in a close place in one ^f the
outhouses, almost stifled for want ^f air, and had perished for want of ^ood,
had he not been once relieved in ^he dead of night, and with much difficulty by
a trusty servant; yet his Lordship thought it a great providence, even by these
hardships, to escape the fury of such enemies, who sought the destruction of
the Nobility, as well as of their King.

In this interim the valiant Earl of Cleveland, (who being above 60. years of
age, had marched 21 days together upon a trotting horse) had also made his
escape from Worcester, when all the fighting work was over, and was go^ to
Woodcot in Shropshire, whither he wa^ pursued, and taken at or near M^^
Broughtons house, from whence he w^^ carried Prisoner to Stafford, and from
thence to the Tower of London.

Col. Blague, remaining at Mr. Barlows house at Bloor-Pipe, about eigh^ miles
from Stafford, his first action wa^ with Mrs. Barlows privity and advice to
hide His Majesty's George under ^ heap of Chips and Dust: Yet the Colonel could
not conceal himself s^ well, but that he was here soon afte^ taken and carried
prisoner to Stafford and from thence conveyed to the Tower of London; Mean time
the Georg^ was transmitted to Mr. Robert Milwar^ of Stafford for better
security; who afterward faithfully conveyed it to Co^ Blague in the Tower by
the trusty hand^ of Mr. Isaac Walton; And the Colonel, not long after happily
escapin^ thence, restored it to his Majesty's own hands, which had been thus
wonderfully preserved from being made a priz^ to sordid Rebels.

The Scotch Cavalry (having no place t^ ^^treat unto nearer than Scotland,)
were ^on after dispersed, and most of them ta^en by the Rebels and Country
people in ^heshire, Lancashire, and parts adjacent.

Thus was this Royal Army totally ^bdued, thus dispersed; and if in this ^^
important affair any of the Scottish ^ommanders were treacherous at Wor^ster,
(as some suspected) he has a ^reat account to make for the many ^ears miseries
that ensued thereby to ^oth Nations, under the tyrannical, ^surped government
of Cromwell.

But to return to the duty of my atten^ance on His Sacred Majesty in Spring
^oppice; By that time Richard Penderel ^ad conveyed Him into the obscurest ^art
of it, it was about Sunrising on ^hursday morning, and the heavens ^ept
bitterly at these calamities; inso^uch as the thickest tree in the wood ^as not
able to keep His Majesty dry, ^or was there any thing for Him to sit ^n;
Wherefore Richard went to Fran^is Yates house, (a trusty neighbor ^ho married
his wifes sister) where he ^orrowed a blanket, which he folded and laid on the
ground under a Tree for His Majesty to sit on.

At the same time Richard spoke the good-wife Yates, to provide ^o^ victuals,
and bring it into the wood a place he appointed her, she present made ready a
mess of milk, and so^^ butter and eggs, and brought them His Majesty in the
wood; Who bei^^ a little surprised to see the woman ((...) good concealer of a
secret,) said chea^fully to her; Good woman, can you ^ faithful to a
distressed Cavalier? She a^swered, Yes Sir, I will dye rather the discover you;
with which answer H^^ Majesty was well satisfied, and receive^ from her hands,
as David did from A^gails, 1 Samuel 25. 35.
that which she brought Him.

The Lord Wilmot in the interim too John Penderel for his guide, but kne^ not
determinately whither to go, pu^posing at first to have marched Northwards, but
as they passed by Brewo^^ Forge, the forgemen made after then till being told
by one Rich. Dutto^ that it was Col. Crompton whom the pursued, the Vulcans
happily, upon th^^ mistake, quitted the chase.

Soon after they narrowly escaped party of Rebels as they passed by Covenbrook;
so that seeing danger on every side, and John meeting with William Walker (a
trusty neighbor,) committed my Lord to his care and counsel, who for the
present conveyed them into a dry marl-pit, where they staid a while, and
afterward to one Mr. Huntbaches house at Brinsford, and put their horses into
John Evans barn, whilst John Penderel goes to Wolverhampton to see what
convenience he could find for my Lords coming thither, but met with none, the
Town being full of Soldiers.

Yet John leaves no means unessayed, hastens to Northcot, (an adjacent village)
and there, whilst he was talking with Goodwife Underhill (a neighbor,) in the
instant Mr. John Huddleston (a sojourner at Mr. Tho. Whitgreaves of Moseley,
and of John's acquaintance) was accidentally passing by, to whom John (well
assured of his integrity,) presently addresses himself and his business,
relates to him the sad news of the defeat of His Majesty's Army at Worcester,
and discovers in what strait and confusion he had left His Majesty and his
followers at Whiteladies, and in particular that he had brought thence a person
of quality, (for John then knew not who my Lord was) to Huntbaches house, who,
without present relief, would be in great danger of being taken.

Mr. Huddleston goes home forthwith, takes John with him, and acquaints Mr.
Whitgreave with the business, who freely resolved to venture all, rather than
such a person should miscarry.

Hereupon Mr. Whitgreave repairs to Huntbaches house, speaks with my Lord, and
gives direction how he should be privately conveyed into his house a^ Moseley
about ten of the clock at night; and, though it so fell out that the directions
were not punctually observed yet my Lord and his man were at las^ brought into
the house where Mr. Whitgreave (after some refreshment give^ them) conveys them
into a secret place which my Lord admiring for its excellent contrivance, and
sollicitous for H^^ Majesty's safety, said, I would give ^ world my friend
(meaning the King) were here; and then (being abundantly satisfied of Mr.
Whitgreaves fidelity ^eposited in his hands a little bag of ^ewels, which my
Lord received again ^t his departure.

As soon as it was day Mr. Whitgreave ^ent William Walker with my Lords horses
to his neighbor Col. John Lane of Bentley near Walsall, South-east from
Moseley about four miles, (whom Mr. Whitgreave knew to be a right honest
Gentleman, and ready to contribute any ^ssistance to so charitable a work) and
wished Walker to acquaint the Colonel, that they belonged to some eminent
Person about the King, whom he could better secure than the horses: The Col.
wil^ingly receives them and sends word to Mr. Whitgreave to meet him that night
in ^ Close not far from Moseley, in order to ^he tender of farther service to
the own^r of the horses, whose name neither the Colonel nor Mr. Whitgreave then
knew.

On Thursday night, when it grew ^ark, His Majesty resolved to go from those
parts into Wales, and to take Richard Penderel with him for His guide; ^ut,
before they began their journey, His Majesty went into Richards house ^t Hobbal
Grange, where the old Good wife Penderel had not only the honor to see His
Majesty, but to see him attended by her son Richard. Here His Majesty had time
and means better to complete His disguise; His Name was agreed to be Will.
Jones, and His arms a wood-Bill* In this posture about nine a Clock at night
(after some refreshment taken in the house) His Majesty, with his trusty
servant Richard, began their journey on foot, resolving to go that night to
Madely in Shrop-shire about five mile^ from Whiteladies, and within a mile o^
the River Severn, over which their way lay for Wales; in this Village lived one
Mr. Francis Woolf, an honest Gentleman of Richards acquaintance.

His Majesty had not been long gone but the Lord Wilmot sent John Pendere from
Mr. Whitgreaves to Whiteladies an^ Boscobel, to know in what security the King
was, John returned and acquainted my Lord, that His Majesty was marche^ from
thence; Hereupon my Lord began to consider which way himself should remove with
safety.

Col. Lane, having secured my Lord horses, and being come to Moseley accordin^
to appointment on Friday ^ight, was brought up to my Lord by Mr. Whitgreave,
and (after mutual saluta^ion) acquainted him, that his sister Mrs. ^ane Lane
had by accident procured a Pass from some Commander of the Re^els, for her self
and a man to go a little ^eyond Bristow, to see Mrs. Norton her ^pecial friend
then near her time of lying ^n; and freely offered, if His Lordship ^hought
fit, he might make use of it, which my Lord seemed inclinable to ^ccept; and on
Saturday night was con^ucted by Col. Lanes man (himself not being well) to the
Colonels house at Bent^ey; His Lordship then and not before ^iscovering his
Name to Mr. Whit^reave, and giving him many thanks ^or so great a kindness in
so imminent ^ danger.

Before His Majesty came to Madeley, ^^e met with an ill-favored encounter ^t
Evelin Mill, being about two miles ^^om thence; The Miller (it seems) was ^n
honest man, but His Majesty and ^ichard knew it not, and had then in ^is house
some considerable persons of ^is Majesty's Army, who took shelter there in
their flight from Worcester, and had not been long in the Mill; so that the
Miller was upon his watch, and Richard unhappily permitting a gate to clap,
through which they passed, gave occasion to the Miller to come out o^ the Mill
and boldly ask, Who is there? Richard thinking the Miller had pursued them,
quitted the usual way in some haste, and led his Majesty over a little Brook,
which they were forced to wad^ through, and which contributed much toward the
surbating and galling Hi^ Majesty's Feet, who (as he afterward pleasantly
observed) was here in some danger of losing his Guide, but that the rusling of
Richards calveskin breeche^ was the best direction His Majesty had t^ follow
him in that dark night.

They arrived at Madeley about midnight, Richard goes to Mr. Woo^ house, where
they were all in bed^ knocks them up and acquaints Mr. Woo^ Daughter, (who came
to the door^ that the King was there, who present^^ received him into the
house, where H^^ Majesty refreshed himself for some time^ but understanding the
Rebels ke^ several Guards upon Severn, and it being ^eared that some of their
party (of which many frequently passed through ^he Town) might quarter at the
house, *as had often happened,) it was apprehended unsafe for His Majesty to
lodge ^n the house (which afforded no secret place for concealment,) but rather
to retire into a Barn near adjoining, as less ^iable to the danger of a
surprise, whither His Majesty went accordingly, and continued in a hay-mow
there all the day following, His servant Richard attending him.

During his Majesty's stay in the Barn, Mr. Woolf had often conference with him
about His intended journey, and in order thereto took care by a trusty servant
(sent abroad for that purpose,) to inform himself more particularly of those
guards upon Severn, and had certain word brought him, that not only the Bridges
were secured, but all the Passage-boats seized on; Insomuch that he conceived
it very hazardous for His Majesty to prosecute His design for Wales, but rather
to go to Boscobelhouse, being the most retired place for concealment in all the
Country, and ^^ stay there till an opportunity of a further safe conveyance
could be foun^ out; which advice His Majesty incline^ to approve: And thereupon
resolve^ for Boscobel the night following; in the mean time, His hands not
appearing sufficiently discolored, suitable to his other disguise, Mrs. Woolf
provided Walnut-tree leaves, as the readiest expedien^^ for that purpose.

The day being over, His Majesty adventured to come again into the house where
having for sometime refreshe^ himself, and being furnished with conveniences
for His Journey, (which wa^ conceived to be fafer on foot than b^ horse) He,
with His faithful guide Richard, about eleven of Clock at night set forth
toward Boscobel.

About three of the Clock on Saturd^^ morning, being come near the house
Richard left His Majesty in the wood whilst he went in to see if any Souldie^
were there or other danger; Where h^ found Col. William Carlis, (who had seen
not the last man born, but the last man killed at Worcester, and) who, having
wit^ much difficulty, made his escape from thence, was got into his own
neighborhood, and for some time concealing himself in Boscobel-wood, was come
that morning to the house to get some relief of William Penderel his old
acquaintance.

Richard having acquainted the Col. that the King was in the wood, the Col.
with William and Richard go presently thither to give their attendance, where
they found His Majesty sitting on the root of a tree, who was glad to see the
Col. and came with them into the house, where He eat bread and cheese heartily,
and (as an Extraordinary) William Penderels wife made His Majesty a Posset, of
thin milk and small beer, and got ready some warm water to wash His feet not
only extreme dirty, but much galled with travail.

The Col. pulled off His Majesty's shoes, which were full of gravel, and
stockens which were very wet, and there being no other shoes in the house that
would fit Him, the good wife put some hot embers in those to dry them, whilt
His Majesty's feet were washing and His stockins shifted.

Being thus a little refreshed, the Colonel persuaded His Majesty to go back
into the wood, (supposing it safer than the house,) where the Colonel made
choice of a thick leafed Oak, into which William and Richard helped them both
up, and brought them such provision as they could get, with a cushion for His
Majesty to sit on; the Col. humbly desired His Majesty (who had taken little or
no rest the two preceding nights) to seat himself as easily as He could in the
tree, and rest his head on the Colonels lap, who was watchful that His Majesty
might not fall; In this Oak they continued most part of that day, and in that
posture His Majesty slumbred away some part of the time, and bore all these
hardships and afflictions with incomparable patience.

In the Evening they returned to the house, where William Penderel acquainted
His Majesty with the secret place, wherein the Earl of Derby had been secured,
which His Majesty liked so well, that He resolved, whilst he staid there, to
trust only to that, and go no more into the Royal Oak, as from hence it must be
called, where he could not so much as sit at ease.

His Majesty now finding himself in a hopeful security, permitted William
Penderel to shave Him, and cut the hair of His head, as short at top as the
Scissers would do it, but leaving some about the ears, according to the Country
mode; Col. Carlis attending, told His Majesty, William was but a mean Barber;
To which His Majesty answered, He had never been shaved by any Barber before:
The King bad William burn the hair which he cut off, but William was only
disobedient in that, for he kept a good part of it, wherewith he has since
pleasured some persons of Honor, and is kept as a civil Relic.

Humphrey Penderel was this Saturday designed to go to Shefnal, to pay some
Taxes to one Captain Broadway; At whose house he met with a Colonel of the
Rebels, who was newly come from Worcester in pursuit of the King, and who,
being informed that His Majesty had been at Whitladies, and that Humphrey was a
near Neighbor to the place, examined him strictly, and laid before him, as
well the penalty for concealing the King, which was death without mercy; as the
reward for discovering him, which should be one thousand pounds certain pay.
But neither fear of punishment, nor hope of reward, was able to tempt Humphrey
into any disloyalty; He pleaded ignorance, and was dismissed; And on Saturday
night related to His Majesty and the Loyal Colonel at Boscobel, what had passed
betwixt him and the Rebel Colonel at Shefnal.

This night the Good-wife (whom His Majesty was pleased to call My dame Joan)
provided some chickens for His Majesty's supper, (a dainty He had not lately
been acquainted with) and a little Pallet was put into the secret place for His
Majesty to rest in; some of the Brothers being continually upon duty, watching
the Avenues of the house and the Road-way, to prevent the danger of a surprise.

After supper Col. Carlis asked His Majesty what meat He would please to have
provided for the morrow, being Sunday, His Majesty desired some Mutton, if it
might be had; but it was thought dangerous for William to go to any market to
buy it; since his Neighbors all knew he did not use to buy such for his own
diet, and so it might beget a suspicion of his having strangers at his house;
But the Colonel found another expedient to satisfy His Majesty's desires;
Early on Sunday morning he repairs to Mr. William Stauntons sheepcoat, who
rented some of the Demeans of Boscobel, here he chose one of the best sheep,
sticks him with his dagger, then sends William for the Mutton, who brings him
home on his back.

On Sunday morning (September the seventh) His Majesty got up early (his
dormitory being none of the best nor his bed the easiest) and, near the secret
place where he lay, had the convenience of a Gallery to walk in, where be was
observed to spend some time in His Ps. 116. I have found tribulation and
sorrow, and I called on the name of our Lord.
Devotions, and where he had the advantage of a window, which surveyed the road
from Tongue to Brewood; Soon after His Majesty coming down into the Parlor, his
nose fell a bleeding, which put his poor faithful servants into a great fright,
but his Majesty was pleased soon to remove it, by telling them, It often did so.

As soon as the Mutton was cold, William cut it up and brought a Leg of it into
the Parlor; His Majesty called for a Knife and a Trencher, and cut some of it
into Collops and pricked them with the Knifes point, then called for a
Drying Pan and butter, and fried the Collops himself, of which he eat heartily;
Col. Carlis the while being but Under-cook, (and that honor enough too) made
the fire, and turned the Collops in the Pan.

When the Colonel afterward attended His Majesty in France, His Majesty
calling to remembrance this passage among others, was pleased merrily to
propose it, as a Problematical Question; Whether Himself or the Col. were the
Master-Cook at Boscobel; and the supremacy was of right adjudged to His Majesty.

All this while the other Brothers of the Penderels were in their several
stations, either scouting abroad to learn Intelligence, or upon some other
service; but it so pleased God, that, though the Soldiers had some
Intelligence of His Majesty's having been at Whiteladies, and none that he was
gone thence, yet this house (which proved a happy sanctuary for His Majesty in
this sad Exigent) had not at all been searched during His Majesty's abode
there, though that had several times; this perhaps the rather escaping, because
the Neighbors could truly inform, none but poor servants lived here.

His Majesty spent some part of this Lord's Day in Reading in a pretty Arbor in
Boscobel garden, which grew upon a Mount, and wherein there was a stone Table
and Seats about it; and commended the place for its retiredness.

And having understood by John Penderel, that the Lord Wilmot was at Mr.
Whitgreaves house, (for John knew not of his remove to Bentley) His Majesty was
desirous to let my Lord hear of Him, and that He intended to come to Mosely
that night.

To this end John was sent on Sunday morning to Moseley; But, finding my Lord
removed thence, was much troubled, and then acquainted Mr. Whitgreave and Mr.
Huddleston, that His Majesty was returned to Boscobel, and the disaccommodation
He had there; whereupon they both resolve to go with John to Bentley, where
having gained him an access to my Lord, his Lordship designed to attend the
King that night at Moseley, and desired Mr. Whitgreave to meet his Lordship at
a place appointed about 12. of the Clock, and Mr. Huddleston to nominate a
place where he would attend His Majesty about one of the clock, the same night.

Upon this Intelligence my Lord made stay of Mrs. Jane Lane's journey to
Bristol, till His Majesty's pleasure was known.

John Penderel returned to Boscobel in the afternoon with intimation of this
designed meeting with my Lord at Moseley, that night, and the place which was
appointed by Mr. Huddleston, where His Majesty should be expected. But His
Majesty, having not recovered his late foot journey to Madeley, was not able
without a horse, to perform this to Moseley, which was about five miles distant
from Boscobel, and near the midway from thence to Bentley.

It was therefore concluded, that His Majesty should ride upon Humphrey
Penderels Mill-horse (for Humphrey was the Miller of Whiteladies Mill,) The
horse was taken up from Grass, and accoutred, not with rich trappings or
furniture, befitting so great a King, but with a pitiful old Saddle and a
worse Bridle.

When His Majesty was ready to take horse, Col. Carlis humbly took leave of
Him, being so well known in the Country that his attendance upon His Majesty
would in all probability have proved rather a disservice than otherwise;
however his hearty prayers were not wanting for His Majesty's preservation.

Thus then His Majesty was mounted, and thus he rode toward Moseley, attended
by all the honest brothers, William, John, Richard, Humphrey, and George
Penderel, and Francis Yates, each of these took a Bill or Pike staff on his
back, and some of them had Pistols in their pockets; two marched before, one on
each side His Majesty's horse, and two came behind aloof off, their design
being this, that in case they should have been questioned or encountered but by
five or six Troopers or such like small Party, they would have showed their
valor in defending, as well as they had done their fidelity in otherwise
serving His Majesty: And though it was near Midnight, yet they conducted His
Majesty through by-ways, for better Security.

After some experience had of the horse, His Majesty complained, It was the
heaviest Dull Jade he ever rode on; To which Humphrey (the owner of him)
Answered (beyond the usual capacity of a Miller,) My Liege! Can you blame the
horse to go heavily, when he has the weight of three Kingdoms on his back?

When His Majesty came to Penford Mill, within two miles of Mr. Whitgreaves
house, His Guides desired Him to alight and go on foot the rest of the way,
for more security, the Foot-way being the more secure and the nearer, and at
last they arrived at the place appointed by Mr. Huddleston, (which was a little
grove of trees in a Close of Mr. Whitgreaves called the Pit-leasow,) in order
to his Majesty's being privately conveyed into Mr. Whitgreaves house; William,
Humphrey and George, returned with the horse, the other three attended His
Majesty to the House; but His Majesty, being gone a little way, had forgot (it
seems) to bid Farewell to William and the rest, who were going back, so He
called to them and said, My troubles make me forget my self, I thank you all,
and gave them his hand to kiss.

The Lord Wilmot, in pursuance of his own appointment; came to the
meeting place precisely at his hour, where Mr. Whitgreave received him and
conveyed him to his old chamber; but hearing nothing of the King at his
prefixed time, gave occasion to suspect ^ome misfortune might have befaln him,
though the night was very dark and ^ainy, which might possibly be the occasion
of so long stay; Mr. Whitgreave therefore leaves my Lord in his chamber, and
goes to Pit-leasow, where Mr. Huddleston attended His Majesty's coming, and
about two hours after the time appointed His Majesty came, whom Mr. Whitgreave
and Mr. Huddleston conveyed, with much satisfaction, into the house to my Lord,
who expected him with great solicitude, and presently kneeled down and
embraced His Majesty's knees, who kissed my Lord on the cheek, and asked him
earnestly, What is become of Buckingham, Cleveland, and others? To which my
Lord could give little satisfaction, but hoped they were in safety.

My Lord soon after (addressing himself to Mr. Whitgreave, and Mr. Huddleston,)
said, though I have concealed my friends name all this while, now I must tell
you, this is my Master, your Master, and the Master of us all; not knowing that
they understood it wa^ King; Whereupon His Majesty was pleased to give his hand
to Mr. Whitgreave and Mr. Huddleston to kiss, and told them he had received
such an Account from my Lord Wilmot of their fidelity, tha^ he should never
forget it; and presently asked Mr. Whitgreave, Where is yo^^ secret place?
which being showed Hi^ Majesty, He was well pleased therewith, and returning
into my Lord chamber, sat down on the bedside, where his nose fell a
bleeding; and then pulled out of His pocket a handkercher, suitable to the rest
of his Apparel, both coarse and dirty.

His Majesty's Attire, as was before observed in part, was then a
leather-doublet, with pewter buttons, a pair of old green breeches and a
Jump-coat (as the Country calls it) of the same green, a pair of his own
stockens with the tops cut off, because embroydered, and a pair of stirrup
stockens which were lent him at Madeley, a pair of old shoes, cut and slashed
to give ease to his feet, an old gray, greazy hat without a lyning, a noggen
shirt, of the coarsest linen, His face and hands made of a reechy complexion,
by the help of the Walnut-tree leaves.

Mr. Huddleston, observing the coarsness of His Majesty's shirt to dis-ease ^im
much and hinder his rest, asked my Lord, if the King would be pleased to change
his shirt, which His Majesty condescended unto, and presently put off his
coarse shirt and put on a flaxen one of Mr. Huddleston's, who pulled off His
Majesty's shoes and stockens, and put him on fresh stockens and dried his
Feet, where he found some body had innocently, but indiscreetly applied white
paper, which, with going on foot from the place where His Majesty alighted to
the house, was rolled betwixt his stockens and his skin, and served to increase
rather than assuage the soreness of his feet.

Mr. Whitgreave had by this time brought up some Biscuit and a Bottle of Sack,
His Majesty eat of the one, and drank a good glass of the other; and, being
thus refreshed, was pleased to say cheerfully, I am now ready for another
March; And if it shall please God once more to place me in the head of bu^
eight or ten thousand good men, ^ of one mind, and resolved to fight, I shall
not doub^ to drive these Rogues out of my Kingdoms.

It was now break of the day on Monday morning the eighth of September* and His
Majesty was desirous to tak^ some rest: To which purpose a Pale was carried
into one of the secret places, where His Majesty lay down, bu^ rested not so
well as his host desired for the place was close and inconvenient, and they
durst not adventure to put him into any bed in an open Chamber, for fear of a
surprise by the Rebels.

After some rest taken in the hole, His Majesty got up, and was pleased to take
notice of, and salute Mr. Whitgreaves Mother, and (having his place of retreat
still ready) sat between whiles in a Closet over the Porch; where he might see
those that passed the road by the house.

Before the Lord Wilmot betook himself to his Dormitory, he conferred with Mr.
Whitgreave, and advised, that himself or Mr. Huddleston would be always
vigilant about the house, and give notice if any Soldiers came, and (says
this noble Lord) If it should so fall out that the Rebels have intelligence of
your harboring any of the Kings Party, and should therefore put you to any
torture for confession, be sure you discover me first, which may happily in such
case satisfy them, and preserve the King. This was the expression and care of
a loyal Subject, worthy eternal memory.

On Monday His Majesty and my Lord resolved to dispatch John Penderel to Col.
Lane at Bentley, with direction for the Colonel to send my Lords horses for him
that night about midnight, and to expect him at the usual place: My Lord
accordingly goes to Bentley again, to make way for His Majesty's reception
there, pursuant to a resolution taken up by His Majesty to go Westward, under
the protection of Mrs. Jane Lanes Pass; it being most probable, that the Rebels
wholly pursued His Majesty Northwards, and would not at all suspect him gone
into the West.

This Monday after noon Mr. Whitgreave had notice that some Soldiers were in
the neighborhood, intending to apprehend him, upon information that he had been
at Worcester Fight: The King was then laid down upon Mr. Huddlestons bed, but
Mr. Whitgreave presently secures his Royal Guest in the secret place, and my
Lord also, leaves open all the Chamber doors, and goes boldly down to the
Soldiers, assuring them (as his Neighbors also testified) that he not been
from home in a fortnight then last past; with which asseveration the Soldiers
were satisfied, and came not up stairs at all.

In this interval the Rebels had taken a Cornet in Cheshire, who come in His
Majesty's Troop to Whiteladies, and either by menaces or some other way, had
extorted this confession from him concerning the King, (whom these bold
Bloudhounds sought with all possible diligence) that he came in company with
His Majesty to Whiteladies, where the Rebels had no small hope to find him;
whereupon they posted thither without ever drawing bit, almost killed their
horses, and brought their faint-hearted Prisoners with them.

Being come to Whiteladies, on Tuesday, they called for Mr. George Giffard, who
lived in an appartiment of the house, present a Pistol to his breast, and bad
him confess where the King was, or he should presently die; Mr. Giffard was too
loyal, and too much a Gentleman to be frighted into any infidelity, resolutely
denies the knowing any more, but that diverse Cavaliers came thither on
Wednesday night, eat up their provision and departed, and that he was as
ignorant who they were as whence they came, or whither they went, and begged, if
he must dye, that they would first give him leave to say a few prayers. One of
these Villains answered, If you can tell us no news of the King, you shall say
no prayers: But his discreet answer did somewhat assuage the fury of their
Leader. They used the like threats and violence (mingled notwithstanding with
high promises of reward) to Mrs. Anne Andrew (to whose custody some of the
Kings Clothes, when He first took upon him the disguise were committed) who
(like a true Virago) faithfully sustained the one, and loyally refused the
other, which put the Rebels into such a fury, that they searched every corner
of the house, broke down much of the Wainscoat, and at last beat the
Intelligencer severely, for making them lose their labors.

During this Tuesday in my Lord Wilmots absence, His Majesty was for the most
part attended by Mr. Huddleston, Mr. Whitegrave being much abroad in the
Neighborhood, and Mrs Whitegrave below stairs, both inquisitive after news,
and the motions of the Soldiery, in order to the preservation of their Royal
Guest; the old Gentle woman was this day ^old by a Countryman, who came to her
house, that he heard the King, upon his retreat had beaten His Enemies at
Warrington-bridg, and that there were three Kings come in to his assistance;
which story she related to His Majesty for divertisement, Who smiling,
answered, Surely they are the three Kings of Colen come down from heaven, for I
can imagine none else.

The same day His Majesty out of the Closet window, espied two Soldiers, who
passed by the gate in the Road, and told Mr. Huddleston, he knew one of them to
be a Highlander, and of his own Regiment; who little thought his King and
Colonel to be so near.

And His Majesty for entertainment of the time was pleased to discourse with
Mr. Huddleston the particulars of the Battle of Worchester (the same in
substance with what is before related) And by some words which His Majesty let
fall, it might easily be collected that His Counsels had been too often sooner
discovered to the Rebels, than executed by His loyal Subjects.

Mr. Huddlestone had under his charge^ young Sir John Preston, Mr. Thomas
Play^^ and Mr. Frances Reynolds, and on thi^ Tuesday in the morning (the better
to conceal His Majesty's being in the house, and excuse his own more than usual
long stay above stairs) pretended himself to be indisposed and afraid of the
Soldiers, and therefore set his Scholars at several Garret windows, that
surveyed the roads, to watch and give notice when they saw any troopers coming;
This service the youths performed very diligently all day and at night when
they were at Supper Sir John called upon his Companions, and said (more truly
than he imagined) Come Lads let us eat lustily, for we have been upon the
lifeguard to day.

This very day (9 September.) the Rebels at Westminster (in further pursuance o^
their bloody designs) set forth a Proclamation, for the discovery and
apprehending of Charles Stuart (for so their frontless impudence usually styled
His Sacred Majesty) His Adherents and Abettors, with promise of 1000 l. Reward
to whomsoever should apprehend Him, (so vile ^ price they set upon so
inestimable a Jewel.) And besides gave strict command to all, Officers of
Port-Towns, that they should permit no person to pass beyond Sea, without
special License. And Saul ^ought David every day, but God delivered 1 Samuel 23.
14.
him not into his hands.

On Tuesday night between 12 and one of the Clock, The Lord Wilmot sent Colonel
Lane to attend His Majesty to Bentley, Mr. Whitgreave meets the Colonel at the
place appointed, and brings him to the corner of his Orchard, where the Colonel
thought fit to stay whilst Mr. Whitgreave goes in and acquaints the King that
he was come: Whereupon His Majesty took his leave of Mrs. Whitgreave, saluted
her and gave her many thanks for his entertainment, but was pleased to be more
particular with Mr. Whitgreave and Mr. Huddleston, not only by giving them
thanks, but by telling them, he was very sensible of the dangers they might
incur by entertaining Him, if it should chance to be discovered to the Rebels;
Therefore His Majesty advised them to be very careful of themselves, and gave
them direction to repair to a Merchant in London, who should have order to
furnish them with moneys and means of conveyance beyond Sea, if they thought
fit. However His Majesty concluded, that if it should please God ever to
restore Him to the Government of His Dominions, He should not be unmindful of
their civilities and fidelity to him. Thus grateful was this Excellent King,
for even that which was every good Subjects duty, and thus sollicitous (in the
midst of His own dangers) for their Security.

After His Majesty had vouchsafed these gracious expressions to Mr. Whitegrave
and Mr. Huddleston, they told His Majesty Al^ the service they could now do
Him, was to pray heartily to Almighty God for His safety and preservation, and
then kneeling down, His Majesty gave them His hand to kiss, and so wen^ down
stairs with them into the Orchard, where Mr Whitgreave both humbly and
faithfully delivered his great Charg^ into Col. Lanes hands, telling the
Colone^ who the Person was he there presented to him.

The night was both dark and cold, and His Majesty's clothing thin, therefore
Mr. Huddleston humbly offered His Majesty a Cloak, which He was pleased to
accept, and wore to Bentley, from whence Mr. Huddleston afterward received it.

As soon as Mr. Whitgreave and Mr. Huddleston heard His Majesty was not only
got safe to Bentley but marched securely from thence, they began to reflect
upon His advice, and, lest any discovery should be made of what had been acted
at Moseley, they both absented themselves from home; The one went to London,
the other to a friends house in Warwickshire, where they lived privately till
such time as they heard His Majesty was safely arrived in France, and that no
part of the aforesaid transactions at Moseley had been discovered to the
Rebels, and then returned home.

This Mr. Whitgreave is descended of the ancient family of the Whitgreaves of
Burton in the County of Stafford, and was first a Cornet, afterward Lieutenant
to Captain Thomas Giffard, in the first War for His late Majesty.

Mr. John Huddleston is a younger brother of the renowned Family of the house
of Hutten-John in the County of Cumberland, and was a Gentleman voluntier in
His late Majestys service first under Sir John Preston the Elder, till Sir John
was rendered unserviceable by the desperate wounds he received in that service
and after under Colonel Ralph Pudsey at Newark.

His Majesty, being safely conveyed to Bentley by Colonel Lane, staid there but
a short time, took the opportunity of Mris Janes Pass, and rode before her to
Bristow, the Lord Wilmot attending, by another way, at a distance. In all which
Journey Mris. Lane performed the part of a most faithful and prudent Servant to
His Majesty, showing her observance, when any opportunity would allow it, and
at other times acting her part in the disguise with much discretion.

But His Majesty's particular Gists to Bristow and to the houses of several
Loyal Subjects, both in Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, Wiltshire, Hampshire, and
so to Brighempston in Sussex where he on the 15. of October 1651. took shipping
and landed securely in France the next morning, and the several accidents,
hardships and encounters, in all that Journey, must be the admired Subject of
the Second part of this History.

The very next day, after His Majesty ^eft Boscobel, being Monday the eighth of
September, two parties of Rebels came thither, the one being part of the County
Troop, who searched the house with some civility; The other, (Cap^ain
Broadwayes men) did it with more ^everity, eat up their little Store of
provision, plundered the house of what was portable, and one of them presented
a pistol to William Penderel, and much frighted My Dame Joan; yet both Parties
returned, as ignorant as ^hey came, of that intelligence they so greedily
sought after.

This danger being over, honest Wil^iam began to think of making satisfaction
for the fat Mutton, and accordingly ^endered Mr. Staunton its worth in money;
but Staunton, understanding the Sheep was killed for the relief of some ^onest
Cavaliers, who had been shel^ered at Boscobel, refused to take the money, but
wished, much good it might do them.

These Penderels were of honest Pa^entage, but mean degree, six brothers born
at Hobbal Grange in the Parish of Tongue and County of Salop; William, John,
Richard, Humphry, Thomas, and George; John, Thomas and George* were Soldiers
in the first War for Hi^ late Majesty, Thomas was slain at Sto^^ fight,
William, as you have heard, wa^ a servant at Boscobel, Humphry a Miller and
Richard rented part of Hobba^ Grange.

His Majesty had not been long gone from Boscobel, but Colonel Carlis sen^
William Penderel to Mr. Humphry Ironmonger, his old friend, at Wolverhampton;
who not only procured him a Pas^ from some of the Rebel-Commanders in a
disguised name to go to London, bu^ furnished him with money for his Journey,
by means whereof he got safe thither, and from thence into Holland* where he
brought the first happy new^ of His Majesty's safety to His Royal Sister* the
Princess of Orange.

This Colonel William Carlis was bo^^ at Brom-hall in Staffordshire, within two
miles of Boscobel, of good Parentage, is ^ Person of approved valor, and was
engaged all along in the first War for His lat^ Majesty, of happy memory; and
since Hi^ Death has been no less active for His Majesty that now is; for which,
and his particu^ar service and fidelity before mentioned, His Majesty has been
pleased by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England ^o give him, by the
name of William CARLOS (which in Spanish signifies Charles) this very honorable
Coat of Arms, in perpetuam rei memoriam, as it is expressed in the Letters
Patents.

blazon or coat of arms SUBDITUS FIDEIIS REGIS and REGNI SALUS


He bears upon an Oak proper in a Field Or a Fess Gules, charged with three
Regal Crowns of the second; by the name of Carlos. And for his Crest ^ Civie
Crown, or Oaken Garland with a Sword and Scepter crossed through it
Saltier-wise.

The Oak is now properly called The ^oyal Oak of Boscobel, nor will it lose at
name whilst it continues a Tree, ^^r that Tree a memory, whilst we have ^^ Inn
left in England; since the Royal ^ake is now become a frequent sign both
London, and all the chief Cities of is Kingdom. And since His Majesty's ^^ppy
Restoration, that these mysteries ^^ve been revealed, hundreds of peo^^e for
many miles round, have flocked ^^ see the Famous BOSCOBEL, which (as ^ou have
heard) had once the honor to ^e the Palace of His Sacred Majesty, but ^^iefly
to behold the Royal Oak, which as been deprived of all its young ^oughs by the
numerous visiters of it, ^ho keep them in memory of His Ma^^sties happy
preservation; Insomuch that ^r. Fitzherbert the Proprietor, has been ^^rced in
a due season of the year, to crop ^art of it, for its preservation, and has
^^tely been at the charge to fence it a^out with a high Fale, the better to
trans^it the happy memory of it to posteri^^.

This Boscobel House has yet been a third ^^me fortunate; for after Sir George
Booths forces were routed in Cheshire in Aug. 1959. the Lord Brereton, who was
e^gaged with him, took Sanctuary the^ for some time, and was preserved.

When His Majesty was thus happi^^ conveyed away by Colonel Lane and Sister,
the Rebels had an intimation the some of the Brothers were instrument^ in His
preservation; so that, besides t^ temptations Humphry overcame at Sh^nal,
William Penderel was twice questio^ed at Shrewsbury on the same account ^^
Captain Fox and one L^luellin a Sequ^strator, and Richard was much threa^ned by
a peevish Neighbor at Whitel^dies; but neither threats nor temptation were
able to batter the Fort of their Lo^alties.

After this unhappy Defeat of His M^jesties Army at Worcester, Good God! i^
what strange canting language did the Fanatics communicate their exultatio^ to
one another; particularly in a Lett^^ (hypocritically pretended to be written
from the Church of Christ at Wrexham, a^^ printed in the Diurnal, Nov. 10.
1651* there is this malignant expression, Christ has revealed his own Arm, and
broke t^^ ^rm of the Mighty once and again, and now ^^stly at Worcester; so
that we conclude (in ^zekiels phrase) there will be found no roller ^ bind the
late Kings Arm to hold a Sword ^gain, etc. And that you may know who ^^ese
false Prophets were, the Letter was ^^us Subscribed;

Daniel Lloyd. Mor. Lloyd. John ^rown. Edw. Tailor. An. Maddokes. Dav. ^aurice.
Men who measured Causes by that Success, which fell out according ^^ their evil
desires, not considering that ^od intended, in his own good time, To ^stablish
the Kings Throne with Justice. Prove. 25.


After the King had entered into the ^ingdom, and returned to his own Land, Dan.
1. 9.
^e five Brothers attended Him at White^all, on Wednesday the 13. of June 1660.
^hen His Majesty was pleased to own ^^eir faithful service, and graciously
dis^isled them with a Princely Reward. And soon after Mr. Huddleston and ^r.
Whitgreave made their humble Adresses to His Majesty, from whom they ^^kewise
received a gracious acknowledg^ent of their service and fidelity to Him ^
Moseley; and this in so high a degree ^f gratitude, and with such a
condescending frame of spirit, not at all puffed u^ with prosperity, as cannot
be paralleled i^ the best of Kings.

Here let us all with glad and thankfu^ hearts humbly contemplate the admirable
Providence of Almighty God, wh^ contrived such wonderful ways, an^ made use of
such mean Instruments for preservation of so great a Person. Let ^^ delight to
reflect minutely on every particular, and especially on such as mo^^ approach
to Miracle; let us sum up the number of those, who were privy to thi^ first and
principal part of His Majestie^ disguise and concealment; Mr. Giffard the five
Penderels, their Mother, and thre^ of their Wives, Colonel Carlos, Franci^
Yates and his Wife, diverse of the Inhabitants of Whiteladies (which then held
fiv^ several Families) Mr. Woolf, his Wife, So^* Daughter and Maid, Mr.
Whitgreave an^ his Mother, Mr. Huddleston, Colonel La^ and his Sister; and then
consider whether it were not indeed a Miracle, that s^ many men, and (which is
far more) s^ many women should faithfully conceal s^ important and unusual a
Secret; and thi^ notwithstanding the temptations an^ promises of reward on the
one hand, the ^anger and menaces of punishment on ^he other.

To which I shall add but this one cir^umstance, that it was performed by
persons, for the most part, of that Religion which has long suffered under an
imputa^ion (laid on them by some mistaken Ze^ots) of disloyalty to their
Sovereign.

And now, on my bended knees, let me ^oyfully congratulate His restored
Maje^ty, and humbly offer Him this short and ^earty wish, O KING LIVE FOR Dan.
3. 10.
EVER. And not content with my own ^nconsiderable Prayers, with all my Soul ^
beg the universal assistance of others, earnestly inviting all the Nation, even
all the three Nations, to sing

Te Deum Laudamus,
2 Samuel 19. 14.

And he bowed the hearts of all the people, as the heart of one man; So that
they sent this word unto the King, Return thou and all thy Servants.

FINIS.
BOSCOBEL: OR THE HISTORY Of His Sacred MAJESTY'S Most Miraculous Preservation
After the Battle of Worcester, 3 Sept. 1651.

The Second Part.

Psalm. 19. 15. (...) shall call upon me, and I will answer Him; I will be with
Him in trouble, I will deliver Him and will honor Him.

LONDON ^nted by M. Clark, and are to be sold by H. Brom and C. Harper, at
their Shops in S. Paul's Churchyard and Fleetstreet. 1681.

PREFACE.
THe First Part of this Miraculous History I long since published, having the
means to be well informed in all circumstances relating to it; The Scene
(whereon those great Actions were performed) being my native Comntrey, and many
of the Actors my particular Friends.

I did not then intend to have proceeded farther, presuming some of those
worthy Persons of the West (who were the happy Instruments in this Second Part)
would have given us that so much desired supplement; The rather since the
publication of the wonderful series of this great Work, wherein the hand of God
so miraculously appeared, in preservation of Him, whom the Lord has chosen, 1 Samuel 10. 24.
wust needs open the eyes and convert the hearts of the most disloyal.

But finding, in all this time, nothing done, and the world more greedy of it,
than ever young Ladies were to read the Conclusion of an amorous strange
Romance, after they had left the darling Lover plunged into some dire
misfortune; I have thus endeavored to complete the History.

Chiefly encouraged hereunto, by an Express from Lisbon, wherein it is
certified, that (besides the translation of the First Part of Boscobel into
French) Mr. Peter Giffard of Whiteladies has lately made it speak Portuguese,
and presented it to the Infanta, our most excellent Queen, who was pleased to
accept it with Grace, and peruse it with Passion; intimating her Royal desire
to see the particulars, how the hand of Providence bad led the great Monarch of
her heart out of the treacherous snares of so many Rebels.

In this, I dare not undertake to deliver so many particulars, as in the
former; for though the time of His Majesty's stay in those Western parts was
longer, yet the places were more remote, and my Lord Wilmot the principal
Agent) dead: But I will again confidently promise to write nothing but truth,
as near as a severe scrutiny can inform me.

And perhaps a less exactness in Circumstantials will better please some, who
(as I have heard) object against my former endeavors on this Royal Subject as
too minutely written and particulars set down of too mean a concern, for which
I have yet the example of that renowned Historian De Bello Belgico.
Famian Strada to protect me, who writing of the Emperor Charles the fifth,
mentions what meat he fed on such a day, what clothes he wore another time, and
gives this reason; That it pleases, to know every thing that Princes do:
Especially when by a chain of Providence, whose every Link seems small and
weak in its single self, so great a Blessing will, at last, be drawn in among
us. 1 Samuel 23. 17.


That Part of this unparalled Relation of a King, which here I undertake to
deliver, may fitly I think be called The second Stage of the Royal Progress;
wherein, as I am sure every good subject will be astonished to read the
hardships and difficulties his Majesty encountered in this long and perilous
journey; so will they be even overjoyed to find Him at last (by the conduct of
Heaven) brought safe to Paris, where my humble endeavors leave Him, thus
comforted by the Prophet,

Fear not, for the hand of Saul shall not find Thee, and Thou shall be King
over Israel. T. B.

THE HISTORY Of His SACRED MAJESTY'S Most Miraculous Preservation after the
BATTLE of WORCESTER. The Second Stage of the Royal Progress.
HE that well considers the admirable events, particularized in the First Part
of this History of His Majesty's most Miraculous Preservation, will be apt to
think His Evil Genius had almost rackt its invention to find out hardships and
perils beyond humane imagination, and that his Good Angel had been even tired
out with contriving suitable means for his deliverance; yet if you please,
(after you have sufficiently wondered and blessed God for the preservations you
read there) proceed and admire the strange stupendous passages you shall find
here; which, when you have done with just and due attention, I cannot doubt but
your thoughts will easily raise themselves into some holy ecstasy, and growing
warm with often repeating their own reflections, break forth at last, and join
your exclamations, with all the true and hearty Adorers of the divine
Providence,

Thou art great O Lord, and do wonderful Psalm. 86. 10.
things; Thou art God alone.

I shall not need, I hope, to bespeak my Readers patience for any long
Introduction; since all the Complement I intend, is humbly to kiss the pen and
paper, which have the honor to be Servants of this Royal Subject, and without
farther Ceremony begin.

Colonel John Lane having (as't has been related) safely conveyed his Majesty
from Mosely to his own house at Bent^ey in Staffordshire on tuesday night the
9th of September 1651. the Lord Wilmot was there ready to receive Him, and
after His Majesty had eaten and conferred with my Lord and the Colonel of his
in^ended journey toward Bristol the very next morning, He went to bed, though
his rest was not like to be long; for at ^he very break of the day on Wednesday
morning the Colonel called up His Majesty and brought him a new suit and Cloak
which he had provided for him of Country gray cloth, as near as could be
contrived like the holy day suit of a Farmers Son, which was thought fittest to
carry on the disguise; Here His Majesty quitted his Leather Doublet and Green
Breeches, for this new Gray Suit; and forsook his former name Will. Jones for
that of Will. Jackson.

Thus then was the royal Journey designed, the King, as a tenants Son (a
qua^ity far more convenient for their inten^ion, than that of a direct Servant)
was ordered to ride before Mrs. Jane Lane, as her Attendant, Mr. Henry Lassels
(who was Kinsman and had been Cornet to the Colonel in the late wars) to ride
single and Mr. John Petre of Horton in Buckinghamshire and his Wife, the
Colonels Sister, who were then accidentally at Bentley, being bound homeward,
to ride i^ the same Company; Mr Petre and hi^ Wife little suspecting Will.
Jackson, their fellow Travailer, to be the Monark o^ Great Britain.

His Majesty, thus refreshed and thus accoutr'd with all necessaries for a
journey in the designed equipage, after he had taken leave of my Lord Wilmot
and agreed on their meeting within few days after at Mr. George Nortons house
at Leigh near Bristol, the Colonel conveyed him a back way into the Stable,
where he fitted His Stirrups, and gave Him some Instructions for better acting
the part of Will. Jackson, mounted Him on a good double Gelding, and directed
Him to come to the Gate of the House, which He punctually performed, with his
Hat under his Arm.

By this time it was twilight, and old Mrs. Lane (who knew nothing of this
Great Secret) would needs see her Beloved Daughter take horse, which whilst she
was intending, the Colonel said to the King, Will. thou must give my Sister thy
hand; But His Majesty, (unacquainted with such little Offices) Offered his hand
^he contrary way, which the old Gentlewoman taking notice of, laughed, and
^sk'd the Colonel her Son, what goodly Horseman her Daughter had got to ride
before her?

Mr. Petre and his wife, and Mr. Lassels being also mounted, the whole Company
took their journey under the pro^ection of the King of Kings) toward Stratford
upon Avon in Warwickshire; And ^oon after they were gone from Bentley, ^he Lord
Wilmot, Colonel Lane, and Robert Swan my Lords Servant, took Horse, with a
Hawk, and Spaniels with them for ^ disguise, intending to go that night to Sir
Clement Fishers house at Packington in Warwickshire; where the Colonel knew
^hey should be both as welcome as Gene^osity, and as secure as Fidelity could
make them.

When the King and His small Retinue ^^rived near Wotton, within four miles of
Stratford, they espy'ed a Troop of Rebels, baiting (as they conceived) almost a
mile before them in the very Road, which caused a Council to be held among
them, whereein Mr. Petre presided, and he would by no means go on, for fear of
losing his Horse, or some other Detriment; so that they wheeld about a more
indirect way, and at Stratford (where they were of necessity to pass the River
Avon) met the same or another Troop in a narrow passage, who very fairly opened
to the right and left, and made way for the Travelers to march through them.

That night (according to designment) Mrs. Lane and her Company took up their
Quarters at Mr. Tomb's house, a^ Longmarston, some tree miles West o^
Stratford, with whom she was well acquainted; here Will. Jackson being in the
Kitchen, in pursuance of his disguise, an^ the Cook Maid busy in providing
supper for her Masters Friends, she desire^ him to wind up the Jack; Will.
Jackson wa^ obedient, and attempted it, but hit no^ the right way, which made
the Maid, i^ some passion ask, What Countryman are yo^ that you know not how
to wind up a Jack* Will. Jackson answered very satisfactorily I am a poor
Tenants son of Colonel La^^ in Staffordshire, we seldom have roast-meat, but
when we have, we don't make use of a Jack; which in some measure assuaged the
Maids indignation.

The same night my Lord, with the Colonel arrived safely at Sir Clement Fishers
house at Packington, where they found a welcome suitable to the Nobleness of
his mind, and a security answerable to the faithfulness of his heart.

Next morning my Lord thought fit to dispatch the Colonel to London, to
procure, if possible, a Pass for the King, by the name of William Jackson, to
go into France, and to bring it himself or send it (as opportunity should be
offered) to Mr. Norton's house, where my Lord (as you have heard) was designed
to attend His Majesty.

On Thursday morning (11th. of September.) the King with Mrs. Lane, and Mr.
Lassels rose early, and after Mrs. Lane had taken leave both of Mr. Petre and
his Wife (whose way lay more South) and of Mr Tombs the Master of the house,
they took horse, and wtihout any considerable accident, rode by Camden, and
arrived that night at an Inn in Cirencester, in Gloucestershire, distant about
twenty four miles from Long-marstons. After Supper a good bed was provided for
Mr. Lassels, and a truckle-bed for Will. Jackson, in the same (Chamber; but Mr.
Lassels after the Chamberlain had left them) laid His Majesty in the best bed,
and himself in the other, and used the like due observance, when any
opportunity would allow it.

The next day, being Friday, the Royal Traveller, with his Attendants, left
Cirencester, and by the way of Sudbury rode to and through the City of Bristol,
(wherein they had once lost their way, till inquiry better informed them) and
arrived that evening at Mr. Norton's house at Leigh, some three miles from
Bristol, and about thirty from Cirencester, which was the desired end of this
perilous journey.

At this place His Majesty still continued under the notion of one of Colonel
Lanes Tenants sons; and, by a presettled contrivance with Mrs. Lane, feigned
himself sick of an Ague, under color whereof she procured Him the better
Chamber and Accommodation without any suspicion, and still took occasion from
thence with all possible care, and obser^ance to send the sick person some of
the ^est meat from Mr. Nortons Table; and Mrs. Nortons Maid, Margaret Rider,
(who was ^ommanded to be his Nurse-keeper, and ^elieved Him sick indeed) made
William a ^arduus-posset, and was very careful of Him; ^or was His Majesty at
all known or suspe^ted here, either by Mr. Norton or his Lady, from whose
knowledge yet, he was not ^oncealed out of any the least distrust of their
Fidelity, (for his whole Dominions yielded not more faithful Subjects) ^ut
because such knowledge might happily ^t unawares have drawn a greater re^pect and
observance from them, than that Exigent would safely admit of.

Under the disguise of this Ague His Majesty for the most part kept his
Cham^er, during his stay at Leigh; yet, being ^omewhat wearied with that kind
of Imprisonment, one day (when his Ague might be imagined to be in the
intermission) he walked down to a place where the Young men played at a game of
Ball called Fives, where His Majesty was asked by one of the Gamesters, if he
could play, and would take his part at that Game; He pleaded unskilfulnesse and
modestly refused.

But behold an unexpected acciden^ here fell out, which put His Majesty and
Mrs. Lane into some apprehension of the danger of a discovery, Mr. Norton's
Butler (whose name was John Pope) had served a Courtier some years before the
War, and his late Majesty in the War, under Colonel Bagot at Litchfield, and
by that means had the Physiognomy of the King (then Prince of Wales) so much
imprinted in his memory, that (though His Majesty was in all points most
accurately disguised) yet the Butler knew him, and communicated his knowledge
to Mrs. Lane, who at first absolutely denied him to be the King, but after,
upon conference and advise had with His Majesty, it was thought best to
acknowledge it to the Butler, and, by the bonds of Allegiance, conjure him to
secrecy, who thereupon kissed the Kings hand, and proved perfectly honest.

On Saturday night (13th. of September) the Lord Wilmot arrived at a village
near Leigh where he lay, but came every day to visit Will Jackson and Mrs.
Lane, as persons of his acquaintance; and so had the opportunity to attend and
consult with His Majesty unsuspected, during their stay at Leigh.

Soon after, upon serious advise had with my Lord, it was resolved by His
Majesty to go to Trent, the house of Colonel Frances Windham, (of whose
Fidelity His Majesty had ample assurance) which lies in Somersetshire, but
bordring on the very skirts of Dorsetshire near Sherburn; and therefore was
judged to be conveniently seated in the way toward Lime and other Port Tows,
where His Majesty might probably take Shipping for France.

In pursuance of this Resolve, the Lord Wilmot (as His Majesty's Harbinger,)
rode to Trent on Monday, to make way for His more private reception there; and
on Tuesday morning (Sept. 16.) His MAJESTY'S Ague being then (as was pretended)
in the Recess, He repaired to the Stable, and there gave Order for making ready
the Horses, and then it was signified from Mrs. Lane, (though before so agreed)
that William Jackson should rid single and carry the Portmantean; Accordingly
they mounted, being attended part of the way by one of Mr. Nortons men, as a
Guide, and that day rode, through the body of Somersetshire, to Mr. Edward
Kirton's house, at Castle Carry near Burton, where his Majesty lay that night,
and next morning arrived at Colonel Windhams said house, which was about twenty
six miles from Leigh.

His Majesty was now at Trent, in as much safety, as the Master of the House
his Fidelity and Prudence could make Him; but the great work was how to procure
a Vessel for Transportation of this great Treasure; for this end His Majesty,
the Lord Wilmot, and Colonel Windham, had several Consults, and in pursuance of
their determination, the Colonel, with his trusty servant, Henry Peter's,
posted to Lime, which is about twenty miles from Trent, where, after some
difficulty, by the assistance of Captain William Eldsden, a Loyal Subject (at
whose house the Colonel lodged) he hired a Bark to transport His Majesty for
France, which Bark was by agreement to attend at Charmouth (a little maritine
Village near Lime) at a time appointed, and returned with all speed to Trent
with the good news.

The next day His Majesty resolved for Lime and Mrs. Jane Lane here humbly
took her leave of Him, returning with Mr. Lassels, by His Majesty's permission,
into Staffordshire, leaving Him in faithful hands, and in a hopeful way of
escaping the bloody designs of merciless Rebels; which as it was all along the
scope of her endeavors, so was it now the subject of her prayers; yet it was
still thought the best disguise, for His Majesty to ride before some woman, and
accordingly Mrs. Julian Conningsby, Colonel Windhams kinswoman, had the honor
to ^ide behind His Majesty, who with the Lord Wilmot, the Colonel, and Henry
Pe^ers, came that evening to a blind Inn in Charmouth, nee^ which place the
Skipper had promised to be in readiness with his Bark; but observe the
disappointment.

In the interim (whilst Colonel Windham was gone back to Trent) it seems the
Rebels proclamation, for apprehending Charles Stuart (meaning, in their
impudent phrase, our gracious King) and prohibiting, for a certain time, the
transportation of any Person without a particular License, had been published
in and about Lime, and the Skipper having acquainted his wife, that he had
agreed t^ transport two or three persons into France, whom he believed might be
Cavaliers, it seems the Grey-Mare was the better Horse; for she locked up her
husband in his Chamber, and would by n^ means permit him to go the Voyage; so
that whilst Henry Peter's stayed on the Beach most part of the night, His
Majesty and the rest of the Company sat up i^ the Inn, expecting news of the
Sea-ma^ with his Boat, who never appeared.

The next morning His Majesty and Attendants resolving to return to Trent rode
first to Bruteport in Dorsetshire where He staid at an Inn, whilst Henry Peter's
was sent back to Captain Eldsden to see if their were any hope left of
persuading the Skipper, or rather of gaining leave of his wife, for him to
undertake the Voyage; but all endeavors proved ineffectual, and by that time
Harry returned, the day was so far spent, that His Majesty could conveniently
reach no farther that night then Broad-Windsor; And (which added much to the
danger) Col. Heane (one of Cromwels Commanders) at this very time was marching
Rebels from several Garrisons to Weymouth and other adjacent Ports, in order to
their being shipped, for the forcing the Island of Jarsey from His Majesty's
obedience, as they had done all the rest of His Dominions; so that the roads of
this County were full of Soldiers:

Broad-windsor afforded but one Inn, and that the George, a mean one too (and
which was worse) the best accomodations in it were, before His Majesty's
arrival taken up by Rebel Soldiers, one of whose Doxies was brought to bed in
the House, which caused the Constable and Overseers for the Poor of the Parish
to come thither at an unseasonable Hour of the night, to take care that the
Brat might not be left to the charge of the Parish; so that His Majesty,
through this Disturbance, went not into Bed at all, and we may safely conclude,
He took as little rest here, as He did the night before at Charmouth. Thus were
the tribulations of David's heart enlarged, and he prayed, deliver me, O Lord
from my distresses.

His Majesty having still thus miraculously escaped Dangers, which hourly
environed Him, returned safe to Trent next morning, where after some
refreshment and rest taken, He was pleased to call my Lord Wilmot and Colonel
Windham (the Members of His little privy council) together, to consider what
way was next to be attempted for His transportation.

After several Proposals, it was at last resolved that my Lord (attended and
conducted by Henry Peter's) should the next day be sent to Salisbury to Mr. John
Coventry, (Son to the late Lord Coventry, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of
England) who then lived in the Close of that City, and was known to be both a
prudent person and a perfect lover of this Sovereign, as well to advise how to
procure a Bark for passing His Majesty into France, as for providing some
moneys for His present necessary occasions.

My Lord, being arrived at Salisbury, dispatched Henry Peter's back to Trent,
with intimation of the good reception he found there; For, Mr. Coventry did not
only furnish him with moneys, but was very solicitous for His Majesty's safety;
To which end he advised with Dr. Humphrey Henchman, a worthy Divine, who since
His Majesty's happy restoration, is with much merit advanced to the Episcopal
Sea of Salisbury.

The result of these two loyal persons consultation was, that His Majesty
should be desired to remove to Hele, (which lay about three miles North-East of
Salisbury) the dwelling house of Mrs. Mary Hyde, the relict of Laurence Hyde
Es; eldest brother to honorable Sir Robert Hyde one of the Justices of His
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, whom they knew to be both as discreet and as
loyal, as any of her sex.

With this resolution and advice Mr. Coventry dispatched his Chaplain, Mr. John
Selleck to Trent with a Letter, rolled up into the bigness of a musket Bullet
which the faithful Messenger had order to swallow down his throat, in case of
any danger.

Mean time Mr. Coventry had found out a trusty Seaman at Southampton, who
undertook to transport whom he pleased, ^ut on second thoughts and advice had
with my Lord Wilmot, it was not held safe for His Majesty to take shipping
there, in regard of the so many Castles by which the ships pass, that are
outward bound, and the often examination of the Passengers in them; so that
some of the small Ports of Sussex were concluded to be the safer places, for
effecting this great work of His Majesty's delivery from the hands of such
unparalled Rebels, who even ravenously thirsted after Royal blood.

In the interim Mr. Selleck returned with His Majesty's resolution to come to
Hele, signified by a like paper bullet, And by this time His Majesty thought
fit to admit of the service and assistance of Colonel Robert Phillips (Grandson
to the famed Sir Edward Phillips late Master of the Rolls) who lived in those
parts, and was well acquainted with the ways of the Country, and known to be as
faithful as loyalty could make him; This Colonel undertook to be His Majesty's
conductor to Hele, which was near thirty miles distant from Trent.

During His Majesty's stay at Tren^ (which was above a fortnight) He was* for
His own security, forced to confine^ Himself to the voluntary Imprisonment of
His Chamber, which was happily accommodated (in case the Rebels had searched
the House) with an old well-contrived secret place, long before made (for a
shelter against the inquisition of Pursuivants) by some of the ancient Family
of the Gerhards, Col. Windhams Lady's Ancestors, who were Recusants, and had
formerly been owners of that House.

His Majesty's meat was likewise (to prevent the danger of a discovery) for the
most part dressed in his own Chamber, the Cookery whereof served Him for some
divertisement of the time; And it is a great truth, if we say, there was no cost
spared, nor care wanting in the Colonel, for the entertainment and preservation
of his Royal Guest.

On the 3. of October, His Majesty) having given Colonel Windham particular
thanks for his great care and sidelity toward him) left Trent, and began his
journey, with Colonel Philips, and personating a tenants son of his, toward
Hele, attended by Henry Pe^^rs (who i^ now Yeoman of the field ^^ Hi^ M^j^sty)
and riding before Mrs. Cunningsby: The Travailers passed by Wincaunton, and
near the midst of that days journey arrived at Mere, a little Market Town in
Wiltshire, and dined at the George-Inn; the Host, Mr. Christoph. Philips, whom
the Colonel knew to be perfectly honest.

The Host sat at the Table with His Majesty, and administered matters of
discourse, told the Colonel for news, that he heard the Men of Westminster
(meaning the Rebels) not withstanding their Victory at Worcester, were in a
grate maze, not knowing what was become of the King; but (says he) it is the
most received opinion that he is come in a disguise to London, and many Houses
have been searched for Him there; at which His Majesty was observed to mile.

After Dinner mine Host familiarly asked the King, if he were a friend to
Caesar, to which His Majesty answered, Yes* then said he, here is a health to
King Charles in a glass of Wine, which His Majesty and the Colonel both
pledged, and that evening arrived in safety at Hele. And Hi^ Majesty since His
happy return has been pleased to ask what was become of his honest Host at
Mere?

In the mean time the Lord Wilmot (who took up the borrowed name of Mr. Barlow)
rode to such Gentlemen of his acquaintance in Hampshire, whom he knew to be
faithful Subjects, to seek means for (what he so much desired) the
transportation of His Majesty; and first repaired to Mr. Laurence Hyde, (a name
as faithful, as fortunate in His Majesty's service at his house at Hinton
D'aubigny near Catharington, then to Mr. Thamas Henslow at Burhant in the same
County, to whom (as persons of known fidelity) my Lord communicated his weighty
business, and desired their assistance for procuring a Bark for His Majesty's
transportation.

Mr. Henslow (in zeal to this service) immediately acquainted the Earl of
Southampton (then at his House at Titchfield, and now with much merit dignifyed
with the great Office of Lord high Treasurer of England) with this most
important affair; my Lord Wilmot judging it fitter for Mr. Henslow (his
neighbor) to do it, than for, himself, in those circumstances, to appear at my
Lords house; whose eminent fidelity and singular prudence, in the conduct of
even the greatest affairs of State, being known both to them and all the world,
and his great power and command at Bewly Haven and the maritine parts of
Hampshire, esteemed very favorable for their design, wherein his Lordship was
extremely active and sollicitous.

Besides this, Mr Laurance Hyde recommended my Lord Wilmot to Colonel George
gunter, who lived at Rackton near Chichester in Sussex, and was known to be
both faithful and active, not unlike to be succesful in this service, to whom
therefore my Lord hasted, and lay at Rackton one night, where he imparted his
great solicitation to the Colonel and and his kinsman Mr. Thomas Gunter, who
was then accidentally there.

All these persons had the like instructions from my Lord, which made a deep
impression on their loyal hearts, and excited them to use their utmost
endeavors by several ways and means to procure the Noah's Ark, which might at
last secure His Majesty from the great inundation of Rebellion and Treason,
which then did overspread the face of his whole Dominions.

But to return to my humble observance of His Majesty at Hele, where Mrs. Hyde
was so transported with zeal and loyalty toward Him, that at Supper, though
His Majesty was set at the lower end of the Table, yet the good Gentlewoman had
much ado to overcome herself, and not carve to him first, however she could
not refrain from drinking to Him in a glass of Wine, and giving Him two Larks,
when others had but one.

After Supper Mr. Fredrick Hyde (brother in Law to the Widow, who was then at
Hele, and since created Sergeant at Law) discoursed with His Majesty upon
various subjects, not suspecting who he was, but wondered to receive such
rational discourse from a Person, whose habit spoke him, but of mean degree;
and when His Majesty was brought to his Chamber, Doctor Henchman attended him
there, and had a long and private communication with him.

Next day it was thought fit, to prevent the danger of any discovery, or even
suspicion in the house, that in regard His Majesty might possibly stay there
some days before the convenience of a Transportation could be found out, he
should that day publicly take his leave, and ride about two miles from the
house, and then be privately brought in again the same evening, when all the
servants were at Supper; which was accordingly performed, and after that time
His Majesty appeared no more at Hele in public, but had meat brought him
privately to his Chamber, and was attended by the good Widow with much care and
observance.

Now among the many faithful Sollicitors for this long expected Bark, Colonel
Gunter happened to be the lucky man, who first procured it at Brighthemston in
Sussex by the assistance of Mr. Francis Mansel, Merchant of Chichester; and the
concurrent endeavors of Mr. Thomas Gunter; And on Saturday night the eleventh
of October he brought the happy tidings to My Lord Wilmot, and Col. Philips who
then lay, the one at Mr. Laurence, Hydes, the other at Mr. Anthony Brown's
house, his neighbor and Tenant.

The next morning, being Sunday, Col. Philips was dispatched to Hele with the
much desired news, and with instructions to attend His Majesty on monday to the
Down's called old Winchester, near Warnford.

Early in the morning His Majesty was privately conveyed from Hele, and went on
foot at least two miles to Clarendon Park Corner, attended by Docter Henchman,
then took horse, with Col. Philips, and at the appointed time and place the
Lord Wilmot, Col. Gunter, and Mr. Tho. Gunter met His Majesty, with a brace of
Crey-hounds, the better to carry on the disguise.

That night, though both Mr. Lawrence Hyde and Mr. Henslow had each of them
provided a secure lodging for His Majesty by the Lord Wilmots order, yet it was
judged fittest by Colonel Gunter, and accordingly agreed unto by my Lord, that
His Majesty should lodge at Mr. Thomas Symons house at Hambledon in Hampshire,
who married the Colonels Sister, in regard the Colonel knew them to be very
faithful, but chiefly because it lay more directly in the way from Hele to
Brighthemston; and accordingly Colonel Gunter attended His Majesty to his
Sisters house that night, who provided a good Supper for them, though she had
not the least suspicion or intimation of His Majesty's Presence among them.

The KING and his small Retinue, arriving in safety at Mr. Symons house on
Monday night the 13. of October, were heartily welcomed by Mrs. Symons, for her
husband was not then at home; but by that time they had supped in comes Mr.
Symons, who, wondering to see so many strangers in his house, was assured by his
Brother Gunter, that they were all honest Gentlemen, yet, at first interview,
he much suspected Mr. Jackson to be a Roundhead, observing how little hair
William Penderels Scissers had left Him; but at last being fully satisfied they
were all Cavaliers, he soon laid open his heart, and thought nothing too good
for them, was sorry his beer was no stronger, and, to encourage it, fetched
down a bottle of strong water, and, mixing it with the Beer, drank a cheerful
cup to Mr. Jackson, calling him brother Roundhead, whom His Majesty pledged;
who was here observed to be clothed in a short Juppa of a sad colored cloth,
and his breeches of another species, with a black hat, and without cuffs,
somewhat like the meaner sort of Country Gentlemen.

Mr. Symons in the time of entertaining his Guests, did by chance let fall an
Oath, for which Mr. Jackson took occasion modestly to reprove him.

His Majesty, thus resting himself Monday night at Hambledon, early on Tuesday
morning (14. October.) prepared for his journey to Brigthemston, distant about
thirty five miles from thence; But (having then no further use of Colonel
Philips) dismissed him with thanks for his fidelity and service, in this most
secret and important affair; and then, having also bidden farewell to Mr. Symons
and his wife, took horse, attended by my Lord Wilmot and his man, Colonel
Gunter, and Mr. Thomas Gunter.

When they came near the Lord Lumleys house at Stanstead in Sussex, it was
considered, that the greatness of the number of horse might possibly raise some
suspicion of them, Mr. Thomas Gunter was therefore dismis'd with thanks, for
the service he had done, and His Majesty held on his journey without any stay,
and being come to Bramber within seven miles of the desired Port, met there
some of Colonel Herbert Morleys Soldiers, who yet did neither examine, nor had
they, as far as could be discerned, the least suspicion of the Royal
Passengers, who arrived at last at the George Inn in Brighthamston, where Mr.
Francis Mansel, (who assisted Colonel Gunter in this happy service, had agreed
to meet him.)

At supper Mr. Mansel sat at the upper end of the Table, and Mr. Jackson (for
that Name His Majesty still retained) at the lower end. The Innkeepers name
was Smith, and had formerly related to the Court, so that he suspected Mr.
Jackson to be whom he really was, which His Majesty understanding, he
discoursed with his Host after supper, whereby his loyalty was confirmed; and
the man proved faithful.

The next morning, being Wedenesday 15. October, (the same day on which the
Noble Earl of Derby became a Royal Martyr at Boulton) His Majesty, having given
particular thanks to Colonel Gunter, for his great care, pains, and fidelity
toward Him, took Shipping with the Lord Wilmot in the Bark, which lay in
readiness for him at that Harbor, and whereof Mr. Nicholas Tetersal was owner;
And the next day, with an auspicious gale of wind, landed safely at Fecan near
Haure de Grace in Normandy; Where His Majesty might happily say with David;
Thou have delivered me from the violent man, therefore will I sing praises to
thy Name, O Lord.

This very Bark, after His Majesty's happy restoration, was by Cap. Tetersal
brought into the River Thames, and lay some months at Anchor before Whitehall,
to renew the memory of the happy service it had performed.

His Majesty having nobly rewarded Cap. Tetersal, in Gold for his
transportation, lodged this night at an Inn in Fecam, and the next day rode to
Roan, still attended by the faithful Lord Wilmot, where he continued Incognito
several days at Mr. William Scots house, since created Baronet, till he had
sent an Express to the Queen his Royal Mother (who had been long sollicitous to
hear of his safety) and the Court of France; intimating his safe arrival there,
and had quitted his disguised habit for one more befitting the dignity of so
great a KING.

Upon the first intelligence of this welcome news, his Highness the Duke of
York sent his Coach forthwith to attend His Majesty at Roan, and the Lord
Gerard, with others His Majesty Servants, made all possible have, with glad
hearts, to perform their duty to Him. So that on the 29 of October, His Majesty
set forward toward Paris, lay that night at Fleury, about seven Leagues from
Roan; the next morning his Royal Brother the Duke of York was ready to receive
Him at Magnie, and that evening His Majesty was met at Mouceaux, a Village near
Paris, by the Queen of England, accompanied with her Brother the Duke of
Orleans, and attended by a great number of coaches and many both English and
French Lords and Gentlemen on horseback, and was thus gladly conducted the same
night, though somewhat late, to the Louvre at Paris, to the inexpressible joy
of his Dear Mother the Queen, his Royal Brother the Duke of York, and of all
true hearts.

Here we must again, with greater reason, humbly contemplate the admirable
Providence of Almighty God, which cer^ainly never appeared more miraculously
^han in this strange deliverance of His Majesty from such an infinity of
dangers, that History it self cannot produce a parallel, nor will Posterity
willingly believe it.

From the 3. of September at Worcester to the 15. of October at Brithemston,
being one and forty days, He pasted through more dangers than he travailed
miles, of which yet He traversed in that time only ^eer 'three hundred (not to
speak of His dangers at Sea, both at his coming unto Scotland, and his going
out of England, nor of his long march from Scotland to Worcester (sometimes on
foot with uneasy shoes; at other times on horsback, encombered with a
portmantean, and which was worse, at another time, on the gallback'd,
slow-paced millers horse; sometimes acting one disguise in course linen and a
leather doublet; sometimes another, of almost as bad a complexion; one day He
is forced to sculke in a barn at Madely; another day sits with Colonel Carlos
in ^ Tree, with his feet extremely surbated and at night glad to 1 Samuel 19. 2.
Thus Jonathan prayed David to abide in a secret place and hide himself from the
fury of Saul.
lodge with Willam Penderel in a secret plac^ at Boscobel which never was
intended for the dormitory of a King.

Sometimes he was forced to shift with course fare for a Bellyfull; another
time in a wood, glad to relieve the necessities of nature with a mess of milk,
served up in an homely dish by Goodwife Yates a poor Country woman; Then again,
for a variety of tribulation, when he thought himself almost out of danger, he
directly meets some of those rebels, who so greedily sought his blood, yet, by
Gods great providence, had not the power to discover Him; and (which is more
than has yet been mentioned) He sent at another time to some Subjects for
relief and assistance in his great necessity, who out of a pusillanimous fear
of the bloody Arch-Rebel then reigning, durst not own Him.

Besides all this it was not the least of his afflictions daily to hear the Earl
of Derby and other his most Loyal Subjects, some murdered, some imprisoned, and
others sequestered in heaps, by the same bloody Usurper, only for performing
their duty ^o their Lawful King. In a word, there ^as no kind of misery (but
death it self) ^f which His Majesty, in this horrid ^ersecution, did not in
some measure, ^oth in body, mind, and estate, bear a ^ery great share; yet such
was his invin^ible Patience in this time of Trial, such ^is Fortitude, that he
overcame them all with such pious advantage to himself, that their memory is
now sweet, and It Is ^ood for Him, that He has been afflicted.

Of these His Majesty's sufferings and ^orced extermination from his own
Dominions, Englands Great Chancellor thus ^xcellently Descants.

We may tell those desperate wretches, Lord Chancellors Speech to the
Parliament, 29. December. 1660.
who yet harbor in their thoughts wicked designs against the Sacred person of
^he King, in order to the compassing their own immaginations, That God Almighty
would not have led Him through so many wildernesses of afflictions of all
kinds, conducted Him through so many perils by Sea, and perils by Land,
snatched Him out of the midst of thi^ Kingdom, when it was not worthy o^ Him,
and when the hands of His Enemies were even upon Him, when they thought
themselves so sure of Him, tha^ they would bid so cheap and so vile a price for
Him; He would not in that Articl^ have so covered Him with a Cloud, tha^ He
travailed even with some pleasur^ and great observation through the mids^ of
His Enemies: He would not so wonderfully have new modelled that Army; s^
inspired their hearts and the hearts of the whole Natoniwith an honest and
impatien^ longing for the return of their Dear Sovereign, and in the mean time
have exercis'^ Him (which had little less of Providenc^ in it than the other)
with those unnatur^ or at least unusual disrespects and reproaches abroad, that
He might have a harmles^ and an innocent appetite to His ow^ Country, and
return to His own People, with a full value, and the whole unwasted bulk of His
affections, without being corrupted or biased by extraordinary foreign
obligations; God Almighty would not have done all this but for a Servant, whom
he will always preserve, as the apple of his own eye, and always defend from
the most secret machinations of His Enemies.

Thus the best and happiest of Orators.

WE have hitherto only admired his Majesty's Fortitude; which Cardinal virtue,
properly consists of two parts, the one active, the other passive, the first
was signally manifest in his Courage during the time of Battle; the other, in
his Patience, by suffering his following afflictions with an even and undaunted
Spirit; yet his Gratitude and invincible Memory remain still to be reverenced
by my humble Pen: For, among the so many persons, who were instrumental and
serviceable in this his great deliverance, there was scarce one whose face
(after so many years absence) His Majesty did not, at his happy return,
precisely remember, and whose merits he has not particularly owned and
rewarded, either in fact, or by his Royal Promise, which are equivalent.

He dignifyed the Lord Wilmot (of principal merit in this service) with the
Earldom of Rochester, and doubtless his acknowledgments had not beenso bounded,
but that death snatched that noble Lord away, before his great Masters
restoration.

And, besides His Majesty's Grace vouchsafed to Mrs. Jane Lane and Col. Francis
Windham, the most honorable Houses of Parliament took notice of the great
services performed by them, and were so sensible thereof, That on the
seventeenth of December 1660. they voted one thousand pounds to be given the
one, and on the nineteenth of the same month, voted the like sum to the other,
with the thanks of the Parliament, the Representative of the whole Nation.

Doctor Henchman (as ye have heard) is advanced to the Bishopric of Salisbury.

Master George Norton has received the honor of Knighthood from His Majesty's
hands.

Col. Philips is deservedly preferred to be one of the Grooms of His Majesty's
Bedchamber.

Mr. Selleck (to omit others) is now Dr. in Divinity, and advanced to the
Archdeaconry of the Cathedral Church of Bathe.

How can we better conclude these our humble endeavors, than in the Words of
Holy David, His Majesty's great Exemplar in afflictions, and Royal Patience,
and to whom we heartily pray; and confidently hope His Majesty will be a
perfect Successor in tranquillity of State, and execution of judgment and
justice to all His People,

The KING shall joy in thy strength, O^ Lord, and in thy salvation how greatly
shall he rejoice?

Thou have given Him his hearts desire and not denied him the request of his
lips. For thou preventest him with the blessing o^ goodness: thou set a
Crown of pure gol^ on his head.

He asked life of thee, and thou gave i^ him, even length of days for ever
and ever

His glory is great in thy salvation, hono^ and Majesty have thou laid upon
him.

For Thou have made him most blessed for ever: Thou have made him exceeding
gla^ with thy countenance.

For the KING trusts in our Lord, an^ though the mercy of the most high, he
sha^^ not be moved.

Some may happily here expect I should have continued the particulars of this
History to the time of His Majesty's happy restoration, by giving an account
of the reception His Majesty found from ^he several Princes beyond the Seas,
dur^ng his Exile, and of his evenness of mind, and prudent deportment toward
them upon all occasions; But that was clear^y beyond the scope of my intention,
which aimed only to write the wonder^ul History of a Great and Good King,
violently pursued in His own Dominions, by the worst of Rebels, and
miraculously preserved, under God, by the best of Subjects.

In other Countries, of which His Majesty traversed not a few, He found
kindness and a just compassion of His Adversity from many, and from some a
neglect and disregard; yet, in all the almost nine years abroad, I have not
heard of any passage that approached ^he degree of a Miracle like that at home.
Therefore I may, with faith to my own intentions, not improperly make a silent
transition from His Majesty's arrival at Paris, on the thirtieth day of October
1651. to His Return to London on the nine and twentieth o^ May 1660. and with a
TE DEVM LAVDAMVS, sum up all, and say* with the Prophet,

My Lord, the King, is come again^ in peace, to his own House, 2 Samuel 19. 30.

And all the people shouted, and said GOD SAVE THE KING 1 Samuel 30 24.

FINIS.
Claustrum Regale Reseratum OR THE KINGS Concealment AT TRENT

Published by A. W.

In umbra alarm tuarum sperabo donec transeat iniquitas. LONDON, Printed by M.
Clark, for H. Brom in S. Paul's Churchyard, and C. Harper in Fleetstreet. 1681

TO THE QUEENS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
THis little Book having obtained liberty, after a long Imprisonment, to walk
abroad, prostrates it self at Your Majesty's feet for patronage and protection.
In it Your Majesty may behold GOD's wonderful Mercy and Providence, in keeping
and preserving our Gracious Sovereign from the hands of His Enemies, when they
so pleased themselves with the hopes of seizing His Sacred Person after the
Battle of Worcester, As they had invented and prepared new ways to afflict His
Majesty, such as till then never entered into the hearts the worst of Tyrants
before them. But it pleased God to frustrate the hopes and designs of the Kings
Adversaries, and to restore His Majesty to His Fathers Throne: Which that he
may long enjoy with Your Majesty, in health, Peace and Happiness, Is, and shall
be the prayers of

Your MAJESTY'S Most obedient, and most Faithful Servant, ANNE WYNDHAM.

Claustrum Regale Reseratum: OR, THE KINGS Concealment AT TRENT.
HOw that after the Battle of Worcester, His Sacred Majesty most wonderfully
escaped the hands of his blood-thirsty Enemies, and (under a Disguise, in the
company of Mrs. Jane Lane) safely arrived at Abbots-Leigh in Somersetshire,
(the seat of Sir George Norton, lying near to the City of Bristol) has been
fully published unto the World. His Majesty's Journey from thence to the house
of Colonel Francis Wyndham at Trent in the same County, his Stay there, his
Endeaour (though frustrate) to get over into France, his Return to Trent, his
final Departure thence in order to his happy Transportation, are the subject of
this present Relation. A Story, in which the Constellations of Providence are
so refulgent, that their light is sufficient to confute all the Atheists of the
world, and to enforce all persons (whose faculties are not pertinaciously
depraved) to acknowledge a watchful Eye of GOD from above, looking upon all
Actions of Men here below, making even the most wicked, subservient to his just
and glorious designs. And indeed, whatsoever the Ancients fabled of Gyges's
Ring, by which he could render himself Invisible, or the Poets fancied of their
Gods, who usually carried their chief Favorites in the Clouds, and by drawing
those aerial Curtains, did so conceal them, that they were heard and seen of
none, whilst they both heard and saw others, is here most certainly verified.
For, the Almighty so closely coveed the King, with the wing of his Protection,
and so clouded the Understanding of his cruel Enemies, that the most piercing
Eye of malice could not see, nor the most Barbarously-bloody Hand offer
Violence to his Sacred Person: God smiting his pursuers (as once he did the
Sodomites) with blindness, who with as much eagerness sought to sacrifice the
Lords Anointed to their fury, as the other did to prostitute the Angels to
their lust.

But before the several Particulars of this Story are laid open, two Questions
(easily foreseen) which will be readily asked by every Reader, call for an
Answer. The one is, Why this Relation so much expected, so much longed for, has
been kept up all this while from public veiw? And the other, How it comes to
pass, that now it takes the liberty to walk abroad? Concerning the first, it
must be known, that a Narrative of these Passages was (by especial command frnm
his Majesty) written by the Colonels own hand, immediately after the Kings
return into England; which (being presented to his Majesty) was laid up in his
Royal Cabinet, there to rest for some time, it being the Kings pleasure (for
reasons best known to his Sacred self) that it should not then be published.

And as his Majesty's command to keep it private, is a satisfactory answer to
the first; so, his license now obtained that it might travel abroad, may
sufficiently resolve the second question. But besides this, many prevalent
reasons there are, which plead for a publication; the chief of which are
briefly these. That the implacable Enemies of this Crown may be for ever
silenced and ashamed; who having neither Law, nor Religion to patronize their
unjust undertakings, construed a bare Permission, to be a Divine Approbation of
their Actions; and (taking the Almighty to be such a one as themselves)
blasphemously entitled God to be the Author of all their wickedness. But the
arm of God stretched out from heaven to the rescue of the King, cutting off the
clue of their Success, even then when they thought they had spun up their
thread, has not left them so much as an apron of fig leaves to cover the
nakedness of their most shameful proceedings.

The next is, That the Truth of his Majesty's Escape (being minced by some,
mistaken by others, and not fully set forth by any) might appear in its native
^eauty and splendour: That as every dust ^f gold is gold, and every ray of light
is ^^ght; so every jot and title of Truth being truth, not one grain of the
treasure, nor ^ne beam of the luster of this Story might ^e lost or clouded; it
being so rare, so excel^ent, that aged Time out of all the Archives ^f Atiquity
can hardly produce a Parallel. ^ingularly admirable indeed it is, if we
^onsider the Circumstances and Actors. The Colonel (who chiefly designed, and
^oved in this great affair) could not have ^ad the freedom to have served his
Maje^ty, had he not been a Prisoner; his very Confinement giving him both a
liberty, and protection to act. For, coming home from Weymouth upon his Parole,
he had ^he opportunity to travel freely, without fear of being stopped, and
taken up: And being newly removed from Sher^orne to Trent, the jealous eye of
Somer^etshire Potentates had scarce then found him out, whose malevolent Aspect
af^erwards seldom suffered him to live at home. and too too often furnished his
house with very unwelcom guests. Others, who contributed their assistance, were
persons of both sexes, and of very different conditions and qualities: And
although their endeavors often proved successless, though they received
discouragements on one hand, were terrified with threats on the other; That a
seal of silence should be imprinted upon the lips of Women, who are become
proverbial for their garrulity; That faithfulnes^ and constancy should guard
the heart^ of servants, who are usually corrupted with rewards, or affrighted
with punishments; That neither Hope nor Fear (mos^ powerful passions, heightened
by Capital animadversions proclaimed against Al^ that should conceal, and large
Remunerations promised to such as should discover the King) could work nothing
upon any single person, so as to remove him o^ her from their respective duty,
but that al^ should so harmoniously concenter, both i^ the Design, and also
afterward keep themselves so long close shut up under the lock of secrecy, that
nothing could be discovered by the most exquisite art an^ cunning, till the
blessed Restoration o^ his Majesty to his glorious Throne, s^ filled their
hearts with joy, that it brok^ open the door of their lips, and let their
tongue loose to tell this Miracle to the amazed World, would (were not the
Persons yet alive, and the Story fresh in memory) rarifie it into a Romance.

The reproaches and scandals, by which some envious persons have sought to
diminish and vilify the faithful services, which the Colonel out of the
integrity of his soul performed unto his Majesty, shall not here be mentioned.
Because by taking up dirt to bespatter him, they defile their own hands, and
the gun they level at his Reputation, recoils to the wounding of their own.

These things thus premised, by way of Introduction, open the Gate, through
which you may enter, and in the ensuing Pages (as in several Tables) take a
full view of the Particulars.

The Disguise His Majesty put on, secured him from the Cruelty of his Enemies;
but could not altogether hide him from the prying eyes of his dutiful Subjects.
For in the time of his stay at Leigh, one John Pope (then Butler to Sir George
Norton, but formerly a Soldier for the King in the West) through all those
clouds espied the most Illustrious Person of the King, With him His Majesty
(after he saw himself discovered) was pleased familiarly to discourse; And
speaking of the great Sufferings of very many of his Friends in the Western
parts, (most whereof were well known to Pope) his Majesty enquired if he knew
Colonel Francis Wyndham, who (in the time of the late Wars) was Governor of
Dunster-Castle? Very well, Sir, answered Pope. The King then demanding what was
become of him? Pope replies, That the Colonel had married Mrs. Anne Gerard, one
of the daughters and heiresses of Thomas Gerard Esquire; late of Trent in
Somersetshire, and that he had newly brought thither his Mother (the Lady
Wyndham) his Wife and family, and that he believed the Colonel intended there
to reside and live. His Majesty having received this intelligence concerning
the Colonel, together with an exact information of the situation of Trent,
sought an opportunity to speak with Mrs. Lane, (from whom the better to conceal
himself, he then kept at a distance) and by means of Mr. Lassels (who
accompanied the King in this journey) obtaining his desire, His Majesty with
much contentment imparted to Mrs. Lane what Pope had informed him concerning
Colonel Wyndham, and his habitation; telling her withal, That if she could
bring him thither, he should not much doubt of his safety.

In this very point of time comes the Lord Henry Wilmot (afterward Earl of
Rochester) from Dirham in Glocestershire (the seat of John Winter Esquire; a person
of known loyalty and integrity) to ^eigh. My Lord had attended his Majesty in
his passage Westward, and on Friday morning (September the 13.) met
accidentally Captain Thomas Abington of Dowdswell in the County of Gloucester at
Pinbury Park; and being known by the Captain, (who had served, under his
Lordship in the Wars) was that night by ^im conducted to Mr. Winter's, from
whom his Lordship (as he has often ^ince acknowledged) received great
Ci^ilities. Mrs. Lane presently reveals to ^he Lord Wilmot the Kings resolution
to ^emove to Trent: whereupon my Lord demanded of Henry Rogers (Mr. Winter's
^ervant, and his Lordships guide from Dirham to Leigh) whether he knew Trent?
He answered that Colonel Wyndham and his Master had married two Sisters, and
that he had often waited on his Master thither. These things so happily
concurring, his Majesty commanded the Lord Wilmot to haste to Trent and to
ascertain the Colonel of his speedy Approach.

His Lordship took leave, and continuing Rogers for his guide, with one Robert
Swan, arrived at Trent the sixteenth of September. Rogers was sent in forthwith
to the Colonel to acquai^^ him, that a Gentleman a friend of his, desired the
feavour of him, that he would please to step forth and speak with him. The
Colonel enquiring of Rogers whether he knew the Gentleman or his business?
answered, No, he understood nothing at all, but only that he was called by the
name of Mr. Morton. Then without further discourse the Colonel came forth, and
found the Gentleman walking near the Stable; whom as soon he approached,
(although it was somewhat dark) he saluted by the Title of My Lord Wilmot. His
Lordship seemed to wonder that he should be known, but it was nothing strange
onsidering the Colonels former acquaintance with him, being one of the first
that engaged under his Command in his late Majesty's service. Besides his
Lordship was not in the least altered, except a Hawk on his fist, and a Lure by
his side might pass for a Disguise. This Confidence of his Lordship really
begat admiration in the Colonel, calling to mind the great danger he was in,
and whose Harbinger he was; For he advertised the Colonel, that the King
himself was on his way to Trent, intending that very night to lodge at
Castle-Cary (a Town six miles thence) hoping by Gods assistance to be with him
about ten of the clock next morning.

At this joyful news the Colonel was transported, (there having run a report,
that his Majesty was slain in the Fight at Worcester) and giving God thanks for
his wonderful mercy, he assured his Lordship, That for his Majesty's
preservation he would value neither his life, family nor fortune, and would
never injure His Majesty's confidence of him; not doubting, but that God who
had led His Majesty through the midst of such inexpressible dangers, would
deliver him from all those barbarous threats, and bloody intentions of his
Enemies. With these and such like expressions, the Colonel brought the Lord
Wilmot into his parlour, where he received an exact account of His Majesty's
condition and present affairs.

Next morning, the Colonel found it necessary to acquaint the Lady Wyndham his
mother, and also his own Lady, with the particulars the Lord Wilmot had
overnight imparted to him, concerning the King. The relation he gave them, did
not (through the weakness of their sex) bring upon them any womanish passion,
but surprised with joy, they most cheerfully resolve (without the least show of
fear) to hazard all, for the safety of the King. And so (begging Gods blessing
upon their future endeavors) they contrive how his Majesty might be brought
into the house, without any suspicion to their family, consisting of above
twenty persons. Among them therefore, Mrs. Julian Coningsby (the Lady Wyndham's
Niece) Elianor Withers, Joan Halsenoth, and Henry Peter's (whose loyalty to the
King, and fidelity to themselves, they had sufficiently experienced) are made
privy to their design. Next they consider what Chambers are fittest for his
Majesty's rception. Four are made choice of; amongst which the Lady. Wyndham's
was counted most convenient for the daytime, where the servants might wait
with most freedom upon his Majesty. Then a safe place is provided to retreat
unto, in case of search, or imminent danger: And lastly, Employments are
designed to remove all others out of the way at the instant of his Majesty's
arrival. All which after a while, answered their desires, even beyond their
expectation.

Between nine and ten the next morning, the Colonel and his Lady walking
toward the fields adjoining to the house, espied the King riding before Mrs.
Lane, and Mr. Lassels in their company. As Soon as his Majesty came near the
Colonel, He called to him, Frank, Frank, how do thou do? By which gracious
pleasance the Colonel perceived, that though his Majesty's habit and
countenance were much changed yet his Heroic spirit was the same, and his mind
immutable. The Colonel (to avoid the jealous eyes of some neighbors) instantly
conveyed the King and Mrs. Lane into the Lady Wyndham's Chamber, where the
passions of Joy and Sorrow did a while combat in them, who beheld his Sacred
Person. For what loyal Eye could look upon so Glorious a Prince thus eclipsed,
and not pay unto him the homage of tears? But the consideration of his
Majesty's safety, the gracious words of his own mouth confuting the sad reports
of his untimely death, together with the hope of his future preservation, soon
dried them up. In a short time the Colonel brought the Lord Wilmot to the King,
and then the Ladies withdrew into the Parlour, having first agreed to call Mrs.
Lane Cousin, and to entertain her with the same familiarity as if she had been
their near Relation. That day she stayed at Trent, and the next morning early
Mr. Lassels and she departed.

His Majesty, after he had refreshed himself, commanded the Colonel in the
presence of the Lord Wilmot, to propose, What way he thought most probable for
his Escape into France; for thither he desired with all speed to be
transported. The Colonel (the King giving him this opportunity) entertained and
encouraged his Majesty with this remarkable passage of Sir Thomas Windham (his
Father) Who, not long before his death [in the Year 1636] called unto him his
five Sons, (having not seen them together in some years before) and discoursed
unto us [said he] of the loving Peace and Prosperity this Kingdom had enjoyed
under its Three last Glorious Monarchs: Of the many Miseries and Calamities
which lay sore upon our Ancestors, by the several Invasions and Conquests of
Foreign Nations, and likewise by Intestine Insurrections and Rebellions. And
notwithstanding the strange mutations and Changes in England, He showed, how it
pleased God in love to our Nation to preserve an undoubted Succession of Kings,
to sit in the Regal Throne. He mentioned the healing Conjunction of the two
Houses of York and Lancaster, and the blessed Union of the two Crowns of
England and Scotland, stopping up those fountains of Blood, which, by National
feuds and quarrels kept open, had like to have drowned the whole Island. He
said, he feared the beautiful garment of Peace would shortly be torn in pieces
through the Neglect of Magistrates, the general corruption of manners, and the
prevalence of a Puritanical faction, which (if not prevented) would undermine
the very pillars of Government. My sons! We have hither to seen serene and
quiet Times: but now prepare your selves for cloudy and troublesome. I command
you to honor and obey our Gracious Sovereign, and in all times to adhere to
the Crown; and though the Crown should hang upon a Bush, I charge you forsake
it not. These words being spoken with much earnestness, both in gesture and
manner extraordinary, he arose from his chair, and left us in a deep
consultation what the meaning should be of -- The Crown hanging upon a Bush.
These words, Sir, (said the Colonel) made so firm an impression in all our
breasts, that the many afflictions of these sad Times cannot raze out their
undelible characters. Certainly these are the days which my Father pointed out
in that Expression: and I doubt not, God has brought me through so many
dangers, that I might show my self both a dutiful Son, and a loyal Subject, in
faithfully endeavoring to serve your Sacred Majesty, in this your greatest
Distress*

After this Rehearsal, the Colonel (in obedience to His Majesty's command) told
the King, That Sir John Strangways (who had given many testimonies of his
loyalty, having two Sons, both of them Colonels for his Royal Father) lived but
four miles from Trent; That he was a person of great fortune and interest in
Dorsetshire, and therefore he supposed that either Sir John, or his Sons might
be servicable to His Majesty's occasions. The King, in prosecution of this
proposal, commanded the Colonel to wait on them; and accordingly the next
morning he went over to Melbury; the place where Sir John dwelt. No sooner was
he come thither, but he met with Colonel Giles Strangways, and after usual
salutations, they walked inio the Park adjoining to the house, where Colonel
Wyndham imparted the reason and end of his present Visit. Colonel Strangways
his answer was, That he was infinitely grieved, because he was not able to serve
His Majesty in procuring a Vessel according to expectation; That he knew not
any one Master of a Ship, or so much as one Mariner that he could trust: All
that were formerly of his acquaintance in Weymouth, being for their loyalty
banished, and gone beyond the sea; and in Pool and Lime he was a mere stranger,
having not one Confident in either. A hundred pounds in Gold he delivered to
Colonel Wyndham, to present to the King; which at his return, by command was
deposited in the hands of the Lord Wilmot, for his Majesty's use.

About this time the Forces under Cromwell were retreated from Worcester into
the several Quarters of the Country; some of which coming to Trent, proclaimed
the Overthrow of the Kings Army, and the Death of the King, giving out that he
was certainly killed; And one of them affirmed that he saw him dead, and that
he was buried among the rest of the slain, no injury being offered to his body,
because he was a Valiant Soldier, and a Gallant man. This welcome News so
tickled the Sectaries, that they could not hold from expressing their joy by
making Bonfiers, firing of Guns, Drinking, and other jollities, And for a close
of all, to the Church they must, and there ring the Kings knell. These rude
Extravagancies moved not His Majesty at all, but only (as if he were more
troubled for their madness, than his own misfortune) to this most Christian and
compassionate Expression, Alas poor people!

Now though the King valued not the menaces of his proud Enemies, being
confident they could do him no hurt; yet he neglected not to try the
faithfulness of his Friends to convey him out of their reach. Thus the former
design proving unsuccessful, and all hope of Transfretation that way being laid
aside, the Colonel acquainted His Majesty, that one Captain William Ellesden of
Lime (formerly well known unto him) with his Brother John Ellesden, (by means
of Colonel Bullen Reymes of Wadden in Dorsetshire) had conveyed over into
France, Sir John Berkley (afterward Lord Berkley) in a time of danger. To this
Captain therefore His Majesty sends the Colonel, who lodging at his house in
Lime, took an opportunity to tell him. That the Lord Wilmot had made his escape
from Worcester; that he lay privately near to him; and that his Lordship had
earnestly solicited him to use his utmost endeavors to secure him from the
hands of the pursuers. To this purpose he was come to town, and assured the
Captain, if he would join in this affair, his courtesy should never be
forgotten. The Captain very cordially embraced the motion, and went with the
Colonel to Charmouth (a little place near Lime) where at an Inn, he brought to
him a Tenant of his, one Stephen Limbry, assuring the Colonel that he was a
right honest man, and a perfect Royalist. With this Limbry Colonel Wyndham
treated under the name of Captain Norris, and agreed with him to transport
himself and three or four friends into France. The conditions of their
Agreement were; That before the two and twentieth day of that instant
September, Limbry should bring his Vessel into Charmou^^-Road, and on the said
two and twentieth, in the night should receive the Colonel and his company into
his Longboat from the Beach near Charmouth, from thence carry them to his
Ship, and so land them safe in France. This the Colonel conjured Limbry to
perform with all secrecy, because all the Passengers were of the Royal party,
and intended to be shipped without leave, to avoid such Oaths and Engagements,
which otherwise would be forced upon them: And therefore Privacie in this
transaction would free him from Danger, and themselves from Trouble, the true
cause why they so earnesty thirsted (for some time) to leave their native
Country. Limbry's Salary was Sixty pounds, which the Captain engaged to pay at
his return from France, upon sight of a Certificate under the Passengers hands
of their landing there. To the performance of these Covenants, Limbry with many
vows and protestations obliging himself, the Colonel with much satisfaction,
and speed came back to his Majesty and the Lord Wilmot to Trent, who at the
narration of these passages expressed no small contentment.

The business being thus far successfully laid, the King consults how it might
be prudentially managed, that so there might be no miscarriage in the
prosecution. Necessary it was that his Majesty and all his Attendants (contrary
to the use of Tavellers) should sit up all the night in the Inn at Charmouth;
that they ought to have the command of the house, to go in and out at pleasure,
the Tide not serving till twelve at night. To remove therefore all suspicion
and Inconveniniencies, this Expedient was found out.

Henry Peter's (Colonel Windham's servant) was sent to Charmouth Inn, who
inviting the Hostess to drink a glass of wine, told her, That he served a very
gallant Master, who had long most affectionately loved a Lady in Devon, and had
the happiness to be well beloved by her; and though her Equal in birth and
fortune, yet so unequal was his fate, that by no means could he obtain her
Friends consent: And therefore it was agreed between them, that he should carry
her thence, and marry her among his own Allies. And for this purpose his Master
had sent him to desire her to keep the best Chambers for him, intending to be
at her house upon the two and twentieth day of that month in the evening; where
he resolved not to lodge, but only to refresh himself and friends, and so
travel on either that night, or very early next morning. With this Love-story
(thus contrived and acted) together with a Persent delivered by Peter's from his
Master, the Hostess was so well pleased, that she promised him, her house and
servants should be at his Masters command. All which she very justly performed.

When the day appointed for His Majesty's journey to Charmouth was come, he was
pleased to ride before Mrs Julian Coningsby (the Lady Wyndham's Niece) as
formerly before Mrs. Lane: The Colonel was His Majesty's Guide, whilst the Lord
Wilmot with Peter's kept at a convenient distance, that they might not seem to
be all of one company.

In this manner traveling, they were timely met by Captain Elesden, and by him
conducted to a private house of his Brothers among the hills near Charmouth.
There His Majesty was pleased to discover himself to the Captain, and to give
him a piece of foreign Gold, in which in his solitary hours he made a hole to
put a ribbon in. Many like pieces His Majesty vouchsafed the Colonel and his
Lady, to be kept as Records of His Majesty's favor, and of their own fidelity
to his most Sacred Person in the day of his greatest Trial. All which they have
most thankfully treasured up as the chiefest Jewels of their Family.

This Royal Company from thence came to the Inn at Charmouth, a little after
night; where Captain Elesden solemnly engaging to see the Master of the ship
ready, (the wind blowing then fair for France) took leave of his Majesty. About
an hour after came Limbry to the Inn, and assured the Colonel all things were
prepared, and that about midnight his Longboat should wait at the place
appointed. The set hour drawing nigh, the Colonel with Peter's went to the
Seaside (leaving His Majesty and the Lord Wilmot in a posture to come away upon
call) where they remained all night expecting; but seeing no Longboat, neither
hearing any message from the Master of the ship, at the break of day the
Colonel returns to the Inn, and beseeches the King and the Lord Wilmot to haste
from thence. His Majesty was intreat^d; but the Lord Wilmot was desirous ^o
stay behind a little, promising to follow the King to Bridport, where His
Majesty intended to make a halt for him.

When the King was gone, the Lord Wilmot sent Peter's into Lime, to demand of
Captain Elesden the reason why Limbry broke his promise, and forfeited his
word? He seemed much surprised with this message, and said, He knew no reason,
except it being Fair-day the Seamen were drunk in taking their Farewell; and
withal advised his Lordship to be gone, because his stay there could not be
safe. But since that, Limbry himself has given this account under his own
hand: --

That according to an Agreement made at Charmouth, September the 19. 1651.
betwixt himself and one Captain Norris, (since known to be Colonel Francis
Winham) he put forth his Ship beyond the Cobs-mouth into Charmouth-road, where
his servants on the 22. of the same month were all ready in her, waiting his
coming; That he going to his house about ten that night, for linen to carry
with him, was unexpectedly locked into a chamber by his Wife, to whom he had a
little before revealed his intended Voyage with some Passengers into France*
for whose Transportation, at his return, he was to receive a considerable sum
o^ money from Captain Elesden.

This woman (it seems) was frighted into a panick fear by that dreadful
Proclamation (of the tenth of September) set out by the Men of Westminster, and
published that day at Lime. In this, ^ heavy Penalty was thundered out against
all that should conceal the King, or any of his party who were at Worcester
Fight* and a Reward of a Thousand pound^ promised to any that should betray
him* She, apprehending the Persons her husband engaged to carry over to be
Royalists, resolved to secure him from danger, by making him a Prisoner in hi^
own chamber. All the persuasions he use^ for his liberty, were in vain: For the
more he entreated, the more her violen^ passion increased, breaking forth into
such clamors and lamentations, that h^ feared if he should any longer contend
both himself and the Gentlemen he promised to transport, would be cast away in
this storm, without ever going to Sea*

Thus a Design in a business of the highest nature, carried on with industry
and prudence, even to the very last, still promising full hope of a happy
production, by one man's single whisper (the bane of Action) proved abortive.
For no doubt, had Limbry kept his counsel, he had gained the honor of
Conveying over his Majesty; of whose Noble Courage and Virtue, God was pleased
to make yet farther trial, as the sequel will inform.

The King passing on upon London-Road from Charmouth, met many travelers,
among whom was one of his Fathers servants, well known both to His Majesty and
the Colonel; who were very well pleased that he was not guilty of so much
Civility, as to give either of them the complement of a Salutation. As they
drew near to Bridport, the Colonel riding a little before, and entering the
town, perceived it full of Soldiers: whereupon stopping his horse till the King
came up, he inreated His Majesty to keep on, and by no means to put himself
into the mouth of them, who gaped greedily after his destruction. Nevertheless,
the King having engaged to the Lord Wilmot to expect him there, (without the
least apprehension of danger) rode into the George, and alighting in the Court,
was forced to stay there, and in the Stable, near half an hour, before the
Colonel could procure a Chamber. All this while his bloody Enemies were his
only Companions, with whom he discoursed freely without fear, and learned from
them their intended Voyage for Jersey and Guernsey, and their Design upon those
Islands. Here may you see the Pursuers overtaken, and the bitterest of Enemies
friendly discoursing with Him, whose utter Ruin they accounted would complete
their Happiness. He that sat in Heaven certainly laughed them to scorn, and by
the interposition of his mighty Arm eclipsed their glory, and by his admirable
Wisdom reproved and confuted their malice against the King, and their
blasphemies against Heaven.

No sooner had the King withdrawn himself from this dangerous Company into a
Chamber (with much difficulty obtained) but Mrs. Coningsby espied Pelers riding
into the Inn. He (being beckned up) acquainted His Majesty, that the Lord
Wilmot humbly petitioned him to make haste out of that place, and to overtake
him slowly passing on the road, and waiting his Majesty's coming. Presently
upon the dismission of Peter's, the King having taken some small repast, not far
from the Town joined in company again with the Lord Wilmot, and discoursing of
the several Adventures of that hopeful, and (as it fell out) most perilous
Journey, concluded that London-Road was very unsafe, and therefore resolved to
follow the next Turning which might probably lead toward Yeavill or Sherborn,
neither of which is computed to be above two miles distant from Trent.
Providence (the best of Guides) directed these Strangers (for so they were all
to those parts) to a way, which after many hours travel brought them into a
Village, in which was a small Inn for entertainment. Thus entered these masqued
Travelers, to enquire where they were. And to this purpose calling for some
Beer, the Host of the house (one Rice Jones) came forth, and informed them that
the place was called Broadwinsor. The Colonel knew the Innkeeper and his wife
to be very honest, loyal persons, and that for their fidelity to the King and
his party, they had (according to their condition) undergone their share of
troubles. The King understanding the affection of the people, resolves to lodge
in the house that night, it being already somewhat dark, and His Majesty and
Company sufficiently wearied with their former nights watching, and that days
travel. The Colonel (while the horses were put up) desired Mr. Jones to show
him the most private rooms; the reason he gave was, Because his Brother-in-law
Colonel Reymes (whom the Lord Willmot personated) had been a long time
imprisoned as well as himself; That they had lately obtained their Paroles, and
to be seen together so far from their homes, might create new jealousies, and
so consequently crush them with new troubles. The good Host upon this brought
them up into the highest chambers, where Privateness recompensed the meanness
of the Accommodation, and the pleasantness of the Host (a merry fellow) allayed
and mitigated the weariness of the Guests. Now the face of things began to
smile, which all the day and night preceding looked so louring and
ill-favored. But this short Calm was on a sudden interrupted by a violent
Storm. For in comes the Constable with almost Forty Soldiers to be billeted
that very night in the Inn: All the lower Receptacles were thronged up with
this unexpected Company; so that the King was in a manner besieged, there being
no passage from above, but through those suspected Guards. Thus every place
brought forth its troubles, and every period of time disclosed fresh dangers!
Shortly after the Soldiers had taken up their Quarters, a Woman in their
company fell in labor in the Kitchen. The pangs she endured, made the
Inhabitants of that place very ill at ease, fearing lest the whole Parish
should become the reputed Father, and be enforced to keep the Child. To avoid
this charge, the chiefest of the Parish post to the Inn, between whom and the
Soldiers arose a very hot conflict concerning provision to be made for the
mother and the infant. This dispute continued till such time as (according to
orders) they were to march to the Seaside. This quarrelsom Gossipping was a
most seasonable diversion, exercising the minds of those troublesome Fellows,
who otherwise were likely to have proved too too inquisitive after the Guests
in the house; the sad consequences of which, every loyal heart trembles to
think on.

Surely we cannot, (except we wilfully shut our own eyes) but clearly see, and
with all reverence and thankfulness adore the Divine Goodness for His Majesty's
signal Deliverances in this Voyage. Especially if looking back upon Charmouth,
we consider the dangers that threatened him, occaonsied by the Lord Wilmot's
short stay there, after the Kings departure. For one Hamnet a Smith, being
called to shoe his Lordships horse, said, He well knew by the fashion of the
shoes, that they were never set in the West, but in the North. The Hostler (a
bird of the same feather) hearing this, began to tell what Company had been
there, how they sat up, and kept their horses sadled all the night; and from
hence they conclude, That either the King, or some Great Persons had certainly
been at the Inn. The Hostler (whose heart was soured against the King) runs
presently to one Westly (of the same leaven) then Minister of Charmouth, to
inform him of these Passages, and to ask counsel what was to be done. This
Westley was at his Morning Exercise, and being something long-winded [And by
the way it may be observed, that long Prayers proceeding from a Traitorous
heart, once did good, but by accident onely] the Hostler, unwilling to lose his
reward at the Gentleman's taking horse, returns without doing his errand. As
soon as my Lord was mounted and gone, Hamnet tells Westly of the discourse
between himself and the Hostler. Away comes Westley upon full speed to the Inn,
and (almost out of breath) asks the woman of the house, what Guests she had
entertained that night? She said, They were all strangers to her, she knew them
not. I tell you then (said he) one of them was the King. Then hastily turning
away from her, he and Hamnet ran to Mr. Butler of Commer (then Justice of
Peace) to have him dispatch abroad his Warrants to raise the Country for the
apprehending of the King, and those persons the last night with him at
Charmouth. But he spends his mouth in vain, a deaf ear is turned upon him, no
Warrant would be issued forth. This check given to his zeal so vexed him, that
it had like to have caused a suffocation, had not Captain Massey (as errant a
Hotspur as himself) given it vent, by raising a Party and pursuing the King
upon London-Road. But God preserved His Majesty by diverting him to
Broadwinsor, whilst Massey and his hot-mettled company outran their Prey as far
as Dorchester. And indeed, the report of the Kings being at Charmouth, was
grown so common, that the Soldiers (lying in those parts) searched the houses
of several Gentlemen, who were accounted Royalists, thinking to surprise him.
Amongst which, Pilisdon (the house of Sir Hugh Windham Uncle to Colonel Francis
Windham) was twice rifled. They took the old Baronet, his Lady, Daughters, and
whole Family, and set a Guard upon them in the Hall, whilst they examine every
corner, not sparing either Trunk or Box. Then taking a particular view of their
Prisoners, they seize a lovely young Lady, saying, she was the King disguised
in women's apparel. At length being convinced of their gross and rude mistake,
they desisted from offering any farther violence to that Family. And here it is
much to be observed, that the same day the King went from Charmouth, Captain
Elesden came to Pilesdon, and enquired of Sir Hugh and his Lady for the King
and Colonel, confidently affirming that they must needs be there.

His Majesty having with an evenness of spirit gotten through this
roughpassage, safely anchored at Broadwinsor, Where at length enjoying some
rest, he commands the Colonel to give his opinion what course was to be taken,
as the face of affairs then looked. The Colonel (seeing Forces drawn every
where upon that shore) thought it very hazardous to attempt any thing more in
Dorsetshire; and therefore humbly besought his Majesty, that he would be
pleased to retreat to Trent: He hoped his Majesty was already satisfied in the
fidelity of his servants; and that he doubted not, his Majesty might lie
securely in that Creek, till it was fair weather, and a good season to put
forth to Sea. He humbly advised, that Peter's might conduct the Lord Wilmot to
Mr. Huit's house at the Kings-Arms in Sarum, where he and many of his friends
had been sheltered in the time of troubles. That Peter's (being at Sarum) should
by a private token bring his Lordship to Mr. John Coventry (his Kinsman) a
Person Noble, Wise, and Loyal, with whom he had kept Intelligence in order to
the Kings service, ever since his Majesty had set foot in Scotland; That he was
assured Mr. Coventry would think himself highly honored to correspond in this
matchless employment, The King's Preservation. He desired the Lord Wilmot to be
confident of lying concealed; And likewise to treat with Mr. Coventry, and by
Peter's to return his Majesty an account how he found that Gentleman affected
toward this service.

This counsel being well relished and approved, 'twas resolved, That between
Sarum and Trent (lying 30 miles distant and better) an intercourse should be
kept by trusty messengers, and a secret way of writing, to avoid danger in case
of interception. All things being thus concluded, the King left his jovial Host
at Broadwindsor, and returned with the Colonel and Mrs. Coningsby to Trent. The
Lord Wilmot with Peter's went that night to Sherborn, and the next morning was
waited on by Swan (who attended his Lordship to the Colonels) and that day got
into Sarum; where he soon saluted Mr. Coventry, in all things fully answering
his Lordships expectation: And (the 25. of September) Peter's was sent back with
this joyful message from the Lord Wilmot to his Majesty, That he doubted not
(by Mr. Coventries assistance, and those recommended by him) to be able in some
short time to effect his desires.

Whilst his Sacred Majesty enjoys his peace at Trent, and the Lord Wilmot (with
those other Worthies) is busied at Sarum to procure its continuation, It cannot
be impertinent to mention a Circumstance or two, which inserted in the midst of
the web and texture of this Story would have looked unhandsom, but added as a
fringe may prove ornamental.

Upon the Sunday morning after the King came to Trent, a Tailor of the Parish
informed the Colonel, That the Zealots [which swarmed in that place] discoursed
overnight, that Persons of Quality were hid in his house, and that they
intended to search and seize them; and therefore he desired the Colonel (if any
such there were) to convey them thence, to avoid surprisal. The Colonel
(rewarding the good man for his care and kindness toward himself and family)
told him, That his Kinsman (meaning the Lord Wilmot) was not private, but
public in his house, (for so his Lordship pleased to be) and that he believed
he would show himself in the Church at the time of Prayers. When the honest
fellow was gone, the Colonel acquaints the King what passed between himself and
the Tailor, and withal besought his Majesty to persuade the Lord Wilmot to
accompany him to Church, thinking by this means not only to lessen the
jealousy, but also to gain the good opinion of some of the Fanatics, who
would be apt to believe, that the Colonel was rather brought to Church by my
Lord, than his Lordship by the Colonel, who seldom came to that Place, since
Faction and Rebellion had justled out, and kept possession against Peace and
Religion. He alleged moreover, that he sat in an I Will distinct from the body
of the Congregation, so that the Parishoners could not take a full view of any
of his company. These reasons, joined with his Majesty's command, prevailed
with his Lordship; and (though he thought it a bold adventure, yet) it not only
allayed the fury, but also took out the very sting of those wasps; insomuch
that they who the last night talked of nothing but searching, began now to say,
that Cromwell's late success against the King, had made the Colonel a Convert.

All being now quiet about home, the Colonels Lady (under a pretense of a
Visit) goes over to Sherborn to hear what news there was abroad of the King.
And toward evening, at her return, a Troop of horse clapped privately into the
town. This silent way of entering their Quarters, in so triumphant a time, gave
a strong alarm to this careful Lady, whose thoughts were much troubled
concerning her Royal Guest. A stop she made to hearken out what brought them
thither, and whither they were bound: But not one grain of Intelligence could
be procured by the most industrious enquiry. When she came home, she gave his
Majesty an account of many stories, which like flying clouds were blown about
by the breath of the people, striving to cover her trouble with the vail of
cheerfulness. But this the King perceiving to be rather forced than free, as at
other times, was earnest to know the cause of her discomposure. And to satisfy
his Majesty's importunity, she gave him a full relation of the Troop at
Sherborn: At which his Majesty laughed most heartily, as if he had not been in
the least concerned. Yet upon a serious debate of the matter, the Colonel and
his Lady supplicated the King to take a view of his Privy chamber, into which
he was persuaded to enter, but came presently forth again, much pleased, that
upon the least approach of danger, he could thither retreat with an assurance
of security. All that night the Colonel kept strict watch in his house, and was
the more vigilant, because he understood from Sherborn, that the Troop intended
not to quarter there, but only to refresh themselves and march. And accordingly
(not so much as looking toward Trent) about two of the clock next morning,
they removed toward the Seacoast. This fear being over, the King rested all
the time of his stay at Trent, without so much as the apprehension of a
disturbance.

The strangeness of which will be much increased by the addition of what a
Captain who served under Cromwell at Worcester, reported to two Divines of
undoubted veracity, long before the King's blessed Restoration: That he was
followed and troubled with Dreams for three nights together, That the King was
hid at Trent near Sherborn, in a house nigh to which stood a Grove or patch of
trees, and that thither he should go and find him. This suggestion thus
reiterated, was a powerful spur to prick him forwards: But the hand which held
the reins and kept him back, was irresistible.

Now the hands of his Majesty's enemies were not only restrained from doing him
evil, but the hands of his friends were strengthened to do him good. In order
to which, Colonel Edward Phelips of Montacute in the County of Somerset, came
from Sarum to his Majesty (Septem. 28.) with this intelligence, That his
brother Colonel Robert Phelips was employed to Southampton to procure a Vessel,
of whose transaction his Majesty should receive a speedy account.

In the mean time, Captain Thomas Littleton (a Neighbor of Colonel Wyndham)
was dispatched up into Hampshire, where by the aid of Mr. Standish he dealt
with the Master of a Ship, who undertook to carry off the Lord Wilmet and his
company, upon the condition his Lordship would follow his direction. But the
hope of Colonel Phelips his good success at Hampton dashed this enterprise, and
the Captain was remanded to Trent, and to make no progress till farther order.

Upon the first of October Mr. John Selliok (Chaplain to Mr. Coventry) brought
a Letter to his Majesty. In answer to which the King wrote back, That he
desired all diligence might be used in providing a Vessel; and if it should
prove difficult at Hampton, trial should be made farther: That they should be
ascertained of a Ship before they sent to remove him, that so he might run no
more hazards than what of necessity he must meet with in his passage from Trent
to the place of his Transportation.

October the fifth, Colonel Phelips came from the Lord Wilmot and Mr. Coventry
to his Majesty with this assurance, That all things were ready; And that he had
informed himself with the most private ways, that so he might with greater
probability of safety guide his Majesty to the Seaside. As Soon as the King
heard this Message, He resolved upon his Journey. Colonel Wyndham earnestly
petitions his Majesty, that he might wait on him to the shore: But his Majesty
gave no grant, saying, It was no way necessary, and might prove very
inconvenient. Upon the renewing this request, the King commanded the contrary,
but sweetened his denial with this promise, That if he were put to any distress,
he would again retreat to Trent.

About ten next morning (October the sixth) his Majesty took leave of the old
Lady Wyndham, the Colonels Lady and Family, not omitting the meanest of them
that served him. But to the good old Lady he vouchsafed more than an ordinary
respect, who accounted it her highest honor, that she had three Sons and one
Grandchild slain in the defense of the Father, and that she her self in her old
age had been instrumental in the protection of the Son, both Kings of England.

Thus his Sacred Majesty, taking Mrs. Juliana Coningsby behind him, attended by
Colonel Robert Phelips, and Peter's, bad Farewell to Trent, the Ark in which God
shut him up, when the Floods of Rebellion had covered the face of his
Dominions. Here he rested Nineteen days, to give his faithful Servants time to
work his deliverance: And the Almighty crowned their endeavors with success,
that his Majesty might live to appear as Glorious in his Actions, as Courageous
in his Sufferings.

FINIS.

