Bloody and Barbarous NEWS From Bishopsgate-street.

A PERFECT NARRATIVE OF THE HORRID MURDER OF Mris. Jewers, A Widow near
Fourscore years of Age, Lately living in Angel-alley, near the Bars Without
Bishopsgate,

On Friday the 27th of this instant September, in the Evening.

Supposed to be committed by Two Persons that were Lodgers in her house, who
are fled; She being found Strangled with a Napkin, and her Mouth stopped with a
foul Towel.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for L. C. 1678.

Bloody and Barbarous News from Bishops-gate-street.
NOt to insist on the horridness of the Sin of MURDER, which defaces Gods
Image, and beyond most other species of wickedness, cries loud to Heaven for
vengeance; I shall immediately address to the Relation of the present Fact,
which in all its Circumstances, is one of the most impious, pre-meditated, and
abominable, that our times have been guilty of.

The Good-Woman killed, named Jewers, was a Widow, whose Husband, by Trade a
Weaver, dyed about a year or two since, and left her possessed of a small House
in Angel-Alley, before mentioned, with convenient Goods and Furniture, and as
some report, a small parcel of Plate: she was near Fourscore years of Age, and
lived as it were alone, only letting out half of her House to a person that
sold a Cup of Ale; the rest reserving in her own hands, she willing to improve,
as well as she could, did sometimes entertain Lodgers, and most unhapily about
a week ago, took in a Man and a Woman, who pretended to be Man and Wife, but
wholly strangers to her and all the Neighbors.

It Is supposed she had been so indiscreet, as to show or declare to these ill
people, what Plate or Money she had; who thereupon formed a Hellish design to
deprive her thereof, and of her Life to boot, if they could not otherwise
effect their black purpose; in order to this, masking their bloody intentions
with a show of kindness, on Friday last in the Evening, they invited their Land
Lady up into their Room, to eat a piece of Pork with them; who nothing
suspecting their villainous plot, went up; but immediately, as it is strongly
presumed, they cruelly, without any Compassion to her Age or Innocence, fell
upon her, and having first stopped her Mouth with a durty Towel or Cloth, they
twisting a Napkin about her Neck, Throtled or Strangled her, and then, (as it is
believed) Rifled her Room of the most considerable and portable things she had,
as Plate, Money, etc. which they might easily accomplish, without being
observed by any, the other people being busy and not in the least mistrusting
any harm. Having thus effected the Inhumane and Bloody Exploit, they left the
Dead Body in their own Chamber, and then, how or when the Man went out, is
uncertain, no notice being taken thereof; but the Woman came down to the other
part of the House where Drink was sold, and defired three Pints of Ale, as for
their Supper, saying, she would step out whilst it was drawing, and fetch some
Cheese: this was about Nine or Ten at night; but she not returning, and the
Tenant wondering as well thereat, as that her Land-Lady came not down to shut up
her door, several times loudly called on the stairs, but received no answer;
whereupon, with a Neighbor she went up, where she found the poor old Woman
lying on the floor Murdered, as aforesaid; the Napkin remaining still violently
drawn together about her Neck, and the foul Towel so furiously ramm'd into her
Mouth, that her Face was very much disfigured, and the very skin torn
therewith. There was then no body in the Room, only the Table spread with a
Cloth, and a Salt-seller set thereupon; but no Meat, nor any appearance of any
that had been.

What Goods in particular they took away, is yet not known, because the Woman
living privately, few people (if any) could exactly tell what she had; only one
Neighbor testifies, that in or since the time of Bartholemew Fair, the
Deceased showed her a piece of Plate, of about Four or Five pound value, which
she said she had bought at the said last Fair; and now there is no such, nor
any other Plate or Money to be found.

These Lodgers not having been since heard of, have (as it were in a Legal
sense) confessed thereby their concernment in the Guilt, by their flight, and
accordingly all Endeavors are used to Apprehend them, whom it is not doubted,
but Divine Vengeance will discover, and bring to condign punishment, whilst in
the mean time, they wander up and down, under the Terrors of Conscience, and
the frightful Apprehensions of Blood-guiltiness, not to be exceeded by any
Tortures, but the actual and endless Torments of Hell.

This sad Example ought to awake the Discretion, and alarm the Caution of all
honest Housekeepers, to be more wary in entertaining Lodgers, without
sufficient Testimonials of their Integrity; it being become a common Practice
for those Runnagate Inmates to rob and spoil those that admit them into their
Houses: Nor do they thereby only hazard their Goods, but their Lives also; as
in this lamentable Case is too apparent.

FINIS.

