THE RESOLUTIONS Of the JVDGES upon the several STATUTES Of Bankrupts: As also
The like Resolutions Upon 13 Eliz. and 27 Eliz, Touching Fraudulent
CONVEYANCES. By T. B. Esquire;

LONDON, Printed for T. Twyford, and are to be sold by Hen. Twyford and other
Booksellers. 1670.

Pasch. 4. Jacobi Regis.
Ford and Sheldon's Case, upon Information in the Exchequer for the King.
THomas Ford, a known Recusant before the 23 of Eliz. for money lent to
Sheldon; some before, and some after the said 23 Eliz. took Recognizance in the
Names of others, and also a Rentcharge to them in Fee, with a Clause of
Redemption by Deed; the Condition of the Recognizance, being for performance of
the Covenanss in the Deeds; and afterward was made the Statute of the 28 Eliz.
which was, That as often as any Failer was made, in the payment of 20 l. a
Month, that so often the Queen, by Process out of the Exchequer, might take and
enjoy all the Goods, and two Parts etc. And after the said Act, Ford lent the
several Sums of Money, and took the Securities as aforesaid, amounting in all
to 21000 l. which being to Ford's use, were all forfeited. Afterward, 41 Eliz.
was Convict of Recusancy, and did not pay the 20 l. a Month: If the King should
have the B^nefit of these Recognizances and Securities, was the Q^estion.

1. Upon Debate, it was objected by Ford's Council, That the Recognizances had
not been Forfeited, though they had been made in Ford's Name; the Statute
speaking only of Goods, which does not include Debts. As if the King grant all
the Goods of J. S. coming to him by Attainder, the Patentee shall not have
Debts: And a Penal Law shall not be extended by Equity.

Obj. 2. That three Recognizances are not within the Intention of the Act,
being Savers of the Realty, and acknowledged to perform Covenants, as to the
Rentcharge.

Ob. 3. No Fraud was in the Case: And then no Statute being in this Case, the
Common Law gives no benefit to the King. As if Cestuy que use had been Attaint
of Treason, the Use being but a Trust could not be forfeited to the King: And
it not a Use, A multo fortiori, a mere Trust.

Ob. 4. What Forfeiture accrues to the King in this Case, must be by force of
the words (Goods) in the Statute, which cannot be, Ford having no Goods but a
mere Trust. Also, one Recognizance was taken in the Names of others before the
Stature, and therefore cannot be thought to defeat the King of a Forfeiture
which was not then in use.

Resolved 1. By all the Barons, and Popham Chief Justice of England, and diverse
other Justices, that Personal Actions are as well included within this Word
(Goods) in an Act of Parliament, as Goods in Possession: But because by Law,
things in Action cannot be granted over; therefore by General Grant, without
special words, can never pass. And where the Statute says, Shall take, seize,
and enjoy all the Goods, and two parts, etc. the King may well enjoy a Debt due
to a Recusant, and by Process out of the Exchequer Levy it: and so take and
seize, refers to Goods, and two Parts of Lands in Possession.

Resolved 2. That it was Originally for the Loan of Money, and both the
Recognizance and Annuity were to secure the said Money. And Recognizances
fotfeited, are but Chattels Personal.

Resolved 3. There was Covin apparent; for he being a Recusant always as
aforesaid, and so chargeable to the King, his taking the Recognizances in the
Name of others, shall be Construed with an Intent to prevent the King of his
Forfeiture: And so shall all Recognizances taken in others Names, after the
said Act, be presumed to be taken. As to Ce^^uy que use, who neither has Jus
in Re, nor Jus ad Rem, true it is, he cannot Forfeit; but an Act done, to
defraud the King of his lawful Duty, the King shall not be barred thereof per
obliquum, if the Act was made, de directo. And for this, If a man outlawed buy
Goods in the Names of others, the King shall have them notwithstanding. So if
an Accountant to the King purchase Lands in others Names, yet the King shall
s^ze those Lands for Money due to him. And this appears by Walter Cherton's
Case, Trin. 24. Ed. 3. Rot. 4. in Scaccario; for Re^ fallere non vult, falli
autem non potest. See another President, Trin. 24. Ed. 3. Pot. 11.

Resolved 4. No^resert, Whether the Duty do acc^ue to the King, by the
Common Law, or by the Statute: And though one of the Recognizances was taken
before the Statute of the 28 of Eliz. yet that was to his use: And though Ford
was not Convict till the 41 of Eliz. that is not material; for he was subject
to a Forfeiture before.

Pasch. 4 Jac. In Chancery, 27 Junii, 29 Eliz.
The Case between the Lord St. John of Bletso, and the Dean of Gloucester.
The Lord St. John brought a Quare Impedit in the Common Pleas against the
Defendant, for the Church of Penmark, in the County of Glamorgan, which Suit
was staid by Aid prayer, and the Record removed into the Chancery: The
Plaintiff moved for a Procedendo and upon Oyer of Cause, before Sir Thomas
Bromley Lord Chancellor, in the presence of Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Master of he
Rolls, and Shute and Windham Justices; and Popham Attorney, and Egerton
Solicitor of the Queen; the Plaintif^ showed a Gift in Tail of the said
Advowson made to his Anc stor in 18 R. 2. and a Verdict for the same in 12 H.
8. and a presentation by his Grandfather to the said Church, of a Clerk that
was admitted, instituted, inducted, and had possession diverse years, with other
matters to prove the Plaintiffs T^tle, yet for that the Defendant, and those
from whom he claims, had time out of mind possessed the said Parsonage as
Impropriate; And for that it will be a dangerous President to all Owners of
Impropriations. It was Resolved by the Court of Chancery, by the advice of the
Justices and Council Learned by the Queen aforesaid, That no Procedendo in
loquela be granted. Vide Ridley, fol. 153, 154. the beginning of Appropriations
and Annuities to be discharged of Tithes, Vide ibid. 155. That the Saxon Kings
appropriated eight Churches to the Monastery of Croyland.

Trin. 37 Eliz. In the Exchequer Chamber;
Crimes and Smith.
The Abbot of Sulby held the Parsonage of Iubbenh^m in Leicestershire to his
proper use, which as impropriate came to H. 8. by the dissolution of
Monasteries, 31 H. 8. who in the 37th. year of his Reign granted it in
Fee-Farm; under which Grant the Plaintiff claimed: The Defendant obtained a
Presentation of the Queen, and to destroy the said Impropriation, showed the
Original Instrument of it, 22 Ed. 4. with Condition in it, That a Vicaridge
should be competently endowed, which was alleged never to be done.

But for that the Rectory was reputed and taken to be appropriate, and a Vicar
presented, admitted, instituted and inducted as a Vicar, lawfully endowed, and
paid his first Fruits and Tenths.

Resolved by all the Court, that it shall be presumed that the Vicaridge was
lawfully endowed. And that it is a dangerous President to examine Originalls of
Impropriations and Endowments of Vicaridges: for that they may perish. And so
it was decreed for the Plaintiff.

Hill. 4. Jac. Regis.
Bedle and Beard.
Anno 31. Ed. 1. The King being seized of the Manor of K^mbolton, to which the
Advowson of the said Church was appendant by Letters Patents, granted the said
Manor, wish the App^^tenances, to Humphry de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, in tail
general. Humphry de Bohun the Issue in tail by his Deed. 4 Ed. 3. granted the
said Advowson, then full of an Incumbent, to the Prior of Stonely, and his
Successors. And at next avoydance they held In proprios usus: Upon this
Appropriation, Concurrentibus his quae in jure requiruntur, the Prior and his
Successors held the same till the dissolution of the Monastery. 27. H. 8. The
said Manor descended to Edward Duke of Buckingham, as Issue to the Estate
Tail. And the Reversion descended to H. 8. The Duke 13 H. 8. was attaint of
High Treason. 14 H. 8. The King granted the said Manor, etc. with all
Advousons appendant etc. to Richard Wingfield, and his Heirs Males. 16 H. 8. It
was Enacted, that the said Duke forfeit all Manors, etc. Advousons, etc. which
he had, etc. in 4 H. 8. The King 37 H. 8. granted and sold the said Rectory of
Kimbolton, as impropriate in Fee, which by mean conveyance came to the
Plaintiff for 1200 li. 37 Eliz. Beard the Defendant got a Presentation of the
Queen by Lapse, pretending the said Church was not lawfully impropriate to the
Prior.

1. For that Humphry, who granted to the Prior, had nothing in it, nothing
passing to his Ancestor by these words, Man^rium cum pertinentiis.

2. Or for that having no more but an Estate Tail by his death, his Grant was
void.

But Resolved by the Lord Chancellor Ellesmere, with the principal Judges, and
upon consideration of Presidents, that the Plaintiff shall enjoy the Rectory:
for though by any thing which can now be shown, the Impropriation is defective,
yet it shall be now intended, in regard of the ancient and continual
possession, that there was a lawful grant of the King to the said Humphry who
granted in Fee, so that he might lawfully grant it to the said Priory: Omnia
p^^sumitur Sol^mniter esse acta. And all shall be presumed to be done, which
might make the ancient Impropriation good; And ancient Grants and Acts shall
not be drawn in question, though they cannot be shown: for Tempus ed^x rerum.
Letters Patents and Writings may consume, be lost or imbezilled. And therefore
the Church was allowed to be rightfully impropriate, and the rather, in regard
of the ancient and long possession of the Owners of the said Rectory.

Mich. 4. Jac. Regis.
Case of Forfeiture by Treason.
Hill 43 Eliz. A Case was moved to all the Justices: Tenant in Tail before the
Statute of 27 H. 8. made a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself, and his Wife
in Tail. And after the said Statute, the Husband was attaint of High Treason,
31 H. 8. and dyed. The Wife continued in possession and dyed, their Issue enter
and die, and this descends to his Issue, and all this found by Office.

The Question was, if the Issue in Tail or the King shall have the Land.

1. And it was objected, that the ancient Estate Tail cannot be forfeited,
because it was discontinued, and such right of Action cannot be forfeited. As
was agreed in the Marquess of Winchesters Case.

2. The Feoffor himself in this Case had not any right to the ancient Estate
Tail, (it being extinguished by his Feoffment) and therefore by his Attaint,
could not forfeit what he had not.

3. The Issue in Tail in remitted to that ancient right which cannot be
forfeited; And the new Estate Tail derived under the discontinuance, which may
be forfeited by the Statute 26 H. 8. cap. 13. is continued, and by Act in Law,
viz. the descent and remitter avoided. And the Kings Estate may be divested out
of the King by remitter. As if Tenant in Tail grant Land to the King, etc. and
the King grant the Land to the Tenant in Tail for life, the remainder to his
Son and Heirs for life: Tenant for life dies, the Issue by and in Law is
remitted, and the Kings Estate is divested out of him. This accords with Plow.
Com. 489. Nicols Case.

1. Resolved that in this Case the Issue in Tail is barred: for though right of
Action cannot be given to the King, by the 26 H. 8. yet when Tenant in Tail
discontinues his Estate to the use of himself in Tail, and after is attaint of
Treason, now by that Statute he does not only forfeit the new Estate in Tail,
but by this, the right of the ancient Estate is barred for ever. And so note,
out of the said Statute, a diversity between a naked right of Action not
forfeitable, and an Estate of Inheritance forfei^able, coupled with an ancient
right, for which the Forfeiture of the possession is barred by the said Act:
And i^ is not like the Case in Plow. Com. of Remitter, for this is no bar of
an ancient right.

Pasch. 4 Jac. Regis.
Case at a Committee aoncerning Bishops.
At this Parliament held Pasch. 4 Jac. Regis, It was strongly urged at a Grand
Committee of Lords and Commons in the Painted-Chamber, that such Bishops as
were made after the first day of the Session, were not lawful Bishops.

1. Admitting them Bishops, yet the manner and form of their Seals, Styles,
Process, and Proceeding, in their Ecclesiastical Courts, were not consonant to
Law: Because by the Statute, 1 Ed. 6. cap. 2. it is provided, That thenceforth
Bishops should not be Elective, but Donative, by Letters Patent of the King.
And for that at this day all Bishops were made by Election, not Donation of the
King; therefore the sa^d Bishops are not lawful.

2. By the same Act it is provided, That all Summons etc. and Process in
Ecclesiastical Courts, shall be made in the King's Name and Style, and their
Seals Engraven with the Kings Arms, and Certificates made in the Kings Name: It
was therefore concluded, That the said Statute being still in force, by
Consequence all Bishops made after the Act, 1 Jac. were not lawful Bishops. And
the Proceedings being in the Name of the Bishop, makes them unlawful. Quia non
obser^ata forma infertur ad^ullatio actus. Upon Consideration had of these
Objections by the Kings Commandment, it was Resolved by Popham, Chief Justice
of England, and Coke Attorney of the King; and after affirmed b^ the Chief
Baron, and the other Justices Attendant to ^he Parliament, that the said Act of
the 1 Ed. 6. cap. 2. is not now in force, being repealed, annulled, and
annihlated, by three several Acts of Parliament: Any whereof being in force, it
makes that Act of 1 Ed. 6. that it cannot stand, Quia Leges Posteriores,
Priores contrarias abrogant. And by the Act of the 25 H. 8. cap. 20. Is set
forth the manner of Election and Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops. And
also for the making and execution of all things which belongs to their
Authority: within which words, the Style and Seal of their Courts, and the
manner of their Proceedings, are included. Which Act of 25 H. 8. is revived by
1 El. cap. 1. and consequently, that of 1 Ed. 6. cap. 2. is repealed.

It appears by our Books, if a Deacon or Priest take a Wife, their Marriage is
voidable not void, for they had not vowed Chastity. Otherwise, of a Monk or a
Nun. And this appears 5 Ed 3. Title Nonability, 26. 19 H. ^. Title Bastardy,
33. 21 H. 7. 39. 6.

Mich. 4. Jac. Regis.
Case of the Stannaries.
It was Resolved this Term in the Star Chamber, That the King had not the
Emption of Tin in Cornwall by his Prerogative; for Stanni nec plumbi fodina,
etc. or other sase Mineb, belong not to the King by his Prerogative, but to the
Subject Owner of the Land. But the Emption of Tin in Cornwall belongs to the
King, as an ancient Right and Inheritance: for though now a Reason cannot
easily be rendered of things done time out of mind; yet it may well be, that all
the Land in that County was the King Demesne; and upon Grant of the Land, the
King reserved the Mines to himself. These Tin Mines being of great Antiquity;
as appears, Ex Diodoro Siculo, Et certo certius est. That all the Land in
England, is derived mediately or immediately from the Crown; and therefore such
a Profit may have a reasonable Commencement; Usage also allowing it to the
King: for all Cornwall was within the King's Forest, which by King John was
disafforested; as by Cambden appears. And it is evident, that before 33 Ed. 1.
all the Tin in Cornwall, and Devon also, was the Kings, whoever owned the Land.
And this is proved by diverse Records, and by an ancient Charter of King John,
among the Bishop of Exeters Records, In haec verba. Johannes Dei Gratia Rex
Angliae, etc. Omnibus B^llivis salutem. Sciatis quod intuitu Dei, and pro
salute animae nostrae, etc. dedimus etc. Deo and Ecclesiae Beati Petri Exon,
and venerabili Patri Simoni Exon. Episcopo and successoribus, etc. decimam de
antiqua firma Stanni in Com. Devon. and Cornub. Habendum sibi and
successoribus, etc. cum omnibus libertatibus and liberis consuetudinibus ad eam
pertinentibus, per manus illius vel illorum qui stannaria habuerint in custod.
etc.

Rex, Roberto de Courtney salutem, Mand^mus vobis quod sine dilatione and
difficultate aliqua, habere facietis Dominae Johannae Reginae matri nostrae
stannaria Com. Devon. etc. Paten. 1 H. 3. H. 4.

Rex concessit Johanni filio Richardi stannaria in Cornubia reddendo 1000
marks. 4 H. 3. Fines. 5 H. 3.

Rex, etc. Sciatis quod concessimus Richardo dilecto fratri n^stro stannariam
nostram Cornubiae cum pertinen. Prohibiting Tin to be transported without the
said Richards License, 10 H. 3 M. 9.

See also 10 Ed. 2. Inqui. 2. Nu. 29.

There are two several Charters, both dated 10 April 33 Ed. 1. One, ad
emendationem stannariarum nostrarum in Cornub. The other, Ad emendationem
stannariarum nostrarum in Devon. That of Cornwall has these word, Concessimus
eisdem stannatoribus quod fodere possint stannum, et turbus ad stannum
fundendum ubisque in terris nostris et vastis nostris, et aliorum quorumcunque
in Com. praedict. et Aquas, et aquarum cursus divertere, ubi et quoties opus
fuerit, etc. ad sundaturam stanni sicut Antiquitus co^su^vit, sine impedimento
nostro seu aliorum quorumcunque Ac quod omnes stannatores nostri praed. totum
stannum suum ponderatum, etc. licite vendere possint cuicunque voluerint,
faciendo nobis et haeredibus nostris Cunageum, et alias Consuetudines debitas,
nisi nos vel haerede nostri stannum illum emere volumus.

This was confirmed 4 Ed. 2. And also 1 and 17 Ed. 3. De Advisamento consilii
nostri ordinavimus, quod stannum in Com. Cornub. et Devon. ad opus nostrum
capiatur pro defensione regni nostri, etc. Et ad parts marinas celeriter
mittatur, etc. Ita quod hominibus quibus stannum illum capi contigerit de
pretio ejusdem stami ad certos terminos solvend. sufficiens securitas per nos
fiat, Assignavimus vos, etc. ad capiend. ad opus nostrum totum stannum in Com.
praed. Cunitum et etiam Cuniend. cum cunitum fuerit: with Authority to take
Carriages and Commandment to the Sheriff to pay for the same. Rot. Aml^yne An.
12. R. 2. part 1.

Edward the black Prince grant, and the King, (21 E. 3.) confirmed to Tydman of
Lymberge, Cunageum Stannariae, etc. nec non emptionem totius Stanni, etc.
infra, etc. pro fine mill marcarum, et reddendo 3500 marcas. The like done to
one Brockhouse, 7 Ed. 6. The Charter of 33 Ed. 1. was confirmed, 8 R. 2. 1 Ed.
4. 3 H. 7. The 11 H. 7. a certain weight and measure was ordained to be used
through England; yet the weights belonging to the Carriage of Tin, were
excepted in that Statute.

The Style of the Court of Stannaries is, Magna Curia Domini Regis Ducatus sui
Cornub. apud Cockerenton in Com. Devon. Johanne Comite Bedford Custode stannar.
dicti Domini Regis aut Reginae in dicto Com. Devon. By which it appears, that
all the Tin belonged to the King.

For the Antiquity of Tin Mines in Cornwall, see Camd^n in Cornwell 121. And
Diodorus Siculus, L. 5. c. 8. fo. 142. 6.

Upon which it was res^lved, 1. That the King has all the Tin, as well in the
Subjects Lands as his own.

2. It is absurd for the King to reserve Emption of his own Tin.

3. The King grants Stannatoribus diverse liberties which are enjoyed by the
Tinners, as well in the Subjects Lands, as the Kings own.

In the Session of Parliament h^ld in December, An. 4. Jac. Regis.
Case of the Kings Prerogative in Saltpeter.
All the Justices, viz. Popham Chief Justice of England, Coke, Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas. Fleming, Chief Baron. Fenner, Searle, Yelverton, Williams and
Tanfield. Justices met at Sergeants Inn, to consult what Prerogative the King
had in digging and taking of Saltpeter to make, Gunpowder by the Law. And upon
conference between them, these points were resolved by them all, (...) voce.

1. That in as much as Gunpowder concerns the defense of the Realm, and
insomuch as Saltpeter (whereof Gunpowder is made) is within the Realm: the King
shall not be driven to buy it, but may take it according to the Limitations
following.

2. That, though the King cannot take the Trees of his Subject growing upon his
Freehold; nor Gravel in the Inheritance of his Subject for reparation of his
houses: as 11 H. 4. 28. Yet it is resolved, that he may dig for Saltpeter,
because the Kings Ministers who dig for the same, are bound to leave the
Inheritance of the Subject, in as good plight as they found it, which they
could not do, if they should cut the Timber growing, which would be to the
Subjects disinherison.

The Case of Gravel for reparation of the Kings Houses, may not be compared to
this: for Saltpeter extends to the defense of the whole Realm, not so the
reparation on of the Kings Houses, 13 H. 4. The King may charge for Murage of a
Town: And so for Portage; but not for making a Wall about his own House: When
Enemies invade the Realm, it is lawful to come upon any Land adjoining to the
invaded Coast, to make Trenches or Bulworks, 8 Ed. 4. 23. And in such Cases
they may dig for Gravel. 3 H. 8. fo. 15. And in this Case the Rule is true:
Princeps et republica ex justa causa possunt rem mean auferre.

3. Resolved, That the taking of Saltpeter is a purveyance of it, for the
making of Gunpowder, for the necessary defense of the Realm. And therefore is
an incident inseparable from the Crown, and ought to be taken only by the
Kings Ministers, and not converted to any other use then the defense of the
Realm: And it is not like Silver or Gold Mines; for there the King has Interest
in the Metal, and may dig, Quia quando lex alicui concedit aliquid, Concedere
videtur id sine quo res ipsa esse non potest: Vide: Plow. Com. in le Case de
Mines: so the King may dig for Treasure Trove eadem ratione.

4. The Ministers of the King cannot undermine, weaken, or impair any the Walls
of Foundations of any Houses or Buildings whatsoever. Nor dig in the Flore of a
Mansion House, which serves for the Habitation of a man: because it is his
place of refuge and defense.

There are two notable Presidents: that the King by his Prerogative, had power
to prohibit Depopulation, and provide for Habitation.

The one in the 43 Ed. 3. Rot. claus. in turri: number. 23. provillade Southampton.

The other An. 21. R. 2. in dorso claus. par. 1. N. 15.

Neither may the Kings Ministers dig in any Barnfloore used for Corn, Hay, etc.
but they may dig in the floores of Stables and Oxehouses, so that they leave
room for the Horses and other Cattle of the Owner, and put it in convenient
time into as good plight as they found it. Also they may dig in Cellars and
Vaults: and and Mud-walls, being not Walls of a Mansion House, and in the
ruins and decays of any Houses or Buildings.

5. They ought to make the places where they dig, as commodious to the Owner as
before.

6. They may work in the possession of the Subject, but betwixt Sunrising, and
Sun setting.

7. They may not place any Furnace or other Vessels in any Subjects House,
without consent, nor so near it, as to prejudice the same.

8. They are not to stay over long in a place, nor to return thither again in a
long time.

9. Resolved, That the owner of the Land cannot be restrained from digging, and
making Saltpeter, for the King has no Interest in it, the property is in the
owner of the Land. Before the 31 Eliz. no King or Queen of this Realm granted
any License for taking Saltpeter; but in that 31 year, there were two, the one
to George Constable Esque and the other general to George Evelin, Richard
Hills, and John Evelin: And after Scilicet 18 October. 2. Jacob. Commission was
granted to Evelin, and others, to take Saltpeter, etc. So that there were but
three Licenses ever made.

Case of Treason.
In this very Term, one George Leake, a Chancery Clark, had upon an ordinary
piece of Parchment, by great deceit fixed with a kind of Glue, another
Parchment so thin, that it appear but one piece. And upon the thin piece he
writ by good Warrant a Li ense, which brought to the Chancellor, was sealed
with the Great Seal. After the George took the thin piece upon which the
writing was, from the other to which the Seal was fixed, and then all was
blank, with the Great Seal annexed; upon which blank, the said George writ a
Grant of the King of certain Lands; and what Offense this was, was the
Question. And after a long debate upon the 25 Ed. 3. 2 H. 4. 25. Stamford l. 1.
fol. 3. 40 Ass. pla. 33. 37 H. 8. Title Treason, 2 H. 4. Claus. 42 Ed. 3. memb.
8. in dorso, where the Case was, That King Richard the First by his Charter,
granted diverse Lands and Liberties, Abbati de Bruera, in which the Abbot rased
out this word Fittetrida, and instead of it writ est leigh, and upon showing
it, obtained a confirmation of it from King Ed. 3. And an allowance of it in
Banco R. And for this Offense, the Abbot was called before the King and Council
in the Star Chamber, where the Abbot being Convict, it was part of the
Sentence, That the Charter, confirmation, and allowance of it, should be
brought in to be cancelled; where note,

1. The Antiquity of the Star Chamber being then a Court.

2. That the rasure was not any Counterfeit of the Great Seal; for if the
Offense had been High Treason, it should not have been determined before the
King and Council.

3. That Spiritual Persons were then punishable before Temporal Judges.

4. That if there be a rasure of a Deed between Subject and Subject in a place
material, all the Deed becomes naught; so if a Patentee raze his Heirs Patents
in a place material.

Thence concluded, That if the rasing of a word in the Kings Patent be not
Treason, then the rasing of two or three, or all the words of the Patent, and
writing a new Grant is not Treason.

By the Statute of the 25 Ed. 3. it is provided, That because many other Cases
of like Treason might happen in time to come, which men cannot think or declare
at present. That if another Case suffered Treason, and not specified in the
Act, shall come before any of the Justices, they shall stay without going to
Judgment of Treason, until the Case be shown before the King in Parliament.

1. That though a Case happen like to the Cases of Treason mentioned in the
said Act; yet that the Judges ought not to judge it Treason, but it ought to be
declared in Parliament.

2. That when a particular Case was adjudged High Treason, (as the Case of
murdring an Ambassador of a King) Et Legatos violare contra jus Gentium est.

Afterward George Leake, upon Examination before the chief Justice of England,
made a clear Confession of of all the manner and circumstances of the Fact as
aforesaid; whereupon Two Questions were moved,

1. Whether this Offense were High Treason or no: And in this the Justices were
divided; my self and diverse others holding, That this Act was not Treason; but
the chief Justice and diverse others were against us.

2. If it be High Treason, then whether he may be indicted generally for the
Counterfeiting of the Great Seal, or else the special Fact must be expressed.

By reason of diversity of Opinions, R^spectuatur, vid. Fleta lib. 1. cap. 22.
Item crimen falsi dicitur, cum quis illicitus cui non fuerit ad haec data
authoritas de sigillo Regis rapto vel invento et brevia Carteria: vide le
Attainder de Elizabeth Barton, Edw. Bocking. by Parliament, etc. 25. H. 8. c.
12.

Hill. 24 Eliz. In the Exchequer.
A Merchant brought eighty weigh of Bay Salt by Sea to a Haven in England, and
out of the Ship sold 20 weighs, and discharged them to another Ship, wherein
they were transported, being never actually put on shore: and for the residue,
viz. 60 weigh, he agreed for the Custom, and put them upon Land; and now the
d^nbt was, 1 Eliz. cap. 12. for the words of the Statute concerning
Exportation, sent from the Wharfe, Key, or other place on the Land, and
concerning Importation taken up, discharge, and lay on Land. If in this Case
the said 20 weighs, which always were waterborn, and never touched the Land,
ought to pay Custom as well inwards as outward: And it was Resolved,

That in both the Cases Custom ought to be paid; and forasmuch as no Custom
was paid, It was Resolved, That the Goods were forfeited.

Note, No Act of Parliament can bind the King from any Prerogative which is
sole and inseparable to his person, but that he may dispense with it by a non
obstante, (as his Sovereign Power of Commandines) his Subjects to serve him for
the public Weal. See 23 H. 6. cap. 8. 2 H. 7. 66. 13 R. 2. Parl. 2. cap. 1.
See also 4 H. 4. cap. 31. Coke l. 2. fol. 69.

But in things which are not incident solely and inseparably to the person of
the King, but belongs to every Subject, and may be severed there an Act of
Parliament, may absolutely bind the King. As if an Act of Parliament do disable
any Subjects of the King to take any Land of his Grant, or any of his Subjects
(as Bishops) as it is done by the Statute, 1 Jac. cap. 3. to Grant to the King,
this is good; for to grant or take Lands or Tenements, is common to every
Subject.

Hill. 4. Jac. Regis,
Care of High Commissioners, If they have Power to Imprison.
Mich. 4 Jac. post prand. There was moved a Question amongst the Judges and
Sergeants at Sergeants Inn; If the High Commissioners in Ecclesiastical Causes,
may by force of their Commission imprison any man or not?

First, Resolved by all, That before the Statute of the first of Eliz. the King
might have granted a Commission to hear and determine Ecclesiastical Causes;
yet the Commissioners ought to proceed according to the Ecclesiastical Law
allowed within the Realm. Vide Caudrye's Case. 5 Report. Then all the Question
rests upon the Act, 1 Eliz. which has three Branches;

1. Such Commissioners have power to exercise Jurisdiction Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical.

2. By force of Letters Patent, they have power to visit, reform, etc. all
Heresies, etc. which by any manner of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, etc.
can or lawfully may be Reformed, etc. So that these Branches limit the
Jurisdiction.

3. That after such Commission delivered to them, shall have power by virtue of
this Act, and the said Letters Patent, to exercise, etc. all the Premises,
etc. according to the Tenor, etc. This Branch gives them Power to execute their
Commission.

But it was Objected, That this Branch gave no power to the Queen, to alter the
Proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Law; or to prescribe what manner of
proceedings or punishment, concerning the Lands, Goods, or Bodies of the
Subject. And this appears by the Title of the Act ( Restoring) the intent being
to make Restitution, not any Innovation.

Vide, a notable Case adjudged in this Point, Hill. 42. El. ^o. 389. as to
Imprisonment, Smith's Case: for at the last Consultation was granted: And at
last, by the better Opinion, as to things committed to them by Commission, they
may put Fine and Imprisonment.

By the 3 H. 7. cap. 14. it is Ordained, where Women, as well Maids, as Widows
and Wives, having substance, etc. for the lucre of such substance, be taken by
Misdoers, contrary to their Wills, and after married, etc. or defiled.

That what person henceforth so takes, etc. against her will, etc. such
taking, etc. to be Felony: And the Misd^ers, etc. to be reputed as Felons. Upon
this, great question was moved, 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. in the Star Chamber, If
the Eloym ent against her without Marriage, or Carnal Copulation, be Felony or
no: And the Opinion of Brook, and some other of the Justices was, that It was
Felony. But Sanders, Lord Chief Justice, was against it; and afterward, as
Peryam chief Baron did Report, It was Resolved by all the Justices, That such
Eloynment only, is not Felony, by the intent of the Statute, without Marriage,
or Carnal Copulation.

Note, By the express purview of the Act, the Accessory both before and after
is made Principal.

Pasch. 4 Jac. Regis.
By the Commandment of the King, it was referred to Popham Chief Baron, and my
self, what Right the Queen, which now is, has; and in what Cases to a Right
claimed by her, called Aurum Reginae: that is to say, Pro centum marcis
argenti, una marca Auri solvendum per illum qui se sponte obligat. And upon
consideration had thereof, and view of Records and Presidents, viz. Librum
Rubrum in Scaccario, fol. 56. de Auro Reginae; where it is said, that this is
to be taken, De iis qui sponte se obligant Regi, etc. which is the Foundation
of this Claim: And of a Record in the Tower, 52 H. 3. And a Record in the
Exchequer, 4 Ed. 1. And a Record in the Exchequer, Hill. 12 Ed. 3. And in the
Tower in the same year, in Rot. Claus. And of Acts of Parliament, 15 Ed. 3.
cap. 6. and 31 Ed. 3. cap. 13. and 13 R. 2. in Turri: And diverse other
Presidents and Process out of the Exchequer, in the time of R. 2. H. 4. and
other Kings, till H. 7.

It was Resolved, that the Queen has Right to it, but with these Limitations.

1. It ought to be sponte, by the Subject, sine coactione: And for this, all
Fines upon Judgments, or by Offer or Fine for Alienation, or any other Case,
where the Subject does it not sponte, sine aliqui coactione: That the King of
Right ought to have it, there the Queen shall have nothing.

2. It ought to be sponte, sine consideration alicujus reventionis seu
interesse: That the King has in esse, in jure Coronae: As upon Sale or Demise
of his Lands, Wards, etc. these are Contracts concerning the Kings Revenues;
and there it cannot be said, that the Subjects, sponte se obligant, as to
purchase any the Revenues of the King.

3. It ought to be sponte super considerationem and non ex mera gratia and
benevolentia subditi, Hill. 4. Ed. 1. in Scaccario, etc.

4. It ought to be sponte, super considerationem quae non long reventionem seu
interesse Coronae, in any thing which the King has. As if a Subject give the
King a Sum of Money for License in Mortmain, or to create a Tenure of
himself, to have a Fair, Market, Park, Chase, or Warren, in his Manor, there
the Queen shall have it; for the Subject did this sponte: And this Resolution
was reported to the King by Popham, in the Gallery at White Hall.

Pasch. 5 Jac. Regis.
The Case of Forests.
This Term it was informed to the King, that great wrongs were done in the
Forest of Leicester, in the County of Leicester; and in his Forest of Bowland,
in the County of Warwick, parcel of his Duchy of Lancaster. And upon this, by
Warrant from the King under his Signet, all the Justices were assembled, to
resolve certain Questions, to be moved concerning Forests, by the Attorney of
the Duchy, and the Council of the other part; which were Forests and Chases:
Which being matter in Fact, the Judges could not give their Resolutions, but by
way of Directions. And it was Resolved,

1. That if these are Forests, it will appear by matter of Record, as by Eyres
of Justices of Forests, Swannimotes, Regardors, etc. But the calling it a
Forest in Grants, etc. proves it not a Forest in Law.

2. Resolved by all the Justices, That if there be no Forests in Law, but
Free-Chases; then who has any Freehold in them, may cut his Wood growing upon
it, without view or License; leaving sufficient for Covert to maintain the
Kings Games: so a common person having Chase in another Soil, the Owner may not
destroy the Covert, nor Browse-wood.

3. Resolved, That in such a Chase, the Owner, by Prescription, may have Common
for his Sheep, and Warren for his Coneys, by Grant or Prescription: but he must
not surcharge or make Burrows in other places, than has been used from the
time of which: nor may he erect a new Warren without Charter.

4. Resolved, That who has such a Warren, may lawfully build a Lodge upon his
Inheritance, for preservation of his Game.

5. Popham, Chief Justice, said, That in the time of Chief Baron Bett, It was
adjudged in the Exchequer, That a man may prescribe to cut his Wood upon his
own Inheritance within a Forest, though it was against the Act, in the 43 Ed.
1. See the Abridgement, Title Forest 21. And this was the Case of Sellenger,
vide 2 Ed. 2. Title Trespass, fol. 9. in the time of Ed. 1. Trespass, 239.
^low. Com. Dyer 72. 32. 2 Ed. 4. cap. 7. that the Subject may have a Forest.
Consuetudo ex rationebili causa usitata private communem Legem. And it was held
by some, that this was but an Ordinance, not an Act of Parliament.

Pasch. 5 Jacobi Regis.
Case of Conspiracy.
This Term, in the Case between Rice ap Evan ap Floyd, Plaintiff; and Richard
Barker, one of the Justices of the Grand Sessions, in the County of Anglesey,
and others, Defendants.

1. Resolved by Popham and Coke, Chief Justices, the Chief Baron, and Egerton
Lord Chancellor, and all the Court of Star Chamber; That when a Grand Inquest
indicts one of Murder or Felony, though the Party be acquitted; yet no
Conspiracy lies for him against the In^ictors: for they are returned by the
Sheriff by Law, to make Inquiry of Offenses upon their Oath, for service of the
King and Country, and are compellable to serve the Law, 10 Eliz. 265. And their
Indictment or Verdict is matter of Record, and called Verum dictum, and shall
not be avoided by Surmise, and no Attaint lies: And with this agrees the Books
in 22 Assise 77. 27 Ass. 12. 21 Ed. 3. 17. 16 H. 6. 19. 47 Ed. 3. 17. 27 H. 8.
2. F. N. B. 115. a. But otherwise of a Witness; for if he conspire out of the
Court, and after swear in Court, his Oath shall not excuse his Conspiracy
before, for he is a private person.

2. Resolved, That when the party indicted, is convictd of Felony by another
Jury, upon Not Guilty pleaded, there he shall never have a Writ of Conspiracy:
But when he is upon his Arraignment, L^gitimo modo acquietatus. But in the Case
at Bar, the Grand Jury who Indicted one William Price, for the Murder of Hugh
ap William; the Jury, who, upon Not Guilty pleaded, convicted him, were
Charged, Indicted, and Convict in the Star Chamber, which was never seen
before: For if the party shall not have a Conspiracy against the Indictors,
when Acquitted, a multo fortiori, when he is lawful Convict, he shall neither
charge the Grand Inquest nor Jury that convicted him. But when a Jury acquits a
Felon or Traitor, against manifest Proof, there they may be charged in the
Star Chamber, ne maleficia remanerent impunita. But if such Supposals shall be
admitted, after ordinary Judicial Proceedings, it will be a means, ad
detrahendos Juratores and deterrendos a servitio Regis.

3. Resolved, That Barker who was Judge of Assize, and gave Judgment upon the
Verdict of Death against the said W. P. and the Sheriff that executed him, nor
the Justices of Peace that examined the offender, and the Witnesses for proof
of the murder before the Indictment, were not to be drawn in question in the
Star Chamber for any conspiracy, nor ought to be charged there with any
conspiracy, or elsewhere, when the party indicted is convicted, or Attaint of
murder or Felony. And though such person were acquitted, yet the Judge, etc.
being by Commission, and of Record, and sworn to do Justice, cannot be charged
for conspiracy, for that he openly did in Court as Judge, Justice of Peace,
etc. but if he has conspired before out of Court, this is extrajudiciall, but
subordinations of Witnesses, and false malicious prosecutions out of Court,
etc. amounts to an unlawful conspiracy. And if Judicial matters of Record
(which are of so high a nature, that for their sublimity, they import verity in
themselves,) should be drawn in question by partial and sinister supposall and
averments of offenders, there will never be* an end of Causes, but
Controversies will be infinite, Et infinitum in jure rep^obatur, 47 Ed. 3. 15.
25. Ed. 4 67. and 27 Ass. pl. 12. But in a Hundred Court, or other Court which
is not of Record, there averment may be taken against their proceedings, 47 Ed.
3. 15.

Also one shall never assign for Error, that the Jury gave Verdict for the
Defendant, and the Court entered it for the Plaintiff, etc. Vide, 1 H. 6 4. 39
H. 6. 52. 7 H. 7. 4. 11 H. 7. 28. 1 Mar. Dyer 89. But in a Writ of false
Judgment, the Plaintiff shall have direct averment, against what the Judges in
the inferior Court have done as Judges, Quia Recordum non habent, 21 H. 6. 34.
Neither shall a Judge in the Cases aforesaid, be charged before any other Judge
at the Suit of the King, 27 Ass. pl. 18. and 23. 2. R. 3. 9. 28 Ass. pl. 21. 9
H. 6. 60. Catlyn and Dyer, chief Justices, Resolved, That what a Judge does as
a Judge of Record, ought not to be drawn in Question in this Court.

Nota been, that the said matters at the Bar were not examinable in the
Star Chamber; and therefore it was Decreed by all the Court, That the said
Bill, without any Answer to it by Barker, shall be taken off the File, and
utterly cancelled: And it was agreed, That the Judges of the Realm ought not to
be drawn into question for any supposed Corruption, which extends to the
annihilating of a Record, or tending to the slander of the Justice of the King,
except it be before the King himself; for they are only to make an account to
God and the King, otherwise this would tend to the subversion of all Justice,
for which reason the Orator said well, Invigilandum est semper, multae invidiae
sunt bonis; And the reason hereof is, the King himself being de jure, to
deliver Justice to all his Subjects; and because himself cannot do it to all
Persons, he delegates his Power to his Judges, who have the Custody and Guard
of the Kings Oath. Thorpe being drawn into question for Corruption before
Commissioners, was held against Law, and he pardoned: Vide the conclusion of
the Oath of a Judge, Stowes ch^oi 18 Ed. 3. 312.

Weyland, chie^ Justice of the Common Bench, and Hengham, Justice of the Kings
Bench, and other Justices were accused of Bribery, and their Causes were
determined in Parliament.

Vide 2 Ed. 3. fol. 27. The Justices of Trayl-Baston, their Authority was
grounded upon the Statute of Ragman, which you may see in old Magna Charta.
Vide the form of the Commission of Trayle-Baston. Hollingshead Chron. fol. 312.
whereby it appears, That the Corruption of his Judges, the King himself
examined in Parliament^ and not by Commission. Absurdum est affirmare,
recredendum esse non judici.

Pasch. 4 Jacob. Regis,
Case concerning the Oath ex officio.
The Lords of the Council at Whitehall, sedente Parliamento, demanded of
Popham, chief Justice, and my self, upon motion of the Commons in Parliament,
In what cases the Ordinary may examine any person ex Officio, upon Oath; and
upon Consideration and View of our Books, we answered the said Lords at another
day in the Council Chamber.

1. That the Ordinary cannot constrain any man to swear generally to Answer to
such Interrogatories as shall be administered unto them, but ought to deliver
them a Copy of the Articles in writings, that they may know whether they ought
to answer them by Law or no, according to the Course of the Chancery and
Star Chamber.

2. No man shall be examined upon the secret thoughts of his Heart, or of his
secret Opinion, but of what he has spoken or done. No Layman may be examined
ex officio, nisi in causis matrimonialibus et Testamentariis, as appears by an
Ordinance of Ed. 1. Title Prohibition, Rastal. See also the Register, fol. 366.
the force of a Prohibition, and an Attachment upon it, by which it appears,
That such Examination was not only against the said Ordinance, but also against
the Custom of the Realm, which has been time of which, etc. but also in
prejudice of the Crown and Dignity of the King; and with this agrees F. N. B.
fol. 41. And so the Case reported by my Lord Dyer, (not printed) Trin. 10 Eliz.
One Leigh, an Attorney of the Common Pleas, was committed to the Fleet, because
he had been at Mass, and refused to swear to certain Articles; and in regard
they ought in such case to examine upon his Oath; and hereupon he was delivered
by all the Court of Common Pleas.

The like in Mich. 18 Eliz. Dyer, fol. 175. in Hinds Case. Also vide de Statute
25 H. 8. cap. 14. which is declaratory as to this point. It stands not with the
right order of Justice, that any person should be convict, and put to the loss
of his Life, good Name, and Goods, unless by due Accusation and Witnesses, or
by Presentment, Verdict, precess of Outlawry, etc. And this was the Judgment of
all the said Parliament. See F. N. B. Justice of Peace, 72 Lam. 6. in his
Justice of Peace 338. Crompton in his Justice of Peace 36. 6. In all which it
appears, That if any be compelled to Answer upon his Oath, where he ought not
by Law, this is oppression, and punishable before a Justice of Peace, etc.

But if a Person Ecclesiastical be charged with any thing punishable by our
Law, as for Usury, there he shall not be examined upon Oath, because his Oath
is Evidence against him at the Common Law; but Witnesses may be cited. Register
title Consult. F. N. B. 53. d. 2 H. 4. cap. 15. In H. 8. nor Ed. 6. time, no
Layman was examined upon his Oath. except in the said two Cases. But in Queen
Mary's Reign, 2 H. 4. was revived, but afterward repealed, 10 Eliz.

Note, King John, in the time of his Troubles, granted by his Charter. 13 Maii,
Anno Regni 140. submitted himself to the Obedience of the Pope. And after in
the same year by another Charter, he resigned his Crown and Realm to Pope
Innocent and his Successors, by the hands of Pandulph his Legate, and took it
of him again to hold of the Pope, which was utterly void; because the Dignity
is an inherent, inseparable to the Royal Blood of the King, and descendable,
and cannot be transferred. Also the Pope was an Alien born, and therefore not
capable of Inheritance in England: By color of which Resignation, the Pope and
his Successors exacted great Sums of the Clergy and Layety of England pro
commutandis paenitentiis. And to fill his Coffers, Pope Gregory the 9th. sent
Otho Cardinalis de Carcere Tulliano into this Realm, to Collect Money, who did
Collect infinite Sums, so that it was said of him, Quod Legatus saginatur bonis
Angliae, which Legate held a Council at London, Anno Dom. 1237. and 22 H. 3.
and for finding out Offenses which should be redeemed with Money; with the
assent of the English Bishops, he made certain Canons, among which, one was,
Jusjurandi Calumniae in causis Ecclesiasticis cujus libet, and de veritate
dicendi in spiritualibus quoque ut veritas facilius aperiatur, etc. Statuimus
de Caetero praestari in reg^o Angliae secundum Canonicas and legitimas
Sanctiones obtenta in contrarium, consuetudine non obstante, etc. By which
Cannon it appears, That the Law and Custom of England was against such
Examinations; so that this was a new Law, and took its effect de caetero.

2. Ob^enta in contrarium, consuetudine non obstante: And this agrees with the
Register and Treaties, de Regia prohibitione, and the other Authorities. And it
appears in Linwood, cap. jurejurandi, fol. 8. 9. That Boniface, Archbishop of
Canterbury, 1272. and 57 H. 3. made this Cannon, Statuimus quod Laici de
subditorum peccatis, etc. per praelatos and judices Ecclesiaslicos inquiratur
ad praestandum de veritate dicenda Sa ramentum per excommunicationis
sententias, si opusfuerit, compellantur impedientes; vero ne hujusmodi
juramentum praestetur per interdict. est excommunicatio, etc. In which Cannon
it is to be noted, That it extends to Lay People: And note, Linwood says, cap.
Jurejurandi, fol. 6. litera, E. Hic dicitur causa editionis hujus, etc.
Praelati, etc. procedebant ad inquirendum de criminibus, etc. and Laici (nota
hic) suffult potestate dominorum in hujusmodi inquisitionibus noluerint jurare
de veritate dicenda.

1. Note, Why Lay People refused to be examined for Crimes and Excess.

2. The Judges of the Common Law, by their Prohibition, did interdict, etc. as
appears by their Register and other Authorities in Ed. 1. time, etc.

3. That where by the Law they may examine Lay People upon Oath, in causis
matrimonialibus and testamentariis; Here Boniface makes the Canon to extend to
Peccata and excessus, which Canon was utterly against the Law and Custom of
England. See another at the same time in Linwood: Cap. de Benef. fo. 231. And
this is declared by Act of Parliament, made 9 Ed. 2. called, Articuli Cleri; si
Praelati imponant poenam pecuniariam alicui pro peccato, etc. Regis prohibitio
locum habet.

Trin. 5 Jac. Regis.
Case concerning Pardons.
The Law so regards the Weal-publike, that though the King shall have the Suit
solely in his Name for the redress of it; yet by his Pardon he cannot discharge
the Offender, because it is not only in prejudice of the King, but in damage
of the Subjects: If a man ought to repair a Bridge, and for default of
Reparation, it fall to decay; in this Case, the Suit ought to be in the King's
Name, and he is sole Party to it, but for the benefit of his Subjects: And if
the King pardon it, yet the Offense remains; but peradventure the Pardon shall
discharge the Fine for the time past. And with this agrees 37 H. 6. 4. 6 Plow.
Con. in Nichol's Case 487. A multo fortiori in case of Depopulation: for this
is not only an Offense: against the King, but against all the Realm; for by
this the Realm is infeebled, and therefore Depopulation and Diminution of
Subjects, is a greater Nuisance than the hindrance of Subjects, in their good
and easy passage by any Bridge or Highway. And for this, notwithstanding the
King's Pardon, he shall be bound to re-edifie the Houses of Husbandry which he
depopulated; and though for the time before the Pardon, perchance he shall not
be Fined, yet without doubt he shall for the time after: For the Offense it
self cannot be pardoned, as in Case of a Bridge or Highway, because it is
malum in se. But this continues as to the Fine and Imprisonment, at all times
after the Pardon: But the Penalty insl^cted by the Statute may be discharged,
Quia prohibitum, Vide 3 Ed. 3. Tit. Ass. 443. But when the King charge his
Subjects for the making of a Bridge, or Cawsie, or Wall, etc. there the King
may discharge the Pontage, Murage, etc.

Note, If one be bound to the King in a Recognizance to keep the Peace, in this
Case, the King, before the Peace broken, cannot pardon and release the
Recognizance, as it is agreed 11 H. 4. 43. 37 H. 6. 4. 1 H. 7. 10. because it is
made for the Safety of the King's Subjects.

Note, No License can be made to do any thing that is Malum in se, but Malum
prohibitum, 11 H. 7. 11. 3 H. 7. 39 H. 6. 39.

Trin. 5 Jacobi Regis,
Case of Commissions.
Note, Commissions in English, under the Great Seal, were directed to diverse
Commissioners in the Counties of Bedford, ^ucks. Huntington, Northampton,
Leicester, and Warwick, to inquire of diverse Articles annexed, which were also
in English; to inquire of depopulation of Houses, converting Arable Land into
Pasture, etc. the Commissioners only to have power to enquire, not to hear and
determine: By color whereof, many Presentiments wiere taken in English, and
returned into the Chancery; and after, viz. Trin. 5 Jac. It was Resolved by the
two Chief Justices, Walmesly, Fenner, Yelverton, Williams, Snig, Althum, and
Foster, that the said Commissions were against Law, for three Reasons.

1. Because they were in English.

2. Because the Offenses inquirable, were not certain in the Commission, but in
a Sc^edule annexed.

3. Because, that it was only to enquire, which is against Law; for so a man
may be unjustly accused or defamed, and shall have no Remedy nor Traverse to
it; for it is not within the Statute of the 5 Eliz. At Common Law Assizes were
not taken, but before Justices in Air (who sit virtute brevis, every seventh
year, Vid. Britton. fo. 1. and Bracton, lib. 5. and 11. or in the Common Pleas:
And because this was a great trouble, it was provided by Magna Charta, cap. 30.
Quod requisitiones de nova disseizina, and de mort' d'an cester non capientur
nisi in propriis Comitatibus, etc. And after by the Statute of Westminster 2.
cap. 30. it was provided, Quod assignentur duo Justiciarii jurati coram quibus
et non aliis capiantur assiz. ad plus ter per annum. By which Act, justices of
Nisi Prius were constituted of other Pleas, as well of one Bench as the other,
Coram quibus, etc. And by the same Act, Justices of Nisi Prius may give
Judgment in Assizes of Darreine presentment, and quare Impedit. Then came the
Statute 21 Ed. 3. de fl^ibus, cap. 4. and provided, that inquisitio^es et
recognitiones capiantnr tempore vacationis, generally before aliquo Justiciario
de utroque Banco, coram quibus, etc. And after by the Statute of York, cap. 3.
It is provided, That in Plea of Land, Nisi Prius shall be taken before one of
the Justices, etc. and Cap. 4. That no other Pleas moved by Attachment or
Distress, shall be taken before any Justice, etc. By the 14 Ed. 3 cap. 15. Nisi
Prius may be taken in any Plea before two; so one be Justice of one Bench, or
Chief Justice, or Sergeant sworn.

By the Statute de finibus cap. 3. Justiciarii ad assizas capiend. assignati
deliberant Gaolas in Com. illis, etc. vide de recitat. del Stat. 28 Ed. 1. de
appellat. which recites the Statute def^lonia: Felony formerly included
Trespass, vide Stamf. 57. 3 H. 3. cap. 7. gives power to Justices of Assize, to
hear and determine Treason, concerning false Money, 14 H. 6. cap. 1. gives
Justices of Nisi Prius power in all Cases of Felony and Treason to give
Judgment. 28 Ed. 1. De appellatis, gives Justices of Assize power to try
Appeals of Approvers.

They may also by the 34 and 35 H. 8. cap. 14. write to the Clerk of the Crown,
de Banco R. to certify the first Conviction in their own Name; otherwise the
best Form is in the King's Nan^e, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. cap. 24.

By Articuli super chartas, cap. 10. and 4 Ed. 3. cap. 11. and 7 R. 2. they may
hear and determine Conspiracies, false Informations, etc. By the Statute of
Northampton, 2 Ed. 3. cap. 3. they may hear and determine the Statute of Armor,
and punish Justices of Peace and others, etc.

They ought twice a year to proclaim the Statute, 32 H. 8. and other Statutes,
against Champer^y, Imbracery, and unlawful Retainers.

By 3 H. 7. cap. 1. they may take Bail of one acquitted of Murder within the
year, to answer the Appeal of the Party.

By 33 H. 8. they must proclaim in their Circuit the Statute against unlawful
Games. They make Execution of the Statute 13 H. 4. cap. 7. of Ryo^s, etc. And
by 2 H. 5. cap. 8. Commission shall be awarded, to enquire of the Defaults of
Justices of Assize, and of the Peace.

By Westminster 2 cap. 37. and 2 Ed. 3. c. 5. they ought also to enquire of the
23 H. 6. cap. 10. concerning Sheriffs, etc. Bailiffs, etc. and Guardians of
Prisons, for their Extortion, and delivering who are not Bailable, and
detaining who are, 2 Mariae, Dyer 99. they held Plea in Assize of Murder, by
W. 2 and 3 H. 7. and of Robbery, by Commission of Gaol Delivery. By 23 Ed. 3.
they may inquire of Default etc. punishment of Victuallers, etc.

Note, Justices of Oyer and Terminer can only enquire of such who are endicted
before themselves; But Justices of Jail-delivery may arraign a Prisoner
indicted before others; the words of their Commission are, Ad Gaolas, Gaolam de
B. de pe^sonaribus in ea existe^t. hac vice deliberand secund. leges, etc.
Brook ti^. Commission, 3. Maii 24. 4 Ed. 3. cap. 2. Justices of Jail-deliver
deliver Prisoners indi^ted before Guardians of the Peace. And by 1 Ed. 6. cap.
7. new Commissioners of Jail-deliver. This extends not to Indictments, etc.
before Commissioners of Oyer and Termi^er, because the proceedings before
Justices of Over and Terminer, after the Oyer determined, ought to remain in
the Kings Bench: But the Records before Justices of Jail-deliver remain with
the Custos Rotulorum, vide Brook. tit. Commission 12. 38 H. 8. Title Oyer and
Terminer, 44 Ed. 2. 31.

Case of Customs, Subsidies, and Impositions.
Upon Conference between Popham, chief Justice, and my self, upon a judgment
lately given in the Exchequer, and upon Consideration of our Books and
Statutes. It appeared, That the Rule of the Common Law is the the Register;
Title ad quod dampnum and F. N. B. 222. a. quod patria magis solito non
o^eretur nec gravetur. Also another Rule, That the King may Charge his People
to a thing which may be to their Profit, without assent of the Commons, but not
to their Charge. As is held in 13 H. 4. 16. and Statutum de Tallagio non
concedendo, and Mag. Chart. cap. 30. which has been confirmed above 30 times,
Vide le Stat. 25 Ed. 1. 3 Ed. 1. in turri, 9 Ed. 3. cap. 1. 2. 14 Ed. 3. 2. 25
Ed. 3. cap. 2. Queen May put an Imposition upon Clothes, which 1 ^liz. Dyer,
165. was moved, but not Resolved: Vide 31 H. 8. Dyer, fol. 43. and 1 Eliz.
Dyer, 165. Magna Custuma, and Parva Custuma: Vide 9 H. 12. and 35.

Upon all which, and diverse Records by us seen, it appeared to us, That the
King cannot at his Pleasure put any Imposition upon any Merchandise to be
Imported or Exported, unless for advancement of Trade, the life of the Island,
Pro bono publico. As if in For^aign Parts any Imposition is put upon the
Merchandise of our Merchants non pro bono publico; to make equality, and
advance Trade, the King may put an Imposition upon their Merchandiz^s, for this
is not against any of the said Statutes; which was the Case of Currants lately
adjudge in the Exchequer. And also of Customer Smith in Queen Elizabeth's time.

And it was clearly Resolved, That such Imposition, so put, cannot be demised
or granted to any Subject, because it is to augment and decrease, or be quite
taken away upon occasion.

And though the King may prohibit any person, in some Cases, with some
Commodities, to pass out of the Realm, yet this cannot be where the end is
Private, but where it is public; because Quam plurima nobis et Coronae
prejudicialia in partibus exteris prosequi intendit; and to restrain in time of
Dearth or War for Necessitas est lex temporis.

It appeared to us also, That at Common Law no Custom was paid, but only for
Woolls, Woollfells, and Leather, which is called in Magna Charta, Recta
consuetudo, all others are called, Mala Tolneta; which in the Statute de
Tallagio non concedendo, is called Male. And it has of long time been used by
Parliament, to Grant to the Kings, at the beginnings of their Reigns, certain
Subsidies of Tunnage and Poundage for term of Life, which began 2 and 3 H. 5.
31 H. 6. cap. 8. and 12 Ed. 4. cap. 3. which proves the King, by his own Power,
cannot impose it; and this may be granted by the King, but the other no^. Vide
31 H. 8. Dyer 43. 1 Ma. D. 92. 1. Eliz. D. 165. 2 and 3 P. and M. D. 128. 12
Eliz. D 296. 23 Eliz. D. 375. 45 Ed. 3. cap. 4. 27 Ass. pl. 44. Register 192,
etc.

Vide magna Charta, cap. 10. They are called Consuetudines; Et per vocabulum
artis; they are called, Cu^uma: Vide Lestat. 51 H. 3. Titl. Exchequer in
Rastall. and 9 Ed. 3. cap. 2.

Vide Fortescue de laud. leg. Ang. cap. 36. fol. 48. and fol. 13. cap. 9.

And note, for the benefit of the Subject, the King may lay Imposition within
the Realm, ^o repair Highwayes, Bridges, and Walls for defense. But the sum
must be proportioned to the benefit. And this appears, 13 H. 4. 16. See also
Charta mercatoria ex Rot. mercator. 31 Ed. 1. n. 42. Patents, 3 Ed. 1. n. 1.
and 9. de sacco lanae dim. marcae lasta Coriorum 1 Mark, etc. Fines 3 Ed. 1.
n. 24. intus et non in dorso: Vide Rot. Parl. an. 13 Ed. 3. And 22 Ed. ^. n. 8.
And 8 H. 6. n. 29. 28 H. 6. n. 35. 9 R. 2. n. 30. 29 Ed. 3. 11. n. ex Rot.
Parliam. 5 Ed. 3. n. 17, 18, 19. 22 Ed. 3. n. 31. 5 Ed. 3. n. 163. 5 Ed. 3 n.
191. 38 Ed. 3. n. 26 Rot. Parl. 7 R. 2. n. 35. 36. 9 R. 2. n. 30. 2 R. 2. Parl.
apud Glocestriam. Act. 25. 1 R. 2. Parl. accord. 1 R. 3. against Benevolence.
Vide Claus. 4 Ed. 3. n. 22. bis.

Case of Libells between Edwards and Wooton.
In Came. Stellat.
The Case was, That Doctor Wooton writ to Edmunds an infamous, malicious,
scandalous, and obscene Letter, with his Name subscribed. And this he Sealed
and directed to his Loving Friend, Mr. Edward Speed, this, and after the said
Doctor dispersed to others a great number of Copies of the said Letter.

And it was Resolved by the Lord Chancellor Egerton, the two chief Justices, et
per totam curiam, That this was a subtle and a dangerous kind of Libell: For
though the writing of a private Letter, without other Publicatior, the Party to
whom it is directed cannot have an Action Sur le Case, but where it is
published to others' to the Plaintiffs Scandal, Action lies.

The Doctor thought this could not in any manner have been punished; but 'twas
Resolved, That the infamous Letter, which in Law is a Libell, shall be punished
in the Star Chamber, being an Offense to the King, and a motive to breach of
the Peace: And in the Case at Bar, the dispersing of Copies of it, aggravates
the Offense, for which also the Party may have an Action Sur le Case.

Note, By the Civil Law, a Person disabling himself to bear Office, or making a
Libell against himself, shall be punished: And though the Doctor subscribed his
Name to the said Letter, yet it importing matter Scandalous is in the Law a
Libell.

The Law of the Lydians is, That who slanders another, shall be let Blood in
the Tongue; who hears it, and ascents to it in the Ear, etc.

Mich. 5 Jac. Regis,
Wooton and Edwins Case.
In Replevin, the Defendant avowed, and the Plaintiff demurred, and the Case
was thus;

William Hawes was seized in Fee of a Message and 55 Acres of Land, five Acres
of Meadow, and six Acres of Pasture, in Formanton in Com. Hereford. and 27.
Junii, 28 H. 8. by Indenture, demised the Tenement aforesaid to N. Traheron for
79 years, Reddendo inde annuatim praefat. Gulielm. Hawes et assign. suis 26 s.
8 d. at the Feasts of the Annunciation, and St. Michael, by equal portions. And
after the Lessor dyed, and the Reversion descended to William his Son, under
whom the said John Edwin Claimed. And the sole Point was, If the Rent reserved
in this Case shall go to the Heir, or be determined by the death of the Lessor.

If the Lessor had reserved the Rent to him without more, this shall determine
by the death of the Lessor. And the addition of the word Assigns shall not
enlarge the reservation; for the Assigns cannot have the Rent longer than the
Lessor himself should have it. Vide 18 Ed. 3. tit. Ass. 86. 10 Ed. 4. 18. 27 H.
8. 19. per Audl^y, et vide H^ll. 33 Eliz. Rot. 1341. In a Replevin, enter
Richmond and Butcher; Butcher avowed for Rent as Heir to his Father; upon a
Demise made by his Father of certain Lands, for 21 years, by these words,
Reddendo proinde durant. termin. 21 annos praefat. ( Patri) executor et
assignat. suis 10 l. legalis, etc. ad festa, etc. And it was adjudged, That by
this Reservation the Heir should not have the Rent, because the Reservation was
to the Father, and his Executors, etc. not to his Heirs.

Mich. 5 Jac. Regis,
Case concerning Buggary.
The Letter of the Statute, 25 H. 8. cap. 6. If any Person shall commit the
detestable sin of Buggary with Mankind or Beast, etc. it is Felony; which Act
being Repealed 1 Mar. is revived and made perpetual 5 Eliz. cap. 17. and he
lose his Clergy.

It appears by ancient Authorities of the Law, That this was Felony, but they
vary in the punishment. For Britton, who writ 5 Ed. 1. cap. 17. says, That
Sorcerers, Sodomers, and Heretics, shall be burned: F. N. B. 269. agrees with
it. But Fleta lib. 1. cap. 35. Christiani Apostati, etc. debent cumburi, (this
agrees with Britton) but Pecorantes et Sodomitae terra vivis^ffodiantur. But in
the Mirror of Justice, vouched in Plow. Com. in Fogosses Case; the Crime is
more high, for there it is called Crimen laesae majestatis, a horrible Sin
against the King, either Celestial or Terrestial in three manners: 1. By
Heresy, 2. By Buggary, 3. By Sodomy. Note, Sodomy is with mankind, and is
Felony, and to make that Offense, Opertet rem penetrate et semen naturae
emittere et effundere; for the Indictment is, Contra ordinationem Creatoris et
naturae ordinem rem habuit veneream dictumque puerum carnaliter cognovit; and
so it was held in the Case of Stafford, Paederastes ^mator puerorum, Vide Rot.
Parl. 50 Ed. 3. 58. So in a Rape there must be penetration, and emission of
Seed, Vide Stamf. fol. 44. which Statute makes the Accessory Guilty of Felony.

West. 1. cap. 34. If a Man ravish a Woman, 11 H. 4. 18. If one Aid another in
a Rape, or be present, he is principle in the Buggary, Vide Levit. 18. 22. et
cap. 10. 13. 1 Cor. 6.

Case of Praemunire.
In Doctor Cosines Book, entitled, An Answer, etc. and published 1584. And a
Pamphlet lately published by Doctor Ridley, they would obtrude upon the World,
That in regard by the Act 10 Eliz. cap. 1. all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
Power within the Realm is annexed to the Crown, and the Law thereof is the
Kings Ecclesiastical Law; That therefore no Praemunire lies against any
Spiritual Judge for any cause whatsoever; And the Reasons some of their
Profession give to confirm it are,

1. That when the Statute of Praemunire was made, the Pope usurped
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, though de jure it belonged to the King: But now
since the King as well de facto as de jure is Supreme Head of all; The cause
being changed, the Law is changed also.

2. ^T conclusion of the Writ of Praemunire is in Domini Regis contemptum et
prejudicium et dictae Coronae et dignitatum suarum Laesionem et exhaeredationem
manifestam et contra forman statuti, etc. which proves the Jurisdictions united
to the Crown; and what is united to, and derived from the Crown, cannot be said
contra Coronam et dignitatem Regis.

3. The High Commission Court is the Kings Court, and therefore though it may
be said, The Consistory Courts are Curiae Episcoporum, yet that Court, by force
of the High Commission, is the Kings, and so their Proceeding^ shall not be
liable to the Praemunire.

4. This new Court is erected by Act of Parliament, etc. And because the
S^atute of R. 2. speaks de curia Romana seu alibi, etc. This ( alibi) cannot
extend to a Court erected by Act of Parliament, 10 Eliz. But to these
Objections it was answered and resolved by diverse Justices in this Term, That
without Question the^ Statutes of 27 Ed. 3. 16 R. 2. etc. de Praemunire, are yet
in force. And all proceedings before any Ecclesiastical Judge, that were in
danger of Praemunire before 1 Eliz. are now in case of Praemunire after the said
Act, the said Acts of Praemunire not being repealed by 1 Eliz.

1. 2. And as to first and second Objections, it was answered, That true it is,
The Crown of England has as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal Jurisdiction
annexed to it, as appears by the Resolution in Cawdryes Case from Age to Age.
And though this was de jure, yet where the Pope became so Potent, he usurped
upon the Kings Ecclesiastical Power in this Realm, but this was mere
Usurpation. And therefore all the Kings of this Realm, Totis viribus proinde,
for establishing of their Temporal Law, by which they inherit their Crown, and
by which, etc. were always jealous in any part or point it should be
incroached upon; And if the Ecclesiastical Law did usurp upon the Temporal, it
was severely punished, and the Offender judged an Enemy to the King by the
ancient Statutes; and every one might have killed him before the Statute of 5
Eliz. And this is the Reason, the Crown it self is directed descendable by the
Common Law, and Treason against the Crown is punished by this Law. And
therefore usurpation by an Ecclesiastical Judge upon it, is said to be contra
Coronam et dignitatem Regis: And all Prohibitions since 1 Eliz. do conclude
contra Coronam et dignitatem Regiam; for as 'twas resolved by all the Justices,
Pasch. 4 Jac. Regis, est contra Coronam, etc. when any Ecclesiastical Judge
does usurp upon the Temporal Law, for the cause of the Subject is drawn ad
aliud examen, when his Cause is not ended by the Common Law, whereto by
Birthright he is inheritable.

3. As to the Third, though the Court by force of High Commission is the Court
of the King, yet their proceedings are Ecclesiastical: And therefore if they
usurp upon the Temporal Law, this is the same offense which was before the
Act, 10 Eliz.

4. As to the Fourth, though it be a new Court, yet the ancient Statutes extend
to it, in this word ( Alibi) and in H. 8. times several new Bishoprics were
erected; yet never any question, but the old Acts of Premuri did extend to
them. But to answer all Objections at once, whereas the Act 1 Eliz. repealed
the Statute 1 and 2 P. and M. cap. 8. yet there is an express Proviso in the
said Act 1 Eliz. That it shall not extend to Repeal any Clause or Matter
contained in the 1 et 2 P. M. which in any sort concerns any matter or cause
of Praemunire, but that all of that stand in force. See the said two Acts, and
also 16 R. 2. Also the Act of 1 Eliz. revives the Act 25 H. 8. cap. 10. which
makes a Praemunire in a Dean and Chapter, etc. for not electing, certifying, or
admitting a Bishop elected; by all which, it appears the said Act of 1 Eliz.
never intended to take away the offense of Praemunire.

But note in what Cases a Praemunire lies, and in what not.

1. In all Causes, when the Cause originally belongs to the Cognizance of the
Ecclesiastical Court and Suit is prosecuted there, as belonging to their
Cognizance, (though in truth (if rightly examined) it ought to be determined ^t
Common Law) yet no Praemunire lies there, but a Prohibition. As if Tithes are
severed from the nine parts, and are carried away; if the Parson sue for the
Substraction of these Tithes in the Spiritual Court, this is not in the case of
Praemunire, Vide 10 H. 4. 2. agreeing with this Opinion. So if a Parson sue for
Tithes of surmising that they were Sylvae Caduae, under the age of 20 years,
where in truth they were above; yet a Prohibition lies, and no Praemunire.

2. But though the Cause originally may appertain to the Cognizance of the
Ecclesiastical Judge, yet if he sue for it in the nature of a Suit, which does
not belong to the Ecclesiastical Court, but to the Common Law, there a
Praemunire lies: As in the former Case, If the Parson after severing of Tithes,
will in any Ecclesiastical Court sue for carrying away his Tithes from the 9
parts, which Action pertains to the Common Law: In such case both the Actor and
Judge incurr the danger of Praemunire. And so it was adjudged 17 H. 8. as
Spillm^n Reports it: One Turb^rvile sued a Praemunire against a Parson, that
convened him into the Ecclesiastical Court, and there libelled against him for
taking of Ty hes which were sever from the nine parts, and the Parson was
condemned to be out of the protection of the King, to forfeit all his Lands,
Goods, and Chattels, and his Body to perpetual Imprisonment, and damages to the
Party. So of a Mortuary delivered and re-taken; if the Parson sue for this as
for a Mortuary to him delivered, he is in case of Praemunire, 10 H. 4. 2. So in
the case put for tithe of Wood, if it appear by the Libell that the Cognizance
of the Case does not belong to Court Christian, the Praemunire lies, as you may
see in the Book of Entries* tit. Dismes, fol. 221. But the tit. Prohibition,
fol. 449. Divisione Dismes, Ps. 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. If the suit be pro Sylva
caedua, etc. and the Suit be framed so as the Cognizance belongs to Court
Christian, though the truth be otherwise; no Praemunire, but a Prohibition lies.

3. When the cause originally belongs to the Cognizance of the Common Law, and
not to the Ecclesiastical Court; there though they Libel for it according to
the course of the Ecclesiastical Law, yet the Praemunire lies, because that
this draws the cause which is determinable at Common Law ad aliud examen, viz.
to be decided by the Civil Law, and so deprives the Subject of the Common Law,
his Birthright; and wi^h this agrees the Book of Entries, tit. Praemunire, fol.
229. b. and 430. a. So that if the Original cause be Temporal, though that they
proceed by Citation, Libel, etc. in Ecclesiastical manner, yet this is in
danger of Praemunire. And the reason of this is, because he endeavors to draw
Cognitionem quae ad Curiam domini Regis pertinet ad aliud examen; that is, that
the Debt, the Cognizance whereof belongs to the Court of the King; he intends
by the Original Suit to draw it to be determined by the Ecclesiastical Court.

And note, In the Indictment of Praemunire against Cardinal Wools^y, Mich. 21 H.
8. 14. it is said, Quod Praedictus Cardinalis intend. finaliter antiquissimas
leges Angliae penitus subvertere et enervare, univer sumque hoc Regnum Angliae
et ejusdem Angliae populum, legibus imperialibus, vuilgo dict. legibus
Civilibus, et ^orum legum Canonibus isperpetuum subjurare, etc. And this
included within these words, Ad aliud examen trahere, viz. to decide that by
the Civil Law, which is determinable by the Common Law. And upon this was a
notable Case in Hill. an. 25 H. 8. of Nicholas, Bishop of Norwich, against
whom, he then being in the Custody of the Marshall, the Kings Attorney did
prefer a Bill of Praemunire, the matter whereof was this, In Thetford in Com.
Norfolk has been de tempore cujus, etc. such Custom that all Ecclesiastical
Causes rising in that Town should be determined before the Dean of that Town,
who has particular Jurisdiction there, and that none in that Town shall be
drawn in Plea in any other Court-Christian, unless before the same Dean: And if
it ought to be done against the same Custom, this to be presented before the
Mayor of the same Town, and the Party to forfeit 6 s. 8 d. That One such sued
in the Consistory of the Bishop for a thing arising within the said Town, which
was presented before the Mayor, for which he forfeited 6 s. 8 d. The Bishop
cited the Mayor to appear before him at his House at Hoxin in Suffolk,
generally pro salute animae, but upon appearance^, (...) upon all the Matter,
and enjoined him on pain of Excommunication, to annul the said Presentment: The
Bishop had Council assigned him, who objected, That as well the Presentment as
Custom was void, and therefore not contra Coronam, etc. nor drawn by the Bishop
ad aliud examen.

2. They objected, That the Bishop's Court was not intended within the Act of
16 R. 2. but in Cur. Romana aut alibi, and this ( alibi) ought not to be out of
the Realm; but it was,

Resolved by Fitz James, chief Justice, Et. per totam Curiam, that be the
Custom or Presentment good or bad, this is a Temporal thing, determinable at
Common Law, and not in Spiritual Court; and therefore the Bishop has incurred
the Praemunire.

3. That alibi extends as well to the Bishop's Courts, etc. as well within the
Realm, as elsewhere; and so the Court said it had been often adjudged:
whereupon the Bishop confessed the Indictment. And Judgment was given, That he
shall be out of the King's Protection, and that his Lands, Goods, and Chattels,
should be forfeited, and his Body to be imprisoned ad voluntatem Regis; etc.

Nicholas Fuller's Case.
In the great Case of Nicholas Fuller of Gray's Inn, these Points were Resolved
by all the Justices and Barons of the Exchequer.

1. Resolved, That no Consultation can be granted out of Term, because it is a
final award of the Court; and can neither be granted in Term nor out of Term by
all the Judges, except in Court; the name of the Writ signifying the same.

2. Resolved, That the Construction of the Statute 1 Eliz. cap. 1. and of the
Letters Patents of High Commission, in Ecclesiastical Causes, founded upon the
said Act, belongs to the Judges of the Common Law: And therefore the
Consultation which was granted with this restraint, Quatenus non agat de
authoritate et validitate Literarum Patentium pro causis Ecclesiasticis, vobis
vel aliquibus vestrum direct. aut de expesitione et interpretatione Statuti de
anno primo nuper Reginae, etc. As if the King has a Benefice donative, by
Letters Patents; this shall not be visitable, nor deprivable by any
Ecclesiastical Authority, but by the Chancellor of the King, or Commissioners
under the Great Seal.

3. Resolved, When there is any Question concerning what Power or Jurisdiction
belongs to Ecclesiastical Judges in any such Case, the determination of this
belongs to the Judges of the Common Law, in what cases they have Cognizance,
and in what not; And according to this Resolution, Bracton, lib. 5. tract. de
except. cap. 15. fol. 412. Vide also Entries, fol. 445. There was a Question,
whether Court-Christian should have Cognizance of a Lamp, and a Prohibition was
granted, Quod non procedant in Curia Christianitatis, quousque in Curiae ^ostra
discussum fuerit utram cognitio placiti illius ad Curiam nostram, vel ad forum
Ecclesiasticum pertineat. And all this appears in our Books, that the Judges of
the Common Law shall determ^ne in what Cases the Ecclesiastical Judges have
Power to punish any pro Laesioae fidei, 2 H. 4. fol. 10. 11 H. 4. 88. 22 Ed. 4.
20. or of the bounds of Parishes, 5 Ed. 3 8 8 Ed. 3. 69. 70. 18 Ed. 3. 58. 12
Ed. 4. 9 H. 7. 1. 10 H. 7. 9. And therefore in this Case of Fuller, one other
Restraint was added in the Consultation, Et quatenus non agat de aliquibus
scandalis, contemptibus s^u aliis rebus quae ad communen legem, aut Statuta
Regni nostri Angliae suat pu^ienda et determinanda.

4. Resolved, That if a Councellor at Law, in his Argument, shall scandal the
King, or his Government, Temporal or Ecclesiastical, this is a misdemeanor, and
and contempt to the Court; for which he shall be indicted, fined, and
imprisoned, but not in Court Christian; but if he publish any Heresy, Schism,
or erroneous Opinion in Religion, he may for this be punished by the
Ecclesiastical Judges; for the Rule is, Quod non est juri consonum, quod quis
pro aliis quae in Curiis nostris act a sunt, quorum cognitio ad nos pertinet,
trahatur in placitum in Curia Christianitatis. See the Book of Entries, fol.
448. And for this cause a Consultation was granted, Quoad Schismata, Hereses,
etc. Vide Much. 18 H. 8. Rot. 78. in Banco Regis. The Case was, a Leet was ^eld
Jovis post Festum Sancti Mich. Arch. 17 H. 8. of the Prior of the House of St.
John de Bethelehem de Shrine of this Manor of Levisham in Com. Surrey before
John Bear, Steward there; a Grand Jury was charged to inquire for the King of
all Offenses inquirable within the said Leet, where one Phillip Aldwin, who was
a resident within the said Leet, appeared, Idemque, Phillippus sciens quandam
Margaretam uxorem Johannis Aldwin apud East-Greenwich infra jurisdictionem
Letae proed. pluries per antea corpus suum in adulterio viciose exercuissse,
etc. eisdem sic juratis de dicta, etc. informationem veraciter dedit. Upon
which the said Margaret drew the said Phillip into the Archbishop of Canterbury
his Court, and there libelled against him for defamation of Adultery; and that
the Phillip said in hisce Angl. verbis, [ Margaret Allen is a Whore and a
Bawd, and it is not yet three weeks agone since a man might take a Priest
betwixt her Legs,] which words were parcel of the words by which he informed
the Jury at the Leet: And upon this he had a Prohibition; and by this Record it
appears, and by the Statute, 10 Ed. 3. c. 11. that Indictors of Lay People, or
Clerks, in Turneys, and after delivering them before Justices, shall not be
sued for Defamation in Court-Christian, but that the Plaintiff grieved shall
have a Prohibition, Vide Pasch. 6 Eliz. In the Lord Dyers Reports (which Case
is not Printed); John Halles in the Case of Marriage between the Earl of
Hereford, and the Lady Katharine Gray, declared his Opinion against the
Sentence given by Commissioners of the Queen in a Cause Ecclesiastical, under
the Great Seal, [That the said Sentence was unjust and wicked, and that he
thought the Delegates had done against their Conscience;] and what offense this
was, was referred to diverse Judges to consider, by whom it was Resolved, That
this Offense was a contemp^ as well against the Queen as to the Judges, and
punishable by the Common Law, by Fine and Imprisonment.

5. Resolved, When any Libell in Ecclesiastical Court, contains many Articles;
if any of them do not belong to Court-Christian, a Prohibition may be generally
granted, and upon motion, Consultation may be made as to things which belong to
Spiritual Jurisdiction: And for these Reasons, it was Resolved by all, That the
Prohibition in the case at Bar was well granted, which in truth was granted by
Fenner and Crook, Justices, in the Vacation.

Note these general Rules concerning Prohibitions, Quaesparsim inveniantur in
libris nostris.

Non debet dici tendere in praejudicinm Ecclesiasticae libertatis quod rege et
repub. necessarium videtur, Artic. Cleri. c. 8.

(2.) Non est juri consonum, quod quis, super iis quorum cognitio ad nos
pertinet, in Curia Christianitatis trahetur in placitum, Entries 444. 447.

(3.) Episcopus teneat placitum in Curia Christianitatis de iis quae mere sunt
Spiritualia: Circumsp^cte agatis, etc.

(4.) Prohibeatur de caetero Hospitalariis et Templariis, ne de caetero trahunt
aliquem in plac^tum coram conservatoribus privilegiorum de aliquare cujus
cognitio ad Forum spectat Regium. West. 2. cap. 43.

(5.) Non concedantur citationes priusquam exprimatur super quare fieri debet
citatio. Ibidem.

6. Resolved, That this special Consultation being only of Heresy, Schism, and
erroneous Opinions, etc. that if they convict Fuller, and if he recant the
same, etc. that he shall never be punished by Ecclesiastical Law: After the
Consultation granted, the Commissioners proceeded, and convicted Fuller of
Schism and erroneous Opinions, and imprisoned and fined him 200 l. And after
in the same Term Fuller moved the Court of Kings Bench, to have a Habeas
Corpus, et ei conceditur; upon which Writ the Jailer did return the cause of
his detention.

Mich. 5 Jac. Regis.
The Case of First Fruits and Tenths.
Note, Annates, Primitiae and First Fruits are all one: It was the value of
every Spiritual Liv^ng by the year, which the Pope, claiming the disposition of
all Ecclesiastical Livings, reserved. And those, and Impropriations began about
the time that Polidore Virgil, lib. 8. cap 2. says, Vide Concilium Viennense
quod Clemens quintus indixit pro annatibus.

These First Fruits were given to the Crown, 26 H. 8. cap. 3.

Note, Hill. 34 Ed. 1. An. 1307. At a Parliament held at Carlisle, great
Complaint was made of Oppressions of Churches, etc. by William Testa (called
Mala Testa) and Legate of the Pope; in which Parliament, the King, with his
Barons assent, denied payment of First Fruits; And to this effect he writ to
the Pope: whereupon the Pope relinquished his Demand, and the First Fruits for
Two years were by that Parliament given to the King.

Decimae, id est, Tenths of Spiritualties were perpetual, and paid to the Pope,
till Pope Urban gave them to R. 2. to aid him against Charles, King of France,
and others who supported Clement the 7th. against him.

5 H. 3. By the Popes Bulls all Tenths were paid to H. 3. for years: These were
given to the King, 26 H. 8. cap. 6.

Vide Dambert de prist Anglor. etc. fol. 128. cap. 10. et ibidem inter leges
Juae, fol. 78. cap. 4.

Sir Anthony Roper's Case.
In the Case of Sir Anthony Roper, drawn before the High Commissioners, at the
Suit of one Bullbrook, Vicar of Bently, for a Pension out of a Rectory
Impropriate, whereof Sir Anthony was seized in Fee: And the High-Commissioners
sentenced the said Sir Anthony to pay it, which he refused; whereupon they
committed him to Prison, who appeared in Court this Term by Habeas Corpus; upon
the return of which Writ, the matter did appear: And it was well debated by the
Justices, and Resolved:

1. That the said Commissioners had not Authority in the said Case; for when
the Acts of the 27 H. 8. and 31 H. 8. of Monasteries, had made Parsonages
Impropriate, etc. although that Pensions were saved, yet by the Preamble of the
Act, 34 H. 8. cap. 16. those to whom the Pensions appertain, had not remedy for
the said Pensions, etc. And if the King covenanted to discharge the Patentee,
etc. of Pensions, the Suit shall be made for the same in the Court of
Augmentations, and not elsewhere: And if High-Commissioners will determine of
Pensions, they must do it by that Act, 34 H. 8. which expressly gives it to
Ordinaries, and their Officials; the High-Commissioners Power being granted
long after by the Act, 1 Eliz.

But it was Object^d, That that Act of 1 Eliz. gave the Queen and her
Successors Power to assign Commissioners, etc. And it was said, That such
Spiritual Jurisdiction which the Bishop should have, is transferred to the High
Commissioners.

But it was unanimously resolved by Coke, Walmesly, Warberton, Daniel, and
Foster, Justices, That the Act 1 Eliz. extends not to this Case for diverse
Causes.

1. Because the Act of the 1 Eliz. does not take away nor alter any Act of
Parliament; but those only which are expressly named therein: And it was
R^solved, That the High-Commissioners cannot hold Plea for the double value of
Tithes carried away before severance.

2. Because the words in the 1 Eliz. are [which by any manner of Spiritual
Jurisdiction can or lawfully may be reformed.] And it appears, That these words
extend to Crime only, and not to Cases of Interest betwixt Party and Party.

3. Because this Jurisdiction was given to the Bishops by Act of Parliament,
viz. 34 H. 8. which is more Temporal than Spiritual, as all of Parliament are.

4. It was not the intent of the Act 1 Eliz. which revived the Statute, 23 H.
8. cap. 9. That the High-Commissioners, for private Causes, shall send for
Subjects out of any part of the Realm; and so in effect confound the
jurisdiction of the Ordinary, an Officer so necessary, that the Kings Courts
cannot be without him in diverse Cases.

5. If that Act 1 Eliz. had extended to give High-Commissioners power to
determine meum et tuum, as Pensions, Tithes, etc. the Party thereby also should
have benefit to appeal, otherwise this should be dissolve the Court of the
Ordinary, which is so ancient and necessary in many Cases, that without it
Justice cannot be administered.

6. The High-Commissioners cannot extend themselves but only to Crime.

Mich. 5 Jac. Regis, Rot. 2254.
Praecept. fuit Guardiano prison. Domini Regis de Flecte, quod haberet qpud
^estm. immediate, etc. Co^pus Anthonii Roper Mil. inprison. praed. sub custodia
sua detent. quocunque nomin^ cens reretur una cum die and causa, etc. Et iidem
Justiciarii hic visa causa illa, ulterius fieri fecerint quod etc. Et modo hic
ad hunc diem, viz. diem Sab. prox. Oct. Sanct. Mich. isto eo^um termino venit
praed. Anthonius in propria persona sua^ sub custod. praed. Guard. ad Bar.
hic. praed and idem Guardianus tunc hic mand. Quod ante advent. brevis praed.
v^z. 9. die Oct. ult. praeter. praed. Anthonii Roper mil. reducit se prison.
praed. perantea Commissus virtute cujusdam ^arranti dat. 30 die Junii ult.
praeter. quod sequitur in haec verba, viz.

These are in his Maj^sties Name to require and charge you by Vertute of his
High Commission, for causes Ecclesiastical, under the Great Seal of England to
us and others directed, that herewith you receive and take into your Custody
the Body of Sir Anthony Roper Knight, and him safely detain, etc. signifying
unto you, That the cause of his Commitment, for that there being a certain
cause, etc. betwixt him the said Sir Anthony Roper and John Bullbrooke Vicar of
Bently, for that he detained wrongfully from him the said Vicar, a certain
yearly Pension, etc. Given at Lambeth, this thirtieth of June, 1607.

Et quod haec suit causa captionis et detentionis praed. Anthonii in prison.
praed. corpus tamen praed. Anthonii modo hic paratus h^bet prout and^* super
quo visis praemissis and per Justiciurios hic before examinatis, videtur
iisdem Justiciariis hic quod praed. causa Commissionis praed. Anthonii prison.
de Fleet prae^, in retorn. sp^cificat. minus sufficiens in lege existit, etc.
Idco prad. Anthonius a prisona prad. per-Cur. hic dimittitur, ac idem
Guardianus de hujusmodi Custodia per eand. Cur. hic plene exoneretur. And this
was resolved una voce by Coke, chief Justice, Walmesly, Warberton, Daniel, and
Foster, Justices.

And in the same Term in I am's Case, A Parson in No^folk, that sued one of his
Parishioners before the High-Commissioners for Scandal, in saying only in the
Church on a Sabbath day, That he was a wicked man, and an arrant Knave.
Prohibition lies for this, That it was not so enormous as the Sta^^te intended.

Hill. 5 Jac. Regis.
Note, It was moved to the Justices this Term, upon consideration of the Acts
of 34 H. 8. and 18 Eliz. If the Justices in Wales may be Constituted by
Commission, and it was conceived they could not, but that it ought to be by
Patent, as has been ever used since 34 H. 8. Then it was moved, If the King by
force of a Clause there in might do it; which Clause is, That the King's most
Royal Majesty shall and may at all times hereafter change, add, alter, minish,
and reform all manner, etc. And it seemed to diverse of the Justices, that this
Power given to the King, determined by his Death for diverse Causes.

1. Because it wants these Words, His Successors; and to draw it in Succession,
by Construction, would be against the Intention of the Maker of the Act: For
they gave this high Power of Alteration, etc. of Laws, to the King, as to his
most Excellent Wisdom shall be thought most meet; which words want His
Successors: For they well knew, his Wisdom did not go in Succession, so the
Power went not in Succession: And for this that Eorum progressus ostendent
multa quae ab initio provideri non possunt: And what ensues upon this,
concerning this uniting of Wales and England none could divine. But it was
never the Intention of the said Act, to give Power to the King and his
Successors for ever to alter, etc.

2. Power of Alteration of Laws, etc. is a Point of Confidence, concerning the
Administration of Justice; which the Act, by omitting of his Successors,
intended to unite this Confidence to the Person of H. 8. and not to extend it
without Limitation of time to his Successors, 1 Ed. 5. 1. 1 H. 7. 1. 14 Ed. 4.
44. All Commissions concerning Administration of Justice, determine by the
King's Death: Not so, if he make a Lease durante been placito, or present one
to a Church; these are not void by his Death, until revoked by his Successor.
And upon Certificate of the Justices Opinion, That the Justices of Wales cannot
be Constituted by Commission, Baron Snig had a Patent for the Circuit of Wales,
as others before him had.

Trin. 6 Jac. Regis.
This Term it was Resolved, per totam Curiam in Communi Banco, viz. Coke Chief
Justice, Walmesly, Warberton, Daniel, and Foster, in the Case of Allan Ball,
That the High-Commissions cannot be force of the Act, 1 Eliz. cap. 1. send a
Pursivant to Arrest any Person subject to their Jurisdiction, to answer to any
matter before them: But they ought to proceed according to Ecclesiastical Law
by Citation: And in the Circuit of Northampton, when the Lord Anderson and
Glanvile were Justices of Assize, a Pursivant was sent by the Commissioners to
Arrest the Body of a Man to appear before them; and in resistance of the
Arrest, and striving among them, the Pursivant was killed. And if this was
Murder, or not, was doubted: and it was Resolved, that the Arrest was
tortious, and by consequence, that this was not Murder, (though the killing of
an Officer of Justice (whose Authority is lawful) in Execution of his Office is
Murder. But they may send Citation by a Puisivant, and upon default proceed to
Excommunication, and then to have a Capias Excommunicatum; which Writ, de
excommunicato capiendo, is preserved and returnable by the Statute 5 Eliz. See
Magna Charta, and all the ancient Statutes: Vid. Rast. Title Accusation.

Marmaduke Langdale's Case.
In the Case of Marmaduke Langdale of Leventhorp, in the County of York, by
Joan his Wife, being sued for maintenance before the Bishop of Canterbury, and
others High-Commissioners: It was Resolved, per totam Curiam, praeter Walmesly,
that a Prohibition before granted, was well maintainable; because it was not
any Enormity nor Offense within the Statute, but a neglect of his duty, and a
Breach of his Vow of maintenance: And the Rule of the Court was, That the
Plaintiff shall count against the High-Commissioners, and upon Demurrer joined
the Case to be argued and adjudged; and the Party grieved, to have a Writ of
Error, si sibi viderit expedire, etc. Upon Complaint made to the King and
Council, by the Lord President of Wales, and the Lord President of York,
against the Judges of the Realm; and the King's Pleasure signified to them:
Upon Consideration had of the parts of the Complaint, they Resolved upon these
Answers: And because of the Lord President of York first opened the Cause of
his Grief more amply, they first answered those Objections, made on the behalf
of that Council: And first, as to the Institution of that Court.

1. After the Suppression of all Religious Houses, Anno 27. H. 8. in October
28. H. 8. there was an Insurrection of the Lord Hussy, and 20000 Men in
Lincolnshire, about Religion, which was appeased by the Duke of Suffolk.

This was no sooner over, but 40000 Men under Sir Robert Ask, made a Commotion
in Yorkshire. Soon after was a great Rebellion in Lancashire, Westmerland;
Cumberland, and Northumberland, which the Earl of Derby quieted. Then Musgrave,
Tilby, and others, assaulted Carlisle Castle, and were overthrown by the Duke
of Norfolk: Soon after, Sir Francis Pigot Rebelled at Setrington in Yorkshire.
Soon after, the Lord Darcy, etc. began a Commotion about Hull, appeased by the
Duke of Norfolk. And all these Rebellions were between the 28. of and 30. of H.
8. in which time, many of the Rebels were Executed. And the King having
effected in the 31 year of his Reign, the Suppression of the greater Houses of
Religion, he established a Council there for the quiet of the Counties of
Yorkshire, Northumberland, Westmerland, Cumberland, Durham, the Counties of the
City of York, Kingston upon Hull, and Newcastle upon Ty^e, for preventions of
Ryots, etc. And in this time of Necessity, the King Armed the President and
Council with two Authorities in one Commission. The one, A Commission of Oyer
and Terminer, de quibuscunque Congregationibus and conventiculis illicitis
coadjutoribus, Lolardiis, etc. per quae pax and tranquilitas subditorum
nostrorum Comitatibus, etc. praedict. gravat. etc. secundum legem and
co^suetudinem regni nostri Angliae, etc.

The other Authority was, Nec non quascunque actionesreales seu de libero
tenemento, and personales, causasque de, bitorum and demandorum quorumcunque in
Com. etc. praed. quando ambae parts vel altera pars sic gravata paupertate
fuerit quod commode Jus suum secundum legem Regni nostri aliter prosequi non
possit, etc. And this was the Authority that the President and Council had at
first, without any private Instructions, as appears by the Commission under the
Great Seal, 31 H. 8. 6 pars Roberto Landavensi Episcopo Presidenti Consilii and
aliis: out of which these things were observed.

1. That the intention of the Commission was, Quod pax subditorum and
tranquilitas preserventur.

2. That they hear and determine Riots, Routs, etc. according to Law, or their
Discretions; which without question was no otherwise intended, but that they
should proceed according to Law; for that is summa discretio, and not according
to private Conceits for talis discretio discretionem confundit: so the other
Clause concerning real and personal Actions, in all the Counties and Places
aforesaid, was only ad faciendum populum, for it was utterly void in Law.

1. Because no such general Authority granted, may be made by the Commission of
the King, to hear and determine all real Actions within such a County
according to Law, as he may be Charter in a particular County or place: As it
was Resolved in Scrogges Case, An. 2 Eliz. so. 175. in Dyer: Vid. Dyer 236. But
the King by Letters Patent may grant to a Corporation in such a Town, Tenere
placita realia, personalia and mixta. And none can by this be prejudiced; for
the proceeding ought to be according to Law; and if they err, a Writ of Error
lies. See Magna Charta, cap. 12. and Westminster. 2. cap. 30. which Acts give
Authority to Justices of Assize in their proper Counties; whereby it appears,
that without an Act of Parliament, the King by Letters Patents cannot authorize
Justices De Assize capiend. to take them in another County. As a Justice of one
Bench, or other, ought to be made by Commission, not by Writ, yet he may be
discharged by Writ, 5 Ed. 4. 32. But Justices in Air are by Writ, Bracton,
lib. 3. cap. 11. and Britton, fo. 1. Also, Westminster. 2. cap. 30. and of York, cap.
4. and sic de ceteris.

Also it was observed, that at first the Commission extended only when one or
both Parties were so poor, as they were not able to prosecute at Law. Also they
had no power to grant Injunctions: and lastly, their Commission was a Patent
under the Great Seal, and enrolled in Chancery. And thus much was said
concerning the first Institution of the Court:

2. That our Proceedings in granting Prohibitions, is for matter justifiable by
Law.

As to this, whereas at first their Authority was Patent, it is now private;
for the Letters-Patent refer to private Instructions, which are no where of
Record, Et de non apparentibus and non existentibus eadam est ratio: besides,
the danger to the Subject is great; for if they lose their Instructions (which
has and may happen) all is Coram non Judice. The second Reason is drawn from
the contumacy of the Party, supposed to be grieved by the Prohibition, and
against whom it is granted: for if the Authority of the Council be never so
good, yet being a late Jurisdiction, the Party must of necessity plead it, so
as it may appear judicially; for as we are Judges of Record, so must we be
informed of Record: And no party prohibited, ever yet moved in Court to have a
consultation, by which might be set forth the Jurisdiction of that Court and
Council; so as the granting of Prohibitions has been just. The third Reason is
drawn from the great Injury offered to the Defendants, for it is a true Rule,
Misera servitus ubi jus est vagum aut incertum. The Defendants by Law may in
all Courts plead to the Jurisdiction of the Court: but how can they do so, when
no man can possibly know what Jurisdiction they have: And the keeping of them
in such Secrecy bewrays that the Council are afraid, that they would not be
justified if they were known.

3. That the manner of our Proceedings was respectful: for a Jury of Officers
and Attorneys of our Court being according to an ancient Custom, time out of
mind used, sworn to present, among other things, all Defaults of Officers and
Ministers, in not executing the Process of this Count, and all Impediments of
the due Proceedings thereof: And finding upon their Oaths, diverse unjust
Impediments of the said Proceedings by the said Council in particular,
thereupon a motion being made in open Court in Michaelmas Term last, by the
King's Sergeant Philips, of many Grievances done thereby, prayed the Court,
according to Law and Justice, to grant several Prohibitions, in all those
several Causes, which we could not deny. Yet first we conferred with Sir
Cuthbert Pepper, Attorney of the Wards, and one of that Council, to let him
understand the part^cular G^ievances; who, upon Motion, came to us to Se^geants
Inn, with whom we conferred, who would not take upon him to justify the same
in no sort, but said he would acquaint the President and Council therewith, and
return their Answer. Which for that it was neglected, upon further Motion in
Court, we granted Prohibition, as in Justice we ought.

4. Now to answer all Objections: And first, where it was objected, more
Prohibitions had been granted of late, than in many years before: To this a
Sixfold Answer was made.

1. That they had exceedingly multiplied the number of Causes; they in five
Counties, and three Towns, having at one sitting 450 Causes at Hearing: whereas
the Chancery that extends into all England and Wales, had in Easter Term, but
95. and in Trinity Term but 72. to be heard. So that it is no wonder, it in
such a Multiplication of Causes, the number of Prohibitions be increased.

2. Besides the Multiplication they have innovated and taken upon them, to deal
in Causes which we know never any President could, and we think, never any
President and Council did usurp: As first, Suits upon Penal Laws; As between
H^rison and Thurston, upon the 39 of Eliz. of Tillage. 2. In H^rtley's Case,
after Indictment of Forcible Entry, and Restitution according to the Statute
upon English Bill, dispossessed by the President. 3. After a Recovery in
Ejectione Firmae, and Habere facias possessionem, out of our Court, they upon
English Bill dispossessed the Plaintiff; this was Hart's Case. So in other
Cases; as between Jackso^ and Philips, Stanton and Child, and Binns and Coll^t.
4. They admit English Bills, in nature of Writs of Error and Formedons, and
other real Actions. 5. They will ^dmit no Plea of Outlary, in disability of
the Plaintiff. 6. They usually granted Injunctions to stay the Common Law,
which is utterly against Law; and some times to stay Suits in Chancery, and in
the Exch^quer Chamb^r: for which, in respect as well of the Multiplications of
Suits, as Innovations of others, it may very well be, that more Prohibitions,
and Habeas Corpus have been granted of late, than in time past. And yet there
has been more granted, and more ancient than is supposed: For which, see Mich.
7 Eliz. Rot. 31. and Mich. 7. and 8 Eliz. in libro de Habeas Corpus. Also,
Trin. 20 Eliz. ibid.

3. The Judges never grant either Prohibition, or Habeas Corpus, but upon
Motion or Complaint by the Party grieved; and therefore as the Subject has
more cause to complain, there must needs be more Prohibitions, and Habeas
Corpus, than heretofore.

4. The Proceedings there are by absolute Power, and their Decrees
uncontrollable and final, more than in a Judgment in a Writ of Right, which
makes them presume too much upon their Authority.

5. These Suits grow more prejudicial to the King than ever, because thereby
the King loses his Fines, etc.

6. Remedy for the time past; if the Common-Bench err, Writ of Error lies in
Banco Regis; if the King's Bench err, a Writ of Error lies in the Upper-House
of Parliament.

7. For the time to come: 1. That the Instructions be enrolled in Chancery,
that the Subject may see and know their Jurisdiction. 2. That the Presidents
and Councels, have some Council Learned in the Court, to inform us judicially
of their true Jurisdiction, and we will give them a day to show cause, that
Justice may be done on both sides; and if we err, the Law has provided a
Remedy by Writ of Error: And we are sworn to do Justice to all, according to
the Laws.

Upon this Answer of the Judges, the Lords of the Council, upon Conference
among themselves, gave (by the Earl of Salisbury, then Lord Treasurer) this
Resolution.

1. That the Instructions should be Recorded, as far as they concerned Criminal
Causes, or Causes between Party and Party: But as to State-Matters, not to be
published.

2. That both Councels should be within the Survey of Westminster Hall, viz.
the Courts of Westminster.

3. The Motion was well allowed, that the Presidents and Councels should have
Council learned in every Court, that day might be given, etc.

And concerning the remoteness of the place, the Counties of Cornwall and
Devon, are more remote then York: And this was the end of that Days Work.

Case of Heresy.
Note, 2 Ma. title Heresy, Brook, per omnes Justiciarios et Baker et Hare. The
Archbishop in his Province, in the Convocation, may and does use to convict
Heresy by the Common Law, and then to put them convicted into Lay-hands, and
then by the Writ de Heretico comburendo, they were burnt; but because it was
troublesome to call a Convocation, It was ordained by the Statute, 2 H. 4. cap.
15. That every Bishop in his Diocese might convict Heretics. And if the
Sheriff was present, he might deliver such to be burnt without the Writ
aforesaid; but if the Sheriff were absent, or he were ^o be burnt in another
County, then the said Writ ought to be had: And that the Common Law was such,
Vide lib. intra, title Indictment, pl. 11. Who are Heretics, See 11 H. 7. Book
of Entries, fol. 319. See Doct. and Stud. lib. 2. cap. 29. Cousin. 48. 2. 1 and
2 P. and M. cap. 6. Also 3 F. N. B. fol. 269. And the Writ in the Register
proves this directly, 4 Bracton l. 3. cap. 9. fol. 123, 124. And true it is,
That every Ordinary may convent any Heretic or Schismatic before him pro
salute animae, and may degrade him, and enjoin him penance according to
Ecclesiastical Law; but upon such Conviction, the Party shall not be burnt.

Nota, The makers of the Act of 1 Eliz. were in doubt what shall be deemed
Heresy or Schism, etc. and therefore the Statute of 10 Eliz. provides, That
nothing shall be deemed Heresy, but what had been so determined by one of the
four general Councels, the Word of God, or Parliament. See Fox in Ed. 6. and
Britton. 5 Ed. 1. lib. 1. cap. 17. and with this agrees the Statute, 2 H. 5.
cap. 7. 23 H. 7. 9. 25 H. 8. cap. 14. or that the proceedings in the
Commencement and end was altered by the Statute, 25 H. 8. then came the Satute
1 Ed. 6. cap. 12. and that repealed 5 R. 2. 2 H. 5. and 26 H. 8. and the 2 H.
4. and by general words all Statutes concerning matter of Religion, then the 1
and 2 P. and M. c. 6. revived the 2 H. 4. by which the 25 H. 8. lost its force,
but by the Act 1 and 2 P. and M. cap. 8. expressly repealing. 21 H. 8. 23 H. 8.
24 H. 8. 27 H. 8. but the 25 H. 8. cap. 14. was not rep^aled, being repealed
before by (...) 1 Ed. 6. yet in the end of that long Act, there is a general
Clause sufficient of it self to repeal the Act 25 H. 8. cap. 14. without more:
then the 1 Eliz. cap. 1. repeals the 1 and 2 P. and M. is repealed, except some
Branches; and in the same Act it is enacted, That all other Statutes repealed
by the said Act of Repeal, 1 and 2 P. and M. and not in this Act specially
revived, shall remain repealed. But the 25 H. 8. cap. 14. was not particularly
revived, and therefore remains repealed. And after the said Statute 1 Eliz.
repeals the Act 1 and 2 P. and M. of reviving of three Acts for punishment of
Heresies; so that now at Common Law none can be burnt for Heresy, but by
Conviction at a Convocation.

Note, The High Commission may punish Heresies, and upon their Conviction, a
Writ de Haeretico cumburendo. See 6 R. 2. by which the Commons disavowed their
assent to the Act of the 5 R. 2. which was contrived by the Prelates in the
Name of the Commons, whereas they never assented.

Mich. 6 Jac. Regis,
Langdale's Case.
In Langdales Case this Term, in a Prohibition to the High Commissioners, two
Points were moved: 1. If a Feme Covert may sue for Alimony before the
High-Commissioners. 2. If the Court of Common Pleas may grant a Prohibition
when there is no Plea pendant there: This concerning the Jurisdiction of the
Court was first debated, and diverse Objections were made against it.

1. That this Court has not Jurisdiction to hold Plea, without an Original,
unless by Privilege of an Attorney, Officer, or Clerk of the Court, and unless
it be in a special Case, viz. when there is an Action there depending for the
same Cause; then it was agreed, that a Prohibition ought to recite, Quod cum
tale Placitum pendet, etc. And it was said, That F. N. B. 43. g. agrees with
this. But a man ought to have his Prohibition out of Chancery, or the Kings
Bench, upon surmise that he is sued in Court Christian for a Temporal Cause,
and the 2 Ed. 4. 11. 6. was cited.

To this it was answered and Resolved by Coke, chief Justice, Warberton,
Daniell, and Foster, Justices, That the Common Pleas may award a Prohibition,
though no Suit be there pendent; for it is the principal Court of Common Law
for Common Pleas, Quia Communia Placita non sequantur Curiam nostram, as it is
Enacted by Magna Charta, thirty times confirmed by Parliam^^^; then if the
Ecclesiastical Judges incroach upon the Jurisdiction of the Common Pleas, there
the Court shall Grant a Prohibition, and that without Original Writ, for diverse
Causes:

1. Because no Original Writ issuing out of Chancery is retornable into the
King Bench or Common Pleas, but is directed to a Judge, or Party, or both, and
is not retornable. And upon contempt of the Prohibition, the Chancellor may
award an Attachment, retornable either in the Kings Bench, or Common Pleas,
which in such case is but a Judicial Writ. And if such Attachment be retornable
in the Common Pleas, etc. the Plaintiff in the Declaration shall make mention
of an Original in Chancery, and of the contempt, etc. as appears in a notable
President.

2. There was great reason that no Original Writ of Prohibition shall be
retornable, for the Common Law was a Prohibition in it self, and incroachment
upon it incurred a contempt, and with this agrees our Books, 9 H. 6. 56. And
there it is held, That the Statute of the 45 Ed. 3. and the Common Law also was
a Prohibition in it self: and thus the Rule of the Book, 19 H. 6. 54. so is it
held in 8 R. 2. Title Attachment Sur Prohibition 15.

Note, By Clopton a Sergeant, at the Common Pleas, That if a Plea be held in
Court-Christian, which belongs to the Court of the King, without a Prohibition
in facto, the Plaintiff shall have an Attachment upon a Prohibition; Quod fuit
concessum, etc. Register 77. Estrepement, Praecipimus quod inhibeas, etc. F. N.
B. 259. Register 112. A Consultation is as much an Original, as a Prohibition:
And the Court has granted a Consultation, ergo Prohibitions. Qui habet
jurisdictionem absolvendi, habet juris dictionem Ligandi.

There are several sorts of Prohibitions; one sort with this word, Probibemus
vobis, and Letters in nature thereof, as Supersedeas. And Injunction is a
Prohibition; and Prohibition of Wast out of Chancery etc.

Express Prohibition are in two manners; the one, founded upon a Suggestion;
the other, upon Record: Upon Suggestion, where Plea is pendent, and yet the
Suggestion is the Foundation; but it is founded upon Record, where no Plea is
pendent: for Prohibitions founded upon Record, Ne admittas, ought to recite the
Plea pendent. So a Writ to the Bishop, to admit a Clerk, is a Judicial Latitat,
as Dyer defends it. As to the pendency of a Plea, or not pendency, it is not
material for diverse causes.

1. The pendency of the Plea may give a privilege to the party, but no
Jurisdiction to the Court in a Collateral Suit; between which there is great
diversity.

2. The Prohibition, where Plea is pendent, is no process Judicial upon Record,
for it is a Collateral Suit.

3. If the Common Pleas cannot grant a Prohibition, without a Plea pendent,
then the Kings which only holds Plea of Common Pleas by second means cannot.
But inasmuch as the Common Law is instead of an Original, as has been said,
both Courts may grant it.

4. Infinite Presidents may be shown of Prohibition out of the Common Pleas,
without recital of any Plea pendent: And true it is, That it ought to be, if
the Court has not Jurisdiction to grant any without Plea-pendant; every
petty-Clerk of the Common Pleas shall have by his Privilege a Prohibition
without Plea-pendent. A fortiori, the Common Law it self may prohibit any one,
4 Ed. 4. 37. 37 H. 8. 4.

5. A President is in the 22 Ed. 4. where a Prohibition was granted, for that
the Plaintiff might have a Writ of false Judgment at the Common Law. The Record
and Report agree, the words of the Record are:

6. That Officers and Clerks as well in the Common Pleas as in the Exchequer,
etc. may have by Privileng of Court a Prohibition without Original; a fortiori,
the Law it self shall have greater Privilege than an Officer or Clerk, and to
enforce the party to bring an Action, will be a means to multiply Suits to no
end, 4 Ed. 4. fol. 37. every Prohibition is as well at the Kings Suit, as at
the Parties, 28 Ed. 3. 97. false Latin shall not abate, nor excommunication in
the Plaint is no Plea, 15 Ed. 3. Title Corrody 4.

Note, Though the Original cause was in the Kings Bench, for Corrody
Excommunication is no Plea in disability of the Plaintiff: Vide 21 H. 7. 71
Kelway 6. quare non admissit, 4 Ed. 4. 37. for not delivery of a Libel in the
Common Pleas, he shall have a Prohibition by all the Justices. So upon 2 Ed. 6.
cap. 13. See 38 H. 6. 14. 22. Ed. 6. 20. 13 Ed. 3. Title Prohibition 11.

32 H. 6. 34. An Attorney in the Palace assaulted and menaced, the Court shall
take a Bill and inquire of it, 4 Ed. 4. 36, 37. Statham Prohibition 3.

Prohibition super articulos, title Prohibition, pl. 5. gives a Prohibition
before, Scil. coram Justicia^iis nostris apud Westminster. Vide F. N. P. fol. 69. b.
in a Writ of Pone: Register. indic. coram Justicia iis nost is apud Westminster. is
the Common Pleas, F. N. B. 64. d. 38 Ed. 3. 14. Statute 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. Hales
Case in my Reports. Many Prohibitions were granted in the Kings Bench, because
no Writ of Error lies but in Plaint.

Robert Banks Case,
Mich. 6 Jac. Regis.
Mich. 6 Jac. Rot. 639. Robert Banks Gent. brought an Action upon the Statute
of Winton 13 Ed. 1. against the Inhabitants of the Hundred of Burnham in the
County of Bucks, and counted that certain misdoers, to the Plaintiff unknown,
at Hitcham the 22d. of Nov. 5 Jac. assaulted the Plaintiff, and robbed him of
25 l. 3 5. 2 d. ob. and that he immediately after the robbery, the same 22d. of
Nov. at Joplow and Maalow, the next Towns to Hitcham in the said County, made
H^e-and Cry, etc. and after the said Robbery, and within 20 days before the
purchase of the Writ, viz. the 19 of F^br. A^. 5. at Dorney in Com. praed. the
Plaintiff before Sir William G^rrard Knight, then Justice of Peace in the said
County, and living next the said Hundred, being examined upon Oath, according
to the Statute 27 El^z. the Plaintiff upon his Oath said, He knew not the
Parties who robbed him; and since the said Robbery 40 days are past, and the
said Inhabitants of Burnham have not made him any amends, nor the Bodies of the
Felons, or any of them, have taken, but suffered them to escape; to which the
Defendants plead, Not Guiley; and V^. fa. was awarded de vicineto, etc. And the
Jury gave a special Verdict, and found that the Plaintiff was robbed, and made
Hue-and-Cry as aforesaid, and found over, That the Plaintiff was sworn before
Sir William Gerrard as aforesaid, and said upon his Oath in these English
words, viz. That he on Thursday the 22 d. of Nov. 1604. riding under Hitcham
wood, etc. was then and there set upon by Horsemen, which he knew not, and
robbed of 25 l. 3 s. 2 d. ob. but whether the said Oath so taken be true
according to the said Statute 27 Eliz. the Jurors pray the direction of the
Court.

Mouses Case,
Mich. 6 Jac. Regis.
In an Action of Trespass brought by Mouse for a Casket, and 113 l. taken and
carried away; the Case was, the Ferryman of Gravesend took 47 Passengers into
his Barge to pass to London, and Mouse was one of them; the Barge being upon
the Water, a great Tempest happened, so that the Barge and all the Passengers
were in danger to be drowned, if a Hogshead of Wine and other pouderous things
were not cast out: And it was Resolved per totam Curiam, That in a case of
necessity for saving the Lives of the Passengers, it was lawful to the
Defendant, being a Passenger, to cast the Plaintiff's Casket out of the Barge
with what was in it; for quod quis ob tutelam corporis sui fecerit, jure id
feciss^ videtur. Upon the special matter pleaded, and Reply, De injuria sua
propria absque tali causa; the first day of this Term, the Issue being tried,
and it was proved directly, That the Men had been drowned, if the things had
not been cast out: The Plaintiff was Non-sult.

Resolved also, That though when the Ferry-man surcharge the Barge, yet to save
the Passengers Lives in such a Necessity, it is lawful for the Passengers to
cast the things out of the Barge: yet the Owners shall have their Remedy upon
the surchage against the Ferry-man; but if there was no surcharge, but the
danger came by the Act of God, then every one must bear his own loss; for
Interest R^ipub. quod homines conserventur, ^ Ed. 4. 23. Bull. etc. 12 H. 8.
15. 28 H. 8. Dyer 36.

Mich. 5. Jac. Regis.
Prohibitions del Roy.
No^e, On Sunday the 10. of Nov. in this Term, the King, upon Complaint made by
Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning Prohibitions, the King was
informed, That when Question was made of what matters the Ecclesiastical Judges
have Cogn^zance, etc. in any Case in which there is not express Authority in
Law, the King himself may decide in his Royal Person, the Judges being but his
Delegates, etc. And the Archbishop said this was clear in Divinity. To which
it was answered by Me, in the presence, and with the clear Consent of all the
Justices of England, and Barons of the Exchequer, that the King in his own
person cannot adjudge any Case either Criminal, as Treason, etc. or betwixt
party and party, concerning Inheritance, Goods, etc. But it ought to be
determined in some Court of Justice, according to the Law and Custom of
England, and all Judgments are given Ideo consideratum est per Curium. And the
King has his Court in the Upper House of Parliament, in which he with his
Lords is the Supreme Judge over all Judges. And in this respect, the King is
called Chief Justice, 20 H. 7. 7. a. by ^rudnel; and it appears in our Books,
2 R. 3. 9. 21 H. 7. 8. that that the King may sit in the Star Chamber; but this
was only to consult, not in judicio. So in the King's Bench; but the Court
gives Judgment. And it is commonly said in our Books, the King is always
present in Court; and therefore he cannot be Nonsuit: And it appears by the
Acts of Parliament, 2 Ed. 3. c. 9. 2 Ed. 3. c. 1. That neither by the Great
Seal, nor by the little Seal, Justice shall be delayed, ergo, The King cannot
take any Cause out of any of his Courts, and give Judgment upon it; but in his
own Cause he may stay it, as appears 11 H. 4. 8. And the Judges informed the
King, that no King after the Conquest, ever assumed to himself, to give
Judgment in any Cause whatsoever, which concerned the Administration of Justice
within the Realm, 17 H. 6. 14. 39 Ed. 3. 14. the King cannot Arrest any man, 1
H. 7. 4. Hussy, chief Justice, Reports, being Attorney to Ed. 4. That Sir John
Markham, chief Justice, said to Ed. 4. That the King cannot Arrest a man for
suspicion of Treason or Felony, as his other Leiges may. And it was greatly
marvailed, That the Archbishop durst inform the King that such absolute Power
as aforesaid belonged to him by the Word of God. Vide 4 H. 4. cap. 22. Westminster.
2. cap. 5. vide le stat. de Marlbridge, cap. 1. and stat. de Magn. Chart. cap.
29. 25 Ed. 3. c. 5. 43 Ed. 3. c. 3. 28 Ed. 3. c. 3. 37 Ed. 3. c. 18. vide 17 R.
2. ex Rotulis Parliamenti in Turri act. 10. A controversy of Land between
Parties was heard by the King; and Sentence given, which was repealed, because
it did belong to the Common Law. Then the King said, That the Law was grounded
upon Reason, and that He and Others had reason as well as the Judges. To which
it was answered by Me, That true it was, God had endued his Majesty with
excellent Science, but his Majesty was not learned in the Laws of England, and
Causes which concern the Life or Inheritance, or Goods of his Subjects, which
are not to be decided by natural Reason, but artificial Reason and Judgment of
Law, which Judgment requires long Study and Experience. With which his Majesty
was greatly Offended, and said, Then he should be under the Law, which was
Treason to be said; To which I said, that Bracton says, Quod Rex non debet
esse sub homine, sed sub Deo et Iege.

Mich. 8 Jacob. Regis.
Robert's Case.
In this Term, in the Case of one Roberts, a Prohibition had been granted in a
Case upon Substraction of Tithes, upon surmise that the Plaintiff being
Defendant in the Spiritual Court, had but one Witness there to prove his
Demise: to which the Court said, That singugaris Testis is not allowable: And
upon sight of a Prohibition in the same Case in Hill. 3 Eliz. in Ban^o Regis.
It was Resolved by Coke, chief Justice, Et totam Curiam in Communi Banco, that
Consultation should be granted for diverse Reasons.

1. It appears by the Register, fol. 5. that it is put for a Rule, Quod non est
consonum rationi, quod cognitio accessorii in Curia Christianitatis impediatur,
ubi cognitio causae principalis ad forum Ecclesiasticum ^^scitur pertinere; and
with this agr^es 1 R. 3. 4.

2. If such a surmise shall be allowed, then in every Case, for mere delay,
such a surmise may be made. And when the spiritual Court has Jurisdiction of
the principal Cause, they determine the accessory: But it was objected, That if
A. claiming a Lease by B. of a Rectory, Libels for substraction of Tithes, and
the Defendant pleads a former Lease made by B. and C. and the Defendant has
but one Witness in the Case to prove the former Lease; if no Prohibition shall
be granted, the Defendant shall be charged. And if C. sue him upon the Statute
2 Ed. 6. the testimony of one only shall be then sufficient, and so he shall he
twice charged.

To which it was answered, That first the fault was the Defendants, that he
would not set forth his Tithes, and then he shall be charged whosoever takes
them. But in such the Ecclesiastical Court will upon one good Witness, and any
concurrent v^hement presumption, allow of such a proof. But if a question arise
upon construction of a Statute, and the Ecclesiastical Court will Judge of it
against the Rule of Law, there upon special surmise of it, a Prohibition lies.

And Coke, chief Justice, cited a notable Judgment, Pasch. 35 Eliz. in Bank le
Roy. Fuller brought a Prohibition against Clements, and Wiskard; and Fuller
counted that himself was Owner of the Rectory of Longham in the County of
Norfolk, and libelled against Clements before the Bishop of Norwiches Official,
for substraction of Tithes, scil. Wheat pendent; which Suit Wiskard intervening
pro intercesse suo, made there allegations against Fuller:

1. That the said Rectory was impropriate to the Monastery of Windling, and by
dissolution thereof, came to H. 8. and conveyed it by mean Descent to Queen
Elizab. who by Letters Patents granted it to Min and Hall, who enfeof^ed
Bozome, who let it to Wiskard for four years; and upon proof of his
allegations; in fine, Sentence was given against Full^r, and several Costs
given to Clements and Wiskard: Fuller appeals to the Court of the Arches, and
there Claims the said Rectory from Halls being seized of it, who by his Deed
granted the same to Sir Edward Clear, (before Bozomes Feoffment,) and that Sir
Edward did enfeoff Fuller, and offered to prove the Deed made to Sir Edward by
one sole Witness, which the Ecclesiastical Court would not allow of. And Fuller
further said, That though he had alleged these matters were determinable at
Common Law, yet they gave Sentence: The Defendants to have a Consultation
pleaded, That Fuller proved the delivery of the Deed by Clear and Mouse, but
could not prove Livery and Seisin according to the Deed; and that therefore
Sentence was given without that, that the Judges would not admit the proof
without other Witnesses; upon this Fuller demurred, and his Council objected.

1. That Wiskard pleads matter determinable merely at Common Law, viz Letters
Patents, etc. and on the other part Fuller Claims an Estate in the Rectory, by
conveyance at Common Law: And the Question in the Court Ecclesiastical being?
Who has the best Estate in the Rectory; this ought to be tried by the Common
Law, for this is the Birthright of the Subject.

2. It was Objected, That all matters in Law ought to be determined by the
Judges of the Law: And in this Case matters of Law arising, as if a Rectory be
granted by Deed with all Tithes, etc. and no Livery is made. If the Tithes may
pass with any Livery; this is a question to be decided by the Judges of the
Common Law: Quod quisque novit in hoc se exerceat.

3. It was objected, That Wiskard was a mere stranger to the Suit, and all his
Allegation is Temporal; and for that it is a stronger Case to maintain a
Prohibition.

4. It was Objected, That Fuller had but one Witness to prove the delivery of
the Deed, and in the Ecclesiastical Law Unus Testis et nullus Testis, for
which causes it was prayed the Prohibition might stand.

To which it was answered by Sir Christopher Wray, chief Justice, Et per totam
Curiam, to the first Objection, That;

1. Where the original belongs to the Ecclesiastical Court, the determination
of all that depends on it belongs to the same Court, though the matter be
tryable at Law; but where the Original matter belongs to the Common Law, and
there commenced, and issue taken upon matter tryable by the Ecclesiastical Law,
there the Judges of our Law shall write to the Judges of the Ecclesiastical
Court to try it, and to certify. As in action Ancestral, if Bastardy* be
pleaded in the Demandant, and upon this Issue is joined, this shall be tried by
the Bishop, and his Certificate shall bind; So in a Quare Impedit: But though
such issues are in their nature Tryable by the Law Ecclesiastical, yet if the
Case was such, that the Ecclesiastical Court could not try it, then (that
Justice be not want^ng) such Ecclesiastical matter shall be tried by the Common
Law, as 4 Ed. 3. 26. But against this was objected the Statute de Articulis
Cleri, cap. 13. Quod de Idoneitate person^ perso^atae ad beneficium
Ecclesiasticum pertineat examinatio ad Judicom Ecclesiasticum; upon which it
was concluded, That the Trial de idomeitate personae in all Cases belong to
Court-Christian: To which it was answered and resolved. That the Trial of
ability belongs to them; but this Trial must be by examination of the Party.
(...) 39 Ed 3. 2. That Earl of Arund^ll'^ Case, and 4 Ed. 3. 25. 16 Eliz. Dyer
327. So if Bastardy be alledg^d in one who is dead, Vide 17 Ed. 3. 5. where
Bastardy is alleged in the Tenant, and one who is a stranger to the Writ, who
are S^sters. Vide 32 Ed. 3. Trial 59. where the Tenant does allege Bastardy in
himself, and the Demandant does aver him Mulier, Vide 29 Ass. pl. 14. b. Eliz.
Dyer 226. 228. If the issue be Quod vacavit p^r resignationem, part of which is
Spiritual, part Temporal; this shall be tried per paiis, vide 9 H. 7. But
admission and in i^ution, though it be alleged in a stranger to the Writ, yet
this shall be tried by the Ordinary, as appears 7 Ed. 6. 78. 6. in Dyer, and
similia.

2. To the second: answered and resolved, That if upon Consultation with men
learned in the Law, they give Sentence according to Law; this is well done, and
no Prohibition ought to granted: but if they draw the interest of any man ad
aliud examen, there Prohibition lies. And in the Case at the Bar, they well
resolved the Law; for by the said Livery of the Charter, the Tithes do not pass
as in gross, because the intention of Parties was to pass the entire Rectory by
the Feoffment, and to pass the Tithes, and so dismember the Rectory.

3. As to the third, Resolved, That by the Ecclesiastical Law a stranger may
come in pro interesse suo, and when they have Jurisdiction of the Original
cause of a Suite, we ought not to question their proceeding, unless they
proceed inverso ordine, and this ought to be* redressed by appeal.

4. As to the fourth, Resolved, That such a surmise, That he has but one
Witness, is not sufficient to have a Prohibition, because the Court
Ecclesiastical has jurisdiction of the Principle. And if such surmise shall be
sufficient, all Suits in the Ecclesiastical Court shall be delayed, or quite
taken away, for such surmise may be made in every Case.

It was Resolved upon Evidence, by Coke, chief Justice, de Banco, inter J. S.
who informed upon the Statute of Usury and Smith, that the Parties to the
supposed Usurious Contract, shall not be admitted Witnesses, because upon the
matter they were Testes in propria causa.

High-Commissioners.
Trin. 8 Jacobi Regis.
Upon a Ha. Cor. by Eliz. Lady Throgmorton Prisoner in the Fleet; the Return
was, The Lady Throgmorton was committed by George, Bishop of London, and other
Ecclesiastical Commissioners, till further Order should be taken for her
enlargement. And the Cause of Commitment was, That she had done many evil
Offices between Sir James Scudamore, and her Daughter the Lady Scudamore, Sir
James his Wife, to make separation between them, and detained her from her
Husband; and upon her Departure after Sentence, for Contemptuous words against
the Court, saying, She had neither Law nor Justice. And it was Resolved,

1. That for detaining the Wife, and endeavoring to make separation, no Suit
can be before the High-Commissioners.

2. For detaining the Wife, there is remedy by the Common Law.

3. That for such an Offense they cannot imprison the Wife.

4. It does not appear, that the words were spoken in Court.

Secondly, It is no Court of Record, because they proceed according to the
Civil Law; so the Admiralty Court and none can be committed for misdemeanor in
Court, unless the Court be of Record.

5. It does not appear by the Return what that Court was, which is uncertain;
and upon this, upon good Consideration, she was Bayled.

But Randall and Hickins were this Term committed by the High-Commissioners,
because they were vehemently suspected for Brownists. And they obtained a
H^beas Corpus, and were remanded for this, that the High-Commissioners have
Power to commit for Heresy. See my Treatise of the High-Commissioners Power.

The Lord Aburgavennye's Case.
In the Parliament a Question was moved by the Lord of Northampton, Lord
Privy Seal, in the Upper-House; That one Edward Nevill, Father of Edward
Nevill, Lord of Aburgavenny, which now is, in the 2 and 3 of Queen Mary, was
called by Writ to Parliament, and died before the Parliament: If he was a Baron
or no, and so ought to be named, was the Question. And it was

Resolved by the Lord Chancellor, the two chief Justices, chief Baron, and
diverse other Justices there present, That the direction and delivery of the
Writ did not make a Baron or Noble, until he did come to the Parliament, and
then sit according to the Commandment of the Writ; for until that, the Writ
did not take its effect. And in the 35 H. 6. and other Books, he is called a
Peer of Parliament, which he cannot be, until he sit in Parliament, which
cannot be before the Parliament begin. And the Command of the King by such his
Writ may by his Supersedeas be countermanded, or else the said. Edward might
have excused himself, or waved it, or submitted to his Fines: And when one is
called by Writ to Parliament, the Order is, That he be apparelled in his
Parliament Robes, and his Writ is openly read in the Upper-House, and he
brought into his place by Two Lords of Parliament; and then he is adjudged in
Law, Inter pares Regni, ut cum olim Senatores cens^ eligebantur, sic Barons
apud nos habiti fuerint, qui per integram Baroniam terras suas tenebant, sive
13. feoda militum et terti^m partem unius Feodi militis, quolibet Feodo computo
ad 20 l. etc. So that by this appears, That every one who has an entire
Barony, may have of right a Writ to be summoned to Parliament; and with this
agree our Books una voce, That none can si^ in Parliament as Peer of the Realm,
without matter of Record, 35 H. 6. 46. 48 Ed. 3. 30. b. 48 Ass. pl. 6. 22 Ass.
pl 2 4. Register. 287. but now none can be summoned to Parliament by Writ,
without the Kings Warrant under the Privy Seal at least. But if the King create
any Baron by Letters Patents under the Great-Seal to him and his Heirs, or to
him and to his Heirs of his Body, or for life, etc. there he is a Nobleman
presently, and he ought to have a Writ of Summons to Parliament of Course, and
shall be tried by his Peers, if, etc.

Richard the Second created John Beauchampe of Holt, Baron of Kidderminster by
Letters Patents, dated 10. October. eleventh year of his Reign, where all others
before him were created by Writ.

Trin. 8 Jac. Regis.
Oldfield and Gerlins Case.
In this Term Thomas Oldfield came out of the Duchy Court, and before he came
into Westminster Hall, with a Knife, stabbed one Ferra^, a Justice of Peace, of
which he dyed. And if Oldfield should have his right hand cut off, was the
question before the two Chief Justices, chief Baron Walmesly, Warberton,
Foster, and diverse other Justices. And it was Resolved, No; for it ought to be
in Westminster Hall, Sedentibus Curiis, as appears, 3 Eliz. Dyer 188. 41 Ed. 3.
Title Coron. 280. And a President was shown, An. 9 Eliz. in Bank le Roy, where
one Robert Gerlin smote one in White Hall, sitting in the Court of Requests,
and was Fined, and Ransomed. But if one smite another before the Justices of
Assize, there his right hand shall be cut off; as appears, 22 Ed. 3. fol. 13.
and 19 Ed. 3. Title Judgment. And one Bellingham, 2 Jac. in Westminster Hall,
Sedentibus Curiis, with his Elbow and Shoulder, out of malice justled Anthony
Dyer of the Temple, that he overthrew him, and spurned him with his Feet upon
the Legs; but smote him not in any other manner: And yet it was held, That his
right hand should be cut off, etc. upon which Bellingham was indicted in Bank
le Roy, and after got his Pardon.

A Case was put to all the Justices of England, viz. The Bishoprics of
Waterford and Lismore, originally two Bishoprics by lawful Authority, in the
time of H. 3. were united, but the Chapters yet remain several. After which
Union, the Bishop aliened Lands of the Sea of Waterford, and also of the Sea of
Lismore, with confirmation of the Chapter of Lismore.

1. The Question was, Whether such Alienations are not voydable by the
Successor, being with the Confirmations of both the Deans and Chapters.

2. The second Question was, Whether the Queen might avoid such alienations by
seizure, or otherwise.

The Justices demanded a View of the Union, to which it was answered, That it
was not extant; then was it Resolved by the Justices, That inasmuch as the
Usage has been after the Union, that the several Deans and Chapters have
severally made Confirmations ut supra; it shall be intended, that the Union
notwithstanding, yet for avoiding Confusion, and in respect of the remoteness
of the Deans and Chapters, that Estates made shall be severally confirmed as
before the Union, and then such Confirmations shall be good, for in such Case,
Modus and conventiovincunt Legem, 50 Ed. 3. Title Assize. Statham, Ri. 2. Title
Grant, 27 H. 8. Dyer 58. 11 Eliz. Dyer, 33 H. 8.

2. It was Resolved, That upon a lawful Alienation made, with Confirmation of
the Dean and Chapter, no contraformam collationis lies upon the Statute of
Westminster. ^. See my 7th. Reports.

Trin. 8 Jacobi Regis.
Convocation Case.
It was Resolved by the two Chief Justices, and diverse other Justices, at a
Committee before the Lords of Parliament, concerning the Authority of a
Convocation.

1. That a Convocation cannot assemble, without the assent of the King.

2. That after their Assembly, they cannot confer to Constitute any Cannons,
without License d l Roy.

3. When upon Conference they conclude any Cannons, yet they cannot ex^cute any
of them without Royal assent.

4. They cannot execute any after Royal assent, but with these Limitations.

1. That they be not against the Kings Prorogative.

2. Nor against the Common Law.

3. Nor against Statute Law.

4. Nor against any Custom of the Realm: And all this appears by 25 H. 8. cap.
19. 19 Ed. 3. Title Quare non admisit 7. 10 H. 7. 17. Merton, cap. 9.

2 H. 6. 13. A Convocation may make Constitutions to bind the Spiritualty,
because they all in person, or by representation, are present, but not the
Temporality.

21 Ed. 4. 47. The Convocation is Spiritual, and so are all their
Constitutions: Vide the Records in Turri, 18 H. 8. 8 Ed. 1. 25 Ed. 1. 11 Ed. 2.
15 Ed. 2. Prohibitio Regis ne Clerus in Congregatione sua, etc. attemptet
contra jus seu Coronam, etc. by which it appears, they can do nothing against
the Law of the Land, or the Kings Prerogative.

Case of Piracy,
Trin. 8 Jacobi Regis.
In this Term the King referred the Consideration of Letters Patents of the
Lord Admiral of England, to the two Chief Justices, and the Chief Baron:
whether by the said Letters Patents the Goods which Pirates should take from
Others by Robbery and Piracy, did pass to the Lord Admiral or no. And upon
Consideration thereof, it appeared to us, That he had Bona et Catalla
Piratorum, and also Bono et Catalla depraedata; Goods robb^d from others, which
did not pass for two Causes.

1. If the King Grant Bona et Catalla Felonum, the Patentee shall have the
Goods and Chattels of the Felon himself, but not the Goods and Chattels which
the Felon steals from others.

2. The Goods taken from Others, the King cannot Grant; for it appears by the
Statute, 27 Ed. 3. cap. 8. St. 2. That the Merchant etc. so robbed shall be
received to prove that the Goods and Chattels belong to him by his Cock^^, or
other lawful Proof, etc. the said Goods shall be delivered without any Suit at
Common Law. But it was Resolved, That till such proof be made, the King may
seize the Goods; for Goods, of which the property is unknown, the King may
seize: And if they are bona peritura, the King may sell them, and upon proof,
etc. restore the value. And the Owner is not limited to any time by the Statute
31 H. 6. cap. 4. 2 R. 2. cap. 2. 13 Ed. 4. 9, 10. a good resolution of the
Justices, and the Register 179. F. N. B. 114. when a Subject of the King
spoiled beyond Sea shall have a Writ, etc. for to take Goods within England,
etc.

Case of Simony.
Trin. 8 Jacob. Regis.
It was agreed ad mensam, by all the Justices and Barons in Fleet Street, That
if the Patron for any Money present any Parson to a Benefice with Cure, etc.
then every such Presentation etc. thereupon are void, though the Presence be
not party not privy to it; for the Statute intends to punish such wicked
avarice, and gives the Presentation to the Queen: And this per verba Statuti
penned strongly enough against corrupt Patrons.

Proclamations.
Mich. 8 Jacobi Regis.
On Thursday the 20th. of Sept. 8 Regis Jacobi, I was sent for to attend the
Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal, and Chancellor of the
Duchy; the Attorney, Solicitor, and Recorder being present. And two Questions
were moved to me by the Lord Treasurer;

1. If the King by his Proclamation may prohibit new Buildings in and about
London?

2. If the King may prohibit the making of Starch of Wheat?

The Treasurer said, These were preferred to the King as Grievances, and
against the Law and Justice; To which the King Answered; That he will conferr
with his Privy Council and Judges, and then he will do them right. To which I
answered, That these Questions being of great Importance, I did desire, that I
might have Conference with my Brethren the Judges; To which the Chancellor
said, Every President had first a Commencement, and that he would advise the
Judges to maintain the Kings Prerogative, and where there was no President, to
leave it to the King; and all concluded it should be necessary to confirm the
Kings Prerogative with our Opinions.

To which I answered, True it is, every President has a Commencement, but when
Authority and President is wanting, there needs great Considerations before any
Novelty be established; For I said, The King cannot change any part of the
Common Law, nor create any offense by his Proclamation: But I desired to Confer
with my Brethren, for Deliberandum est diu, quod Statuendum est semel; To which
Mr. Solicitor said, D^vers Sentences were given in the Star Chamber upon the
Proclamation against Building, and that I had given Sentence against the said
Proclamation: To which I answered, That Presidents were to be seen, and
Considerations to be had upon Conference with my Brethren, for Melius est
recurrere quam male currere, and Indictments conclude, contra leges and
statuta, never contra regiam Proclamationem. At last my motion was allowed, and
the Lords appointed the two Chief Justices, Chief Baron, and Baron Altham to
consider of it.

Note, the King by his Proclamation, or otherwise, cannot change any part of
the Common Law, Statute Law, or Customs of the Realm, 11 H. 4. 37. Fortescue in
laudibus legum Ang. cap. 9. 18 Ed. 4. 35, 36, etc. 31 H. 8. cap. 8. ubi non est
lex, ubi non est transgressio; ergo, That which cannot be punished without
Proclamation, cannot be punished with it. Vide le Stat. 31 H. 8. cap. 8. But if
a man be indicted upon a Contempt against a Proclamation, he shall be Fined an^
imprisoned. Vide Fortescue, cap. 9. 18, 34, 36, 37, etc.

In all Cases, the King out of his Providence, and to prevent dangers, may
prohibit them before, which will aggravate the Offense, if it be afterward
committed: And as it is a Grand Prerogative of the King to make Proclamations,
22 H. 8. Procl. B. yet we find Presidents of Proclamations utterly against Law
and Reason, and therefore void: For Quae contra rationem Juris introducta sunt,
non debent trahi in sequentiam. An Act made to License Forreiners to
Merchandise in London, H. 4. by Proclamation prohibited the Execution of it,
usque ad prox. Parliament. which was against Law. Vide do^s. claus. 8 H. 4.
Proc. in London; but 9 H. 4. An Act was made, That all Irish should depart the
Realm before the Feast of the Nativity; this only was in terrorem, being
utterly against Law.

Hollingshead, 772. Anno Dom. 1546. 37 H. 8. The Whor^-houses, vulgo Stews,
were suppressed by Proclamation, and found of Trumpet.

In the same Term R^solved by the two Chief Justices, Chief Baron, and Baron
Altham, upon Conference between the Lords of the Privy Council and them, That
the King by his Proclamation cannot create any Offense, which was not an
Offense before, for then he may alter the Law. And the Law of England is
divided into three parts: 1. Common Law. 2. Statute Law. 3. Custom: But the
Kings Proclamation is none of them.

Resolved also, That he has no Prerogative, but what the Law of the Land
allows him; but he mry by Proclamation admonish his Subjects, that they keep
the Laws, upon pain to be inflicted by Law, etc.

Lastly, If the Offense be not punishable in the Star Chamber, Prohibition by
Proclamation cannot make it punishable there. And after this Resolution, no
Proclamation imposing Fine and Imprisonment was made, etc.

Mich. 8 Jac. Regis.
Prohibitions.
It was Resolved in this Term, That if a man be excommunicated by the Ordinary,
where he ought not, as after a general Pardon, etc. and the Defendant being
Negligent, does not sue a Prohibition, but remains excommunicate by 40 days,
and upon Certificate in Canc* is taken by the Kings Writ de excommunicato
capiendo; no Prohibition lies in this Case, because he is taken by the Kings
Writ. Then it was moved what remedy the Party has, who is wrongfully
excommunicate; to which it was answered, he has three Remedies.

1. He may have a Writ out of Chancery to absolve him, 14 H. 4. fol. 14. and
with this agrees 7 Ed. 4. 14.

2. When he is excommunicate against the Law of this Realm, so that he cannot
have a Writ de Cau^fone admittenda, then he ought Parere mandatis Ecclesiae in
sorma Juris, i. e. Ecclesiastici, where in truth it is Excommunicatio contra jus
and forman Juris, i. e. Communis Juris: But if he show his Cause to the Bishop,
and Request him to assoyl him, either because he was excommunicate after the
Offense pardoned, or that the Cause did not appear in Ecclesiastical
Cognizance, and he refuse, he may have an Action Sur le Case against the
Ordinary; and with this agrees Dr. and St. lib. 2. cap. 32. fol. 119.

3. If the Party be excommunicate for non^e of the Causes mentioned in the Act,
5 Eliz. cap. 23. then he may plead this in the Kings Bench, and so avoid the
Penalties in the Act.

Note, It was Resolved by the Court, etc. That where one is cited before the
Dean of the Articles in cause of defamation, for calling the Plaintiff Where,
out of the Diocese of London, against the Statute of 23 H. 8. And the Plaintiff
has Sentence, and the Defendant is excommunicated, and so continues 80 days;
And upon Certificate into the Chancery, a Writ of Excommunicato capiendo is
granted, and the Defendant taken and imprisoned thereby, that he shall not have
a Prohibition upon the Statute 23 H. 8. for no Writ in the Register extends to
it; but there is a Writ there called de cautione admittenda, when the Defendant
is taken by the Kings Writ de excommunicato capiendo de parendo mandatis
Ecclesiae, and to assoyl and deliver the Defendant. But in the Case at Bar, it
does not appear to us judicially, without Information, that the Citation is
against the form of the Statute: And the Information comes too late in this
Case, after the Defendant has persisted so long in his Contumacy, and is taken
by the Kings Writ, and imprisoned.

Admiralty.
It was Resolved per totam Curiam, That if One be sued in the Admiralty-Court,
for a thing alleged to be done upon the High-Sea, within the Admirals
Jurisdiction, and the Defendant plead and confess the thing done; and after
Sentence, the Court will be advised to Grant a Prohibition, upon surmise, That
it was done infra corpus comitatus, against their own confession, unless it can
be made appear to the Court by matter in Writing, or other good matter, that
this was done upon the Land; for otherwise every one will stay till after
Sentence, and then for vexation only sue out a Prohibition. And admonition was
given to them that sue out Prohibitions, That they should not keep them long in
their Hands, or until they perceive they cannot prevail in the Ecclesiastical
Court, then to cast in their Prohibition; for if they abuse that liberty to the
vexation of the Party, we will take such order, as in case of a Writ of
Privilege, if the Defendant keep it till the Jurors are ready, etc. it shall
not be allowed.

Hill. 8 Jacob. Regis.
In this Term, in Doctor Trevor's Case, who was Chancellor of a Bishop in
Wales; It was Resolved,

That the Office of a Chancellor and Register, etc. in Ecclesiastical Courts,
are within the Statute 5 Ed. 6. cap. 16. which Act, being made for avoiding
corruption of Officers, etc. and advancement of worthy Persons, shall be
expounded most beneficially to suppress Corruption. And because the Law allows
Ecclesiastical Courts to proceed in Blasphemy, Heresy, Schism, etc. loyalty of
Matrimonies, probate of Wills, etc. and that from these proceedings depends not
only the Salvation of Souls, but the legitimation of Issues, etc. and other
things of great Consequence. It is most reason that such Officers shall be
within the Statute, then Officers which concern Temporal ma^ters, the Temporal
Judge committing the Convict only to the Jailer, but the Spiritual Judge, by
excommunication, to the Devil: And there is a Proviso in ^he Statute for them.

It was Resolved, That such Offices were within the Purview of the said Statute.

Hill. 8 Jac. Regis.
Admiralty.
It is to be understood, That the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty is more ancient
than Mr. Lambert, in his Jurisdiction of Courts, does affirm, which was the
time of Edward the Third. But without question, the Jurisdiction of the
Admiralty is more ancient; for I find a notable Book in the time of Ed. 1.
Title Avowry, 192. which proves it more ancient than Mr. Lambert speaks: The
Case was, One brought a Replevin of his Ship taken on the Coast of Scarbrough
upon the Sea, and carried into Norfolk, and there detained; the plaint of
taking in the Coast of S. which is no Town nor Place certain by which the Paiis
may be taken, for the Coast contains four Leagues. And also a thing done at
Sea, this Court cannot have Cognizance; for this Judgment is given to Mariners.
Beresford, who gave the Rule in this Case; The King W^lls, That the Peace be
kept as well upon the Sea as the Land-And we find, that you come by due
Process, and we see nothing why you ought not to answer; upon which Book I
observe five things:

1. That of things done upon the Sea, Judgment is given to Mariners, id est, to
Admirals, as shall appear, and belongs not to the King's Court, because no
Paiis may be taken there; for where the Paiis or Jury may come, the Admiral
has no Jurisdiction.

2. This proves directly, That there the Admiral has Jurisdiction to adjudge
things done upon the Sea, from whence no Paiis may come. And this did nor begin
then, for questionless ever since there was Trade or Traffic (which is the
Life of every Island) there was Marine Jurisdiction, to redress Depraedations,
Piracies, Murders, and other Offenses upon the Sea.

3. The third thing is, That if part of the matter be done on the Sea, and part
in the Country, that the Common Law shall have all the Jurisdiction.

4. The Sea within the Jurisdiction of the Admiral, is described to be out of
every County.

5. If a thing be done upon the Sea, horse del County, the Party may plead it to
the Jurisdiction of the Court.

And it is to wit, that in ancient time the Jurisdiction of Admiral was called
Maritina Angliae, and sometimes Marina Angliae, which signifies the Admiralship
or Marinship of England; for Marinus is the same with (...), that is of the
Sea, and (...) is the Admiral or General of the Fleet; and Almarath is
corruptly Admiral. And anciently, sometimes one was Admiral of all England,
and sometime the Office was divided. And for this, see ex Rot. Patentium de An.
6 H. 3. de Maritina Custodiend. 29 Aug. ex Rot. Pat. An. 9 H. 3. 3. October.
Charta 15 H. 3. 28 Junii, 25 Ed. in. 14. Claus. in Dorso in 18. William
teyborne Capitaneus Marinariorum.

At this time there were two Admirals, the one had the Government of all the
Fleet from the Thames mouth versus Boream, the other from the Thames mouth
versus occidentem, 1 Pars. Patent. 25 Ed. 1. 25 Martii in 9. and 1 Pars.
Patent. 10 Ed. 2. 8. December. And so in the time of R. 2. H. 4. H. 5. H. 6.
during whose Reigns there was like unus qui fuit Admirallus Angliae.

3 Ed. 2. Coron 399. where a man may see what is done of one part, and the
other of the Water, etc. in that place the County may have Cognizance, and it
may be tried by a Jury. And Stamfords Pleas of the Crown, lib. 1. fol. 51.
citing this Book, says thus: So this proves, That by the Common Law, before
the Statute, etc. the Admiral shall not have Jurisdiction, unless upon the
High-Sea; which proves his Jurisdiction by the Common Law upon the High-Sea. Ex
quo sequitur, that his Jurisdiction was by the Common Law, and then it is so
ancient, that the Commencement cannot be known. Whence I conclude, that this
Authority did not begin of King Edw. 3. as Monsieur Lambert upon uncertain
Conjectures supposes.

Pasch. 9 Jac. Regis.
It was Resolved by the two Chief Justices, Chief Baron, the Attorney and
Solicitor, That the King may erect any Name of Dignity which was not before;
and for that Reason the King may Create a Baronet, to him and his Heirs-males
of his Body issuing.

It was Resolved, That if he Create him not of some Place, he shall not have an
Estate Tail, but Fee-simple conditional, forfeitable for Felony; but if he
Create him Baronet of a Place, then he shall have an Estate-Tail within the
Statute, West. 2. And the King may Grant to such Precedence before Knights
Bannerets, Knights of the Bath, and Kinghts-Batchelors: And also he may Grant
Precedence to their Wives, Sons, and Daughters, etc.

The King cannot Create any Dignity above the Dignity of a Baronet, and under
the Dignity of a Baron: And the creation of this Dignity of a Baronet shall not
discharge the Heir to be in Guard.

Pasch. 9 Jacobi Regis.
Accessory in Treason, etc.
Note, That in Trespass and Treason, there are no Accessaries, but all are
Principles: But in Felony, above the sum of 12 d. there, and in case of death,
etc. there may be Accessory as well before as after. In Petit larceny there can
be no Accessaries, for the smallness of the Felony: Then the Case is, A.
Counterfeits the Great Seal of England, and B. knowing that he did Counterfeit
it, receives, abets, and comforts him. If B. in this Case be Guilty of Treason,
is the Question: And it seems he is not; for though A. by the Counterfeiting be
a Traitor, yet the abetting, etc. cannot make B. an Accessory, because at the
time of Counterfeiting it, he did not know it; but if one before the Act be
done, procure another to Conterfeit the Great-Seal, there it is High Treason;
and in the Indictment he may be charged with the Fact. And this appears to me
very evident in Reason, and agrees with our Books; as 19 H. 6. 47. 6. he who is
consenting to the making of false Money, commits High Treason, for he is
Particeps Criminis before the Fact: But it is held in Conyers Case, Mich. 13
and 14 Eliz. Dyer 296. that in the same Case, if one after the Fact done know
thereof, and receive the Party, this is but Misprision of Treason; and with
this accords 3 H. 7. 10. which diversity Stam. Pleas of the Crown, fol. 3. has
well observed. Vide Dyer 298. vide le Stat. 27 Eliz.

Pasch. 9 Jacobi Regis.
Sir William Chanc^ys Case.
In this Term Sir William Chancy having the privilege of this Court, and being
a Prisoner in the Fleet, was brought to ^he Bar by Habeas Corpus, by the
Guardian of the Fleet; who returned, That the said Sir William was committed to
the Fleet by Warrant from the High-Commissioners in Ecclesiastical Causes,
which Warrant follows in these words, viz.

These are to Will and Require you in his Majesty's Name, by Virtue of his
H^gh-Commission etc. to Us and others directed, etc. That herewithal you take
and receive into your Custody the Body of Sir William Chancy Knight, whom we
will that you keep, etc. until further Order, etc. letting you know the cause
of his Committment to be, for that being at the Suit of his Lady convented
before etc. for Adultery, and expelling her from his Company, and Co-habiting
with another Woman, without allowing her any competent Maintenance; and by his
own Confession convict thereof, he was thereupon enjoined to allow his Wife a
competent Maintenance, etc. and to perform such Submission and other order for
his Adultery as by Law should be enjoined him, which he expressly refused to do
in contempt, etc. Given at London 19 Martii, 1611. subscribed Henry Mountague,
George Overall, Thomas Morton, Zach. Pa^field.

And it was moved by Nicholas Sergeant, a Council with Sir William, that this
return was insufficient.

1. Because Adultery ought to be punished by the Ordinary, and not by the
High-Comm^ssioners, on which the Offender is remediless, and can have no
appeal; Quod fuit concessum per Coke, Warberton and Foster, but Walmesly
doubted of Adultery.

2. That by force of the Act of the 1. of Eliz. the High-Commissioners cannot
imprison Sir William for Adultery, nor for denying Alimony to his Wife: And
Doderidge, the Kings S^rjeant, of Council on the other side, did not defend the
Imprisonment to be lawful.

And it was clearly agreed by Coke, Walmesly, Warberton, and Foster, That the
Commissioners had not power to imprison in this Case. And Walm^sly said. That
though they have used this Power for twenty years without any exception; yet
when it comes before them judicially, they ought to Judge according to Law; and
upon this Sir William Chancy was Bailed.

And it was resolved per totam Curiam, That when it appears upon the Return,
that the Imprisonment is not lawful, the Court may discharge him of
Imprisonment.

Also it was Resolved, That the Return was insufficient in form.

1. It is not shown when the Adultery was committed.

2. He was enjoined to allow his Wife a competent Maintenance without any
certainty, and to perform such submission, etc. as by Law shall be enjoined,
which is all infuturo, and uncertain. Vide in my Treatise at large the Reasons
and Causes why the High-Commissioners may sue and imprison, Vide Pasch. 42
Eliz. Rot. 1209.

Pasch. 9 Jacobi Regis.
Empringham's Case.
In this Term a Case was moved in Star Chamber upon a Bill exhibited by the
Attorney General against Robert Empringham Vice Admiral in the County of York,
Marmaduke Ketthewell, one of the Marshals of the Admiralty, and Thomas
Ha^rison, an Informer in the same Court for Oppression and Extortion, in Fining
and Imprisoning diverse of the Kings Subjects in the said County, which no Judge
of the Admiralty can justify, because it is not a Court of Record; but they
proceed according to the Civil Law, and upon their Sentence no Writ of Error
lies, but an Appeal. Also the said Empringham has caused diverse to be cited,
to appear before him for things done in the Body of the County, which were
determinable by the Common Law, and not before the Admiralty, whose authority
is limited to the High Sea. And for these and other Oppressions they were fined
and imprisoned, and sentenced beside to make Restitution, etc.

Trin. 9 Jacobi Regis.
Memorandum, That upon the Thursday before this Term, all the Justices of
England, by the Kings Command, were assembled in the Council Chamger at
Whitehall, where was, Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, and with him two
Bishops, and diverse Civillians; the Archbishop complained of Prohibitions out
of the Common Pleas, and delivery of Persons by Haheas Corpus, but chiefly of
Sir William Chancy. I defended our proceedings according to my Treatise
thereof, which I delivered before the High-Commissioners: And after great
dispute between the Archbishop and Me, at last he said, He had a Point not yet
touched upon in my Treatise, which would give satisfaction to the Lords and Us
also, and upon which he would rely; And that the Clause of Restitution and
Annexation, viz. And that all such Jurisdictions, etc. Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, as by any power Spiritual has heretofore, or hereafter
lawfully may be used, etc. for visitation of the Ecclesiastical State and
Persons, and for Reformation, Order, and Correction of the same, and of all
Errors, Heresies, Schisms, etc. shall for ever by authority of this present
Parliament, be united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And it
was said, That H. 8. and Ed. 6. did give Power by their Commissions to diverse,
to impose Mulcts, etc. in Ecclesiastical Causes, etc. and upon this he
concludes, That this having been used before 1 Eliz. this is given to Queen
Eliz. and her Successors. Also inasmuch as by 2 H. 4. and 2 H. 7. the
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical may Fine and Imprison in particular Causes,
therefore Power to Fine and Imprison in all Ecclesiastical Causes is given to
the King: And this he said he uttered, that it might be answered.

1. To which, I for a time gave this Answer, That it was good for the
Weal-publick that the Judges at the Common Law should interpret the Statutes
within this Realm.

2. It was said by me, That before the Statute of 1 Eliz. no Ecclesiastical
Judge may impose a Fine, or Imprison for any Ecclesiastical or Spiritual
Offense, unless there be Authority by Act of Parliament: And this was so
affirmed by all the Justices.

Vide my Book of Presidents, the Commission at large to Cromwell to be
Vicegerent.

Afterward in this very Term the Privy Council sent for the Justices of the
Common Pleas only, and there the Reasons of the said Resolution were largely
debated, and strong Opposition made hy Egerton Lord Chancellor, but the
Justices of the Common Pleas remained constant in their Resolution: Afterward
the Council sent for the chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Justice Williams,
Justice Crook, Chief Baron Ta^field, Snig, Althan, and Bromly, who were not
acquainted with the Reasons of the said Rule of the Common Pleas, nor knew why
they came before the Council; And hearing the Lord Chancellor affirm, That the
High-Commissioners have always by the Act 1 Eliz. imposed Fines and
Imprisonments for exorbitant Crimes, (without any Conference with us, or among
then selves, or hearing the matter debated,) were of Opinion with us: And after
at another day this same Term, the said Judges of the Kings Bench, Barons of
the Exchequer, and Justice Fenner and Yelverton, who were omitted before, and
We the Justices of the Common-Bench were commanded to attend the Council. And
being all assembled, We of the Common Pleas were commanded to retire, and then
the King demanded their Opinions in certain Points touching the
High Commission, wherein they unanimously agreeing, We, viz. Coke, Walmesly,
Warberton, and Foster, were called before the King, Prince and Council, where
the King declared, That hy the Advice of his Council, and the Justices of the
Kings Bench and Barons, he will reform the High Commission in diverse Points,
which after he will have to be obeyed in all Points.

Whereupon I said to the King, That it was grievous to Us, his Majesty's
Justices of the Bench, to be severed from our Brethren, but more grievous, that
they differed from us in Opinion, without hearing one another, especially since
in what we have done in Sir William Chancys Case, and others the like
concerning the Power of the High-Commissioners, was done judicially in open
Court, upon argument at the Bar and Bench. And further I said to the King, that
when we the Justices of the Common Pleas see the Commission newly reformed, We
will, as to that which is of Right, seek to satisfy the Kings expectation; and
so We departed, etc.

Trin. 9 Jac. Regis.
Stockdale's Case in the Court of Wards.
The King by Letters Patents dated 9. April, the ninth year of his Reign, did
Grant to William Stockdale in these words.

Such, and so many of the Debts, Duties, Arrearages, and Sums of Money being of
Record in our Court of Exchequer, Court of Wards, Dutchy-Court, or within any
Court or Courts, etc. in any year, or several years, from the last year of the
Reign of H. 8. to the 13th. year of Our Dear Sister, as shall amount to the sum
of 1000 l. To have, tak^, levy, etc. the said Debts, etc. to the said William
Stockdale his Executors, etc.

And in this Case diverse Points were resolved:

1. That the said Grant of the King is void for ^he incertainty, for thereby no
Debt in certain can pass: As if the King have an 100 Acres of Land in D. and he
Grants to a Man 20 Acres of the Lands in D. without describing them by the
Rent, Occupation, or Name, etc. this Grant is void.

2. When the Patentee Claims by force of this word Arreragia.

It was resolved clearly, That he shall not have Arrearages of Rents, Reliefs,
and mean Rates of Lands, etc. in the Court of Wards, etc. if the Patent go not
further.

But the Proviso in the end of the Patent, viz. Provided, that the said
William Stockdale shall take no benefit by any means of Arrearages of any
Rents, etc. until Sir Patrick Murrey and others be paid the sum of 1000 l.
etc. has well explained what Arrearages the King intended: But clearly mean
Rates are not within the words, for they are the Profits of Demesne Land.

Trin. 9 Jacobi Regis.
Diverse men playing at Bowls at great Marlow in Kent, two of them fell out;
and a third man, who had not any quarrel, in revenge of his Friend, struck the
other with a Bowl, of which he dyed: This was held Manslaughter, because it
happened upon a sudden motion.

In the same Term a special Verdict diverse years past found in the County of
Hertford, which was, That two Boys fighting together, one was seratched in the
Face, and bled very much at the Nose, and so he run three quarters of a Mile to
his Father, who seeing his Son so abused, he took a Cudgel and run to the place
where the other Boy was, and stroke him upon the Head, upon which he dyed. And
this was held but Manslaughter, for the Passion of the Father was continued,
and no time to judge it in Law Malice prepense: And this Case was moved ad
mensam, etc.

Mich. 9 Jac. Regis.
Memorandum upon Thursday in this Term, a High Commission in Causes
Ecclesiastical was published in the Archbishops great Chamber at Lambeth, in
which I, with the Chief Justice, Chief Baron, Justice Williams, Justice
Crook, Baron Altham, and Baron Bromly were named Comm^ssioners among all the
Lord of the Council, diverse Bishops, Attorney and Solicitor, and diverse Deans
and Doctors in the Cannon and Civil Laws: And I was commanded to sit by force
of the said Commission, which I refused for three Causes.

1. Because neither I nor any of my Brethren of the Common Pleas, were
acquainted with it.

2. Because I did not know what was contained in the new Commission; and no
Judge can execute any Commission with a good Conscience, without knowledge; for
Tantum sibi est permissum, quantum est Commissum.

3. That there was not any necessity of my sitting, who understood nothing of
it, so long as the other Judges, whose advise had been had in this new
Commission, were there.

4. That I have endeavored to inform my self of it, by a Copy from the Rolls,
but it was not enrolled.

5. None can sit by force of any Commission, till he has taken the Oath of
Supremacy according to 1 Eliz. and if I may hear the Commission read, and have
a Copy to advise upon, I will either sit, or show cause to the contrary. The
Lord Treasurer persuaded me to si^, but I utterly refused it, and the rest
seemed to incline. Then the Commission was openly read, containing diverse
Points against the Laws and Statutes of England: At hearing of which, all the
Judges rejoiced they sat not by it. Then the Archbishop made an Oration;
during all which, as the reading of the Commission, I stood, and would not sit;
and so by my Example, did the rest of the Judges. And so the Archbishop
appointed the great Chamber at Lambeth in Winter, and the Hall in Summer; and
every Thursday in the Term at two a clock Afnoon, and in the Forenoon one
Sermon.

Mich. 9 Jacob. Regis.
In this Term, the Issue, in an Information upon the (...) 2 H. 6. 15. was
tried at the Bar; and upon Evidenc^ upon the words of the Statute, which are,
That ev^^y person that sets or fastens in the Thames, any Nets or En^i^^s
called Trincks, or any other N^ts, to any ^^sts, etc. to stand continually day
and night, forfeits to ^he King 100 s. for every time, etc. And the Defendants
having set and fastened Nets called Trincks in the Thames, etc. to Boats, day
and night, as long as the Tide served, and nor continually.

The Question was, If this was within the Statute; and it was clearly Resolved,
That it was within the Statute; for the Nets called Trinks cannot stand longer
than the Tide serve; and for this the word continually shall be taken for so
long as they may stand to take Fish; for lex non intendit aliquid impossible.

Mich. 9 Jacob. Regis.
Shulters Case in the Star Chamber.
The Case was such; John Shulter of Wisbich, of the age of 115 years, had Issue
John his eldest Son, and others, viz. Christopher, Richard, etc. and being
seized of Land in Fee o^ 100 Marks, per annum, value, his eldest Son being
dead, and his Grandchild John with^n age, he gave direction for a Lease to be
made of a Fa^m called Roushal, to Christopher during the minority of his
Grandchild, rendering the ancient Rent, with power of Revocation, and of Lands
in Yatesbury to Richard in the same manner; and the same time Chr^stopher and
Richard, by the Covin of one Woodruff a Serivener, 25 Eliz. drew two Leases to
Christopher and Richard for 51 years, rendering 4 d. per annum, and without any
power of Revocation; John Shulter the Grandfather being blind with age, and
Woodruff telling him they were according to his direction. And thereupon John
Shulter the Grandfather sealed and delivered them. And it was resolved by the
Lord Ellesmere Chancellor, and two Chief Justies, That the said Indentures
could not bind the said John Shulter, because he was blind: and the effect was
declared to him other than in truth it was. I^ fully agreed with Mansers Case,
in the second part of my Reports, fol. 4.

Mich. 9 Jacobi Regis.
Sir Anthony Ashley's Case.
The Case was this; Sir James Creyton had bought a pretended Right of and in
the Manor of ^yddy and Millisent, and diverse other Lands, of which Sir Anthony
had long possession: Upon which, diverse Motions were made concerning Fines,
acknowledged to be staid, etc. in the Common-Bench; and Sir James not
prevailing in it, entered into a wicked Conspiracy, with several other
Defendants in the Cause, to accuse the said Sir Anthony of some Capital Crimes,
whereby he should forfeit all his Lands, Goods, and Chattels, which they should
share amongst them; and in the end Henry Smith, formerly a Servant to Sir
Anthony, was suborned to accuse the said Sir Anthony, of the Mu^ther of William
Rice, late Husband of Mary Rice, one of the Defendants, which William was dead
18 years before; and Smith was to have 500 l. for his pains, to have a place
procured him in the Kings Guard in Ordinary, a Prote^tion also from the King
against his Creditors, and a General Pardon. Of all which, Smith would have
assurance, before he would make any Accusation of the said Sir Anthony:
Whereupon Articles in Writing were drawn, engrossed and sealed between Sir
James Creyton of the one part, and John Cantrel, Servant to Hunnings, by
Smith's Consent, and to his use, on the other part: By which Sir Ja^es
Covenanted, that the said Cantrel, and his Heirs, after the Conviction and
Attainder of Sir Anthony, shall have a sixth part of his Manors, etc. In
consideration whereof, Cantrel Covenanted, that he should procure Witnesses, to
Convict the Plaintiff of Murder, or other Capital Crimes, etc. Which Articles
were sealed 16 of Feb. 7 Jac. And for the performance of the said Articles, Sir
James gave Bond of 8000 l. to Cantrel. Within two days after, Smith
counterfeits himself sick, and then pretending to disburthen his Conscience,
reveals the said Murder, and accused himself for poisoning the said William
Rice, by the said Sir Anthonies Command; so that he himself was Principal. Upon
this Sir James procures Mary Rice, the Widow of the said William Rice, to
prefer a Petition to the King, importing the Accusation aforesaid: Which
Petition, the King referred to the Chief Justice of the King's Bench, who, after
full Examination, certified the King, that he found a false Conspiracy, to
indict Sir Anthony, without any just ground, and certified also the effect of
the Articles: Upon which the King, by Advice of the Privy-Councel, thought the
matter fit to be sentenced in the Star Chamber; Which in the same Term, upon
ordinary proceeding, was heard by six days: And it was objected by the
Defendants Council, That the Bill, upon the said Conspiracy, did not lie; and
that it would be dangerous to maintain it; for it will deter men to prosecute
against great Offenders, whereby they will pass unpunished: And by the Law,
Conspiracy lies where a man is indicted, and legitimo modo acquietus; but here
he was never indicted, etc.

But to this, it was Answered, and Resolved, by the Lord Chancellor, the two
Chief Justices, and all the Court, That in this Case, the Bill was
maintainable, though the Party accused was not indicted and acquitted before,
as it was Resolved in this Court, Hill. 8. Jac. in Poulter's Case. Besides, be
Sir Anthony guilty or no, the Defendants are punishable, for promising Bribes
and Rewards to Smith, to accuse the Plaintiff, and the Articles to share Sir
A^thonies Estate after Attainder: And there is a great Indignity offered to the
King, in assuming to Covenant, that the King shall protect or pardon, or that
any man's Estate may be shared before Attainder.

And it appeared by many Witnesses, that William Rice dyed not of any
poisoning, but of a horrible Disease got by his dissolute life, which with
Reverence cannot be spoken.

And in this Case, it was Resolved, That if Felony be done, and one has
suspicion upon probable matter, that another is guilty of it, he may arrest the
party so suspected, to bring him to Justice. But in this Case, three things are
to be observed:

1. That a Felony be done.

2. That he that does arrest, has suspicion upon probable cause.

3. That he himself, who has the suspicion, arrest the party.

Resolved also, That if Felony be done, and common fame and noise is, that one
has committed it, this is good cause for him that knows of it to arrest the
party: and with this agrees the Book, 2 H. 5. 15, 16. 15 H. 7. 5. 20 H. 7. 12.
21 H. 7. 28. 7 Ed. 4. 20. 8 Ed. 4. 27. 11 Ed. 4. 4. 6. 17 Ed. 4. 5. 6. 20 Ed. 4
6. B. 7 H. 4. 25. 27 H. 8. 23. 26 H. 8 9. 7 Eliz. Die. 226.

Hill. 9 Jac. Regis.
In this Term, the Attorney and Solicitor consulted* with me, if at this day,
upon Conviction of an Heretic before the Ordinary, the Writ de Haeretico
combunendo lies; and it seems to be clear that it does not: for the Reasons
and Authorities that I have reported, Trin. 9 Jacob. before: But after, they
consulting with Fleming Chief Justice, Tanfield Chief Baron, and Williams and
Crook: And they, upon the Report of Dr. Cosins, mentioned in my said Report,
and some Pr^sidents in Queen Elizabeth's time, they certified the King, that
the said Writ lies; but that the most sure way was to convict the Heretic
before the High Commissioners.

Pasch. 10 Jac. Regis.
The Lord Vaux his Case.
In this Term, the Lord Vaux was indicted of a Praemunire in the King's Bench,
upon the New Statute, for refusing the Oath of Allegiance: upon his
Arraignment, he prayed he might be tried per Pares. But i^ was Resolved, That
he shall not; for that Magna Charta, cap. 29. Nec super cum ibimus, nec super
eum mittemus, nisi per legale judicium parium suorum, is only to be understood
of Treasons, Misprision of Treason, Petit Treason, and Felony, and their
Accessaries, etc. But Praemunire is but a contempt, and Pardon of all Contempts
pardons it. Whereupon the Lord Vaux confessed the Indictment, Vide Lamb,
Justice d^l Peace, 520, Dallisons Report accordingly. Vide Stamford, etc.

Trin. 10 Jacob. Regis.
Countess of Shrewsbury's Case.
In this Term, before a select Council at York-house, the Countess of
Shrewsbury (Wife of Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury) then Prisoner in the Tower, was
brought, and by the Kings Attorney and Solicitor was charged with a high
Contempt of dangerous consequence; declaring, That the Lady Arbella, being of
the Blood Royal, had married Seymor, the Earl of Hertford's second Son, without
the King's Consent, for which he was committed to the Tower, and had escaped
and fled beyond the Seas. And the Lady Arbella being under restraint escaped
also, and embarked her self on the Sea, but was taken ere she got over: of
which flight of the Lady Arbella, the said Countess well knew, as is directly
proved by Crompton, and not denied by the Lady Arbella. And admitting the Lady
Arbella had no evil intent against the King; yet when she fled, and should be
environed with Evil Spirits, cum perversis perverti possit.

Now the Charge was in two Parts:

1. That the Countess of Shrewsbury, being by the King's Command called to the
Councel-Table, and being required by the Lords, to declare her knowledge
touching the said Points; she answered, she would not answer particularly; and
being again by the King's Commands asked by the Council at Lambeth, she refused
for two Causes:

1. Because she had made a Vow, that she would not declare any thing in
particular touching the said Points; and (she said) it was better to obey God,
than Man.

2. She stood upon her Privilege of Nobility, viz. to answer, when Judicially
called before her Peers: such Privilege having been allowed to William Earl of
Pembroke, and the Lord Lumly.

2. The second Point of the Charge was, That when the Answer she had made was
put in Writing, and read to her, yet she refused to subscribe the same: Which
Denial was urged by the King's Council, as a high contempt, etc. And the
Countess hearing the Charge, yet persisted in her obstinate Refusal, for the
same Reasons the insisted on as before: And the Lord Chancellor began, and the
Archbishop and the other Lords adjudged it a great and high Contempt: And that
no such allowance was to the Earl of Pembroke, or Lord Lumly, as was supposed.
And the Archbishop, and Earl of Northampton, proved by Scripture, that the said
Case now was against the Law of God.

All that the Justices said was, That they might well be silent; but that
silentium in Senatu est vitium: and therefore they briefly speak of three
things:

1. Whither the Refusals aforesaid were Offenses in Law, against the King, his
Crown, and Dignity.

2. What Proceeding this is; and if justifiable by President or Reason.

3. What the Offenses are, and how punishable.

1. As to the first: It was resolved by the Justices, and Master of the Rolls,
that the denying to be examined, was a high Contempt against the King, his
Crown, and Dignity: and upon hope of Impunity, it will be an encouragement to
Offenders, as Fleming Chief Justice said, to enterprise dangerous Attempts.

The Master of the Rolls said, the Nobility in this Case, had no more
privilege to deny to be examined, than any other Subject.

Also, if one Noble be sued, and a Peer be sued in Star Chamber or Chancery,
they must answer upon their Oaths: And if produced as a Witness, they ought to
be sworn: And therefore for maintaining of Order, the Chief Justice said he
would recite some of those Honorable Privileges, which the Law of England
attributes to Nobility.

1. If a Baron Viscount, Earl, etc. be Plaintiff in any Action, and the
Defendant will plead, that the Plaintiff is not a Baron, etc. this shall be
tried only by the Record in Chancery, which imports by its self solid truth.

2. Their Persons have many Privileges in Law.

1. At a Subjects Suit they shall not be arrested.

2. Their Bodies are not subject to Torture, in causa criminis ^aesae
Majestatis.

3. They are not to be sworn in Assiz^s, Juries, or Inquests.

4. It is Felony in any Servant of the King, named in the Checquer Roll, to
compass or intend to kill any Lord of Parliament, or of the King's Council.

5. In the Common Pleas, a Lord shall have Knights returned of his Jury.

6. He shall have Day of Grace.

7. Shall not be Tried in case of Treason, Felony, or Mi^prison of them, but by
those that are Nobles and Peers.

8. In Trial of a Peer, the Lords of Parliament shall not swear, but give their
Judgment, Super Fidem and Ligeantiam Domino Regi debitam. And the King honors
with Nobility for two Causes.

1. Ad consulendum; and therefore he gives them a Robe.

2. Ad Defendendum Regem and Regnum; and therefore he gives them a Sword.

And therefore, as they derive their Dignities with those Honorable
Privileges from the King; to deny to answer, being required by the King, is a
high Contempt, accompanied with great Ingratitude.

This Denial is contra Ligeantiam suam, as appears by the Ancient Oath of
Allegiance: And the Law has greater account to a Noble-mans Allegiance, then
one of the Commons, because the breach of their Allegiance is more dangerous;
for Corruption optimorum est pessima.

2. As to the second Point, viz. concerning the manner of Proceedings.

1. Privative: It is not to fine, imprison, or inflict corporal punishment; for
that ought to be assessed in some Court Judicially.

2. Positive: The Fine is ad monendum; or at most, ad minandum: it is, ad
instruendum non ad destruendum.

This selected Council, is to express what punishment this Offense justly
deserved, if judicially proceeded against in the Star Chamber: Therefore this
Proceeding is out of the King's Mercy to this Lady; that seeing her Offense,
she might submit to the King, without any Judicial Proceedings against her. And
though the Law puts Limits to the King's Justice, it does not so to his Mercy:
Et ideo processus iste est regalis plane and rege dignus. And this manner of
Proceeding, is fortified by the President of the Earl of Essex, against whom
such Proceedings were in this very place, 42 and 43 Eliz.

As to the last Point, It was resolved by all, quasi una voce, that if a
Sentence should be given in the Star Chamber, she should be fined 20000 l. and
imprisoned during the Kings pleasure.

Trin. 10 Jacobi Regis.
Robert Scarlet's Case.
Note, That at the Sessions of Peace lately holden at Woodbridge in Suffolk,
the Sheriff returned a Grand Inquest, of which one Robert Scarlet desired to be
one: But the Sheriff knowing the malice of the man, refused to return him: Yet
by Confederacy with the Clark, who read the Panel, he was sworn of the Grand
Inquest; and being amongst them of the Grand Inquest (though not returned) as
one of them, of his malice, and upon his own knowledge, as he pretended,
indicted 17 honest men upon diverse penal Laws: Some of the Justices looking
over the Bills, and seeing so many honest men indicted, as they supposed,
maliciously, demanded what Evidence they had to find the said Bills; and they
answered, By the Testimony and Cognizance of one of themselves, viz. Robert
Scarlet: And upon Examination it appeared, that the said Robert Scarlet was not
returned, but had procured himself to be sworn by Confederacy, as aforesaid:
For which Offense, he was indicted at the Summer Assizes following, 10 J c.
held at Bu^y, upon the Statute 11 H. 4. c. 9. And he pleaded not guilty: All
the especial Matter aforesaid being proved, he was found guilty by a
substantial Jury. And in this Case, diverse Points were considered;

1. Whether Justices of Assize have power to punish this offense or no? And it
was held affirmatively, scil. by force of their Commission of Oyer and
Terminer. And if the Act be indefinite, or general, and does not give
Jurisdiction to any Courts in special, the general words of Commission of Oyer
and Terminer extends to it.

Vide 7 Eliz. Dyer. Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, may inquire of Offenses
against Penal Statutes, unless the Statute appoint them to be determined in any
Court of Record. And the Opinion there, that in any Courts of Record, are
restrained to the four ordinary Courts at Westminster, is not held for Law; as
the Statute 5 Ed. 6. 14. against Forestallers, etc. gives the Penalty to be
recovered in any Court of Record: And Justices of Assize, in regard of their
Commission of Oyer and Terminer, have always enquired thereof: So the 33 H. 8.
9. of unlawful Games: And of Woods, 35 H. 8. c. 17. and many others.

2. The second consideration was upon the Statute, 11 H. 4. cap. 9. and it was
held, that Robert Scarlet was an Offender within that Statute; because knowing
he was not returned of the Grand Inquest, procured himself, by false
Conspiracy, to be sworn as aforesaid.

3. The third Consideration was had of 3 H. 8. 10. which alters the Act of the
11 H. 4. in part, as to denomination: But in regard, that still by that Act
none can be of any Grand Inquest, but by Return of the Sheriff: And for this
the Act 3 H. 8. 10. has not altered the Law, as to the Offense of Robert
Scarlet.

4. The said Act 11 H. 4. has made a new Law, viz. That any Indictment found
against the said Act shall be void: So that this may draw in Question, all the
Indictments found at the same S^ssions. And for this Judgment was given, that
he should be fined and imprisoned.

Trin. 10 Jac. Regis.
Baker and Hall's Case.
Note, Upon Consideration of the Statute, 3 H. 7. c. 14. It was Resolved by
Coke, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; Yelverton, Williams, Snig, and others,
That whereas it is provided, that what person soever takes a Woman so against
her Will, etc. in respect of this Word ( So) which has relation to the
Preamble: It was agreed by all, that if the Wife has nothing, nor is Heir
apparent, it is out of the Statute: for i^ would not have been so curious in
describing the Person, and all in vain. And Clergy is taken away by the 38
Eliz. cap. 9. for Principals or Procurers before. Vide Stamf. so. 37. b. and so
was the Law taken, 3 and 4 P. and M. Vide Lamb 252. Note, Receivers of the
Woman are Principals; but not the Receivers of them who took the Woman. Vide
Lamb. bid.

Note, I saw a Report in Queen Mary's time, upon the 50 Ed. 3. cap. 5. and 1 R.
2. cap. 15. concerning arresting Priests in Holy Church, that the said Statutes
are but in affirmance of the Common Law; and it is there held, that eundo,
redeundo, morando, for to celebrate Divine Service, the Priest ought not to be
arrested, nor any who aid him in it; and that the Party grieved, may have an
Action upon the Statute, 50 Ed. 3. For though an Act does not give an Action,
yet Action lies upon it, 7 H. 6. 30. etc. 2 H. 5. and 4 Ed. 4. 37. Vide
Register in breve super Stat.

Note, If a man be convicted, or has Judgment of Death for Felony, he shall
never answer by the Common Law, to any Felony done before the Attainder, so
long as the Attainder remains in force: Vide 8 Eliz. c. 4. 18 Eliz. 7. And at
this day, if a man be adjudg'd to be hanged, and has his Pardon he shall never
answer to any Felony before; for he cannot have two Judgments to be hanged.
Aliter, If the first Attainder by Error be reversed. Vide 10 H. 4. Coro^. 227.
Case, del Appeal, etc.

A man seized of a Manor, to which he has stray appendant by Prescription,
etc. by his Bayley he seizes an Ox as a Stray in the Manor, and makes
Proclamation according to Law, and within the Year and Day, lets the Manor
with all Royalties, etc. And Dy^r Sergeant moved the Court, who should have the
Stray: And Brown Justice, was of Opinion, that the L^ssor should have it. But
all the Justices were against him, that the Lessee shall have it, because the
property of the Stray is not altered before the Year and Day; and till then,
the Lord or the Manor has but the custody of it. In Dr. Hutchinson's Case,
Parson of Kenn in Devonshire, It was Resolved, per totam Curiam, That if any
shall receive or take Money, Fee, Reward, or other Profit, for any Presentation
to a Benefice with Cure; although in truth, he which is presented be not
knowing of it: yet the Presentation, Admission, and Induction, are void, per
expressa verba Statuti, 31 H. 8. cap. 6. and the King shall have the
Presentation hac vice: But if the Presence be not cognizant of the Corruption,
then he shall not be within the Clause of Disability in the same Statute: and
so it was Resolved by all the Justices in Fleetstreet, Mich. 8. Jac. so. 7.
vide verba statuti.

Hugh Manneyes Case.
In an Information in the Exchequer against Hugh Manney Esque the Father, and
Hugh Manney the Son, for Intrusion and cutting a great number of Trees in
Merion^th shire, the Defendants plead not guilty; and one Rowland ap Eliza
produced as a Witness for the King, deposed upon his Oath, that Hugh the Father
and Son joined in sale of the said Trees, and commanded the Vendees to cut them
down: The Jury found upon this great Damages for the King: and Judgment was
given, and Execution had of a great part.

Hugh Manney the Father exhibited a Bill in the Star Chamber at Common Law,
against Rowland ap Eliza, and assigns the Perjury in this; That the said Hugh
the Father, did never join in Sale, nor command the Vendees to cut the Trees;
and Rowland ap Eliza was convict of the Perjury, by all the Lords in the
Star Chamber; and it was Resolved by all, That it was by the Common Law
punishable before any Statute.

Hayes Case, in Cur-Wardorum.
By Inquisition in the County of Middlesex, Anno 6 Jac. by virtue of a diem
clausit extremum, after the death of Humphry Willward, it was found, that the
said Humphry died seized of a Message, and 26 Acres of Land in Stepney, and
that John Willward was his Heir, being 14 years, and 9 days old; and that the
Land was held of the King, in capite, by Knights Service. John Willward died
within age, and by Inquisition in Middlesex, 8 Jun. Anno Jac. by virtue of a
Writ of Deveneront, after the said John's death, it was found, that John dyed
seized in Ward to the King; and that the said Message and Lands, at the time
of the said John's death; were holden of the Dean of Paul's, as of his Manor of
Shadwel.

All the mean Rates incurred in John's lifetime, are paid to the King.

1. The Questions are: 1. Whether by John's death, and finding of the mean
Tenure in the Deveneront, the first Office granted to Points be determined.

2. Whether the Tenure found by the first Office may be traversed.

And as to these Questions it was Resolved, by the two Chief Justices, and
chief Baron, That where the said John dyed, the Office found by force of the
Diem clausit extremum, after Humphries death, whereby the King was entitled to
the Guardianship of John, has taken its effect, and is executed, and does
remain as Evidence for the King after John's death, but yet is not traversable;
for it is traversable during the time it remains in force only, and the Jurors
upon the Deveneront, after the death of the said John, are at liberty to find
the certainty of the Tenure, and they are not concluded by the first
Inquisition: and with this agrees, 1 H. 4. 68. And this appears by the
diversity between the Writ of Diem clausit extremum, and the Deveneront, which
is but in one Point; to wit, the Diem clausit extremum is general, And the
Deveneront is not general, but does restrain only the Lands and Tenements,
quod deveneront, etc. And thus it was Resolved nono Jacobi, in the Court of
Wards, in the Case of Dune Lewis

Award of Capias U^lagatum, by Justices of the Peace.
In this same Term, the Opinion of all the Court of Common-Pleus was, That if
one be outlawed before Justices of Assize, or Justices of Peace, upon an
Indictment of Felony, that they may award a Capias Utlagatum; and so was the
Opinion of P^riam Chief Baron, and all the Court of Exchequer, as to Justices
of Peace: for they that have power to award process of Outlawry, have also
power to award a Capias utlagatum. See 34 H. 8. c. 14. See Lamb. Justice of
Peace, fol. 503. contra. But see 1 Ed. 6. cap. 1. Justices of Peace, in case of
Profanation of the Sacrament, shall award a Capias Utlagatum throughout all
England.

Hersey's Case, Star Chamber.
John Hersey Gent, exhibited his Bill in the Star Chamber, against Anthony
Barker Knight, Thomas Barker Councellor at Law, Robert Wright Doctor of
Divinity, Ravenscroft Clerk, and John Hai is; and thereby charged the
Defendants with forging the Will of one Margery Pain; and the Cause came to
Hearing, ad requisitionem defendentium: and upon hearing the Plaintiffs
Council, there appeared no Presumption against any of the Defendants, but that
the Testament was duly proved in the Ecclesiastical Court: and upon an Appeal
was also affirmed before Commissioners Delegates, and Decreed also in Chancery.
So that it appeared to the Court, that the said Bill was preferred of mere
malice to slander the Defendants. Now because the Defendants had no Remedy at
Law for the said Slander, and if it should pass unpunished, it may encourage
men, It was Resolved by the Court, That by the course of the Court, and
according to former Presidents, the Court may give Damages to the Defendants;
and so it was done viz. 200 l. to the Doctor of Divinity, 200 Marks to the
Knight, 40 l. to the Clerk, 120 l. to the Woman. And it was said, that Creare
ex ihilo, quando bonum est, est divinum: sed creare aliquid ex nihilo, quando
est malum, est diabolicum: et plus Maledicite noc^nt quam Benedicite docent.

Hill. 2 Jac. Regis.
Theodore Tomlinson brought an Action of account for Goods against one Philips
in the Common Pleas; and thereupon Philips sued Tomlinson in the Admiralty,
supposing the Goods to have been received in Foreign Parts beyond Sea; and
Tomlinson being committed, for refusing to answer upon his Oath to some
Interrogatories, brought his Habeas Corpus. Upon which it was resolved by the
Court of Common plea, in thr^e Points, viz.

1. That the Court of Admiralty has no Cognizance of things done beyond Sea;
and this appears plainly by the Statute 13 R. 2. cap. 5. and the 19 H 6. fol. 7.

2. That the Proceedings in the Court of Admiralty, are according to the Civil
Law; and therefore the Court is not of Record, and so cannot assess a Fine, as
the Judges of a Court of Record may.

3. It does appear, that the Interrogatories were of such things, as were
within their Jurisdiction, and the Parry ought by Law to answer.

This Case was intended by my Lord Coke, to be inserted into his 7th Report,
but that the King commanded it should not be Printed; but the Judges resolved
ut supra.

Corven's Case, Right to S^ats in the Church.
Corven did Libel against Pym for a Seat in a Church in D^vonshire: And Pym, by
Sergeant Hutton, moved for a Prohibition upon this Reason; that himself is
seized of a House in the said Parish; and that he and all whose Estates he has
in the House, have had a Seat in an Isle of the Church: And it was Resolved by
the Court, that if a Lord of a Manor, or other Person, who has his House and
Land in the Parish, time out of mind, and had a Seat in an Isle of the same
Church; so that the Isle is proper to his Family, and have maintained it at
their Charges; that if the Bishop would dispossess him, he shall have a
Prohibition: But for a Seat in the Body of the Church, i^ a Question arises,
it is to be decided by the Ordinary, because the Freehold is to the Parson, and
is common to all the Inhabitants. And it is to be presumed, that the Ordinary
who has Cure of Souls, will take Order in such Cases, according to right and
convenience; and with this agrees 8 H. 7. 12. And the Chief Justice Dame Wick
her Case, 9 H. 4. 14. which was, The Lady brought a Bill in the King's Bench
against a Parson, Quare Tunicam unam vocatam, A Coat Armor, and Pennons, with
her Husband Sir Hugh Wick his Arms, and a Sword, in a Chapel where he was
buried; and the Parson claimed them as Oblations: And it is there holden, That
if one were to sit in the Chancel, and has there a place, his Carpet, Livery,
and Cushion, the Parson cannot claim them as Oblations, for that they were
hanged there in honor of the Deceased: the same Reason of a Coat Armor, etc.
And the Chief Justice said, the Lady might have a good Action, during her Life,
in the Case aforesaid; because she caused the things to he set up there; and
after her death, the Heir shall have his Action, they being in the nature of
Hire-looms which belong to the Heir. And with this agrees the Laws of other
Nations, Bartho. Cassan^us, sol. 13. Co^cl. 29. Actio^ dat si aliquis arma in
aliquo loco posita deleat aut abrasit, etc. and in 21 Ed. 3. 48. in the Bishop
of Carlisle's Case.

Note, That in Easter Term, 10 Jacob. it was Resolved in the Star Chamber, in
the Case between Huss^y, and Katharine Leyton, that if a man have a house in
any Parish and that he, and all those whose Estate he has, have used to have a
certain Pew in the Church; that if the Ordinary will displace him, he shall
have a Prohibition; but where there is no such Prescription, the Ordinary shall
dispose of common and vulgar Seats.

Earl of Shrewes buryes Case.
Sir Humphry Winch, Sir James Ley, Sir Anthony St. Ledger, and Sir James
Hulles^on, certified the Lords of the Council, by Command from them, by Letters
dated 28. Martii, 1612. of the Claim of Gilbert Earl of Shrewesbury to the
Earldome of Waterford, and Barony of Dungarvan in Ireland, as follows.

King Henry the Sixth, by Letters Patent in the 20th. year of his Reign, did
Grant to his Cousin, John Earl of Shrewsbury, in consideration of his Loyal
Services in the City and County of Waterford, pro se, etc. ipsum in Comitem
Waterford, una cum stilo et titulo ac nomine ac honor eisdem debitis ordinamus
and creamus, habendum to the said Earl, and his Heirs-males of his Body; and
further, did Grant the Castles, Lordships, etc. of Dungarvan to the said Earl
and the Heirs-males of his Body, To hold, etc. of the King and his Heirs by
Homage and Fealty, and by the Service of being his Majesty's Seneschal in
Ireland. After in the Parliament, called Des Absentees, holden at Dublin in
Ireland 10. Maii, 28 H. 8. It was enacted by reason of the long absence of
George, Earl of Shrewesbury out of the said Realm, That the King, his Heirs,
etc. shall enjoy in right of his Crown of England, all Honors, Manors,
Castles, etc. and all and singular possessions, etc. as well Spiritual as
Temporal, which the said George Earl of Shrewesbury and Waterford, or any
other Persons had to his Use, etc. King Henry the 8th. by his Letters Patents
dated 29th. of his Reign, reciting the said Statute, Nos praemissa
Considerantes, etc. did Grant to the said Earl and his Heirs the Abbey of
Rufford with the Lands thereunto, etc. in the County of Nottingham, and the
Lordship of Rotheram in the County of York, the Abbeys of Chestersteld,
Shirbrook, and Glossa^dale in Derbyshire, with diverse other Lands, etc. to be
holden in Capite: And the Questions were as follows.

1. Whether by the long absence of the Earl of Shrewsbury out of Ireland, the
Title of the Honor be lost and forfeited, he being a Peer of both Realms, and
refiding here in England.

2. Whether by the Act Des absent^es, 28 H. 8. the Title of Dignity of Earl of
Waterford be taken from the said Earl as well as the Land, etc.

Afterward by other Letters Patents dated 27th. of Sept. 1612. the two Chief
Justices and Chief Baron were required to consider of the Case, and to certify
their Opinions; which Case being argued by Council learned in the Law in behalf
the said Earl, and they having taken great advisement; It was unanimously
Resolved by them all as follows:

1. As to the first, Resolved, That since it does not appear what defense was
requisite; and that the Consideration Executory was not found by Office to be
broken in that Point, the said Earl of Shrewsbury notwithstanding does remain
Earl of Waterford.

2. As to the second, It was Resolved, That the said Act 28 H. 8. Des
Absente^s, does not only take away the Possessions given him at his Creation,
but also the Dignity it self: for though one may have a Dignity without
Possession, yet is it very inconvenient, that Dignity should be clothed with
Poverty: and so it was resolved in the Lord Ogles Case, in Edw. 6. Reign; as
the Baron of Burleigh 35 El^z. did report.

The cause of Degradation of George Nevil Duke of Bedford is worth observation,
which was done by Act of Parliament 16 June, 17 Ed. 4. which Act reciting the
making the said George Duke, sets forth the cause of his Degradation in these
words: And for so much, as it is openly known, that the said George has not,
or by Inheritance may have, any livelihood to support the said Name, Estate,
and Dignity, etc. Therefore the King, by Advice of his Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons, etc. Enacteth, etc. That from henceforth the same
Creation of the said Duke, and all Names of Dignity given to the said George,
or to John Nevil his Father, be void and of none effect. Wherein are to be
observed;

1. That though the Duke had not Possessions to maintain his Dignity, yet it
could not be taken from him but by Act of Parliament.

2. Great Inconveniences follow, where there is great State and Dignity, and
no means to maintain it.

3. It is good reason to take away such Dignity by Act of Parliament; and then
the Act shall be expounded, to take away such Inconvenience. And though the
Earl of Shrewsbury be of great Honor, Virtue, and Possessions in England; yet
it was not the Intention of the Act to continue him Earl in Ireland, when his
Possessions there were taken away.

And where it was objected, that the general words Honors and Hereditaments,
are explained and qualified by the said Relative subsequent, which the said
George, or any to his use has: Now in regard no man can be seized of the said
Digni^y, therefore the Act does not extend to it. It Is answered, that is to be
understood, Reddendo singula singulis; and these words which the said G. E.
has, are sufficient to pass the Dignity: and with this agrees all the Judges
Opinions in England in Nevils Case upon the like in the Statute 28 H. 8. in 7th
Part of my Reports, sol. 33, and 34.

Hill. 2 Jacob. Regis.
Jurisdiction of the Court of Common Pleas.
In the last Term, by the King's Commands, the Justices of the Kings Bench, and
Barons of the Exchequer, were assembled before the Lord Chancellor Ellesmere,
at York-house, to deliver their Opinion, Whether there was any Authority in our
Books, that the Justices of the Common-Bench may grant Prohibitions; or whether
every Plea ought to be pending in the Court for such cause: And the King would
know their Opinions. The Judges took time till this Term; and then Fleming
Chief Justice, Tanfield Chief Baron, Saig, Altham, Crook, Bromley, and
Dodderidge: ( Yelverton and Williams Justices, being dead since last Term) did
deliver their Opinions to the Lord Chancellor; That the Presidents of each
Court are sufficient Warrant for their Proceedings in the same Court; and for a
long time, and in many Successions of Reverend Judges, Prohibitions upon
Information, without any other. Plea pending, have been granted, Issues tried,
Verdicts and Judgments given upon Demurrer: All which being in force, they
unanimously agreed to give no Opinion against the Jurisdiction of the
Common-Bench in this Case. See my Treatise of the Jurisdiction of the
Common-Bench in this Point.

Hill. 10 Jac. Regis,
Parliament in Ireland.
The Lords of the Council did write to the two Chief Justices, and Chief Baron,
to look into Poynings Act made 10 H. 7. in Ireland, and to consider thereof,
and certify what shall be fit to be held concerning the same; their Letter
bore date, Ultimo Janii 1612. Upon which, in this Term, the said Chief
Justices, Chief Baron, Attorney and Solicitor General, were assembled two days
at Sergeants Inn: And they considered not only of the said Act 10 H. 7. c. 4.
called Poynings Act; but also of an Act made in Ireland, 3 and 4 P. and M. c.
4. Entitled, An Act declaring how Poynings Act shall be expounded and taken;
for by the said Act 10 H. 7. it is provided, That no Parliament be hereafter
holden in Ireland, but when the Kings Lieutenant and Council there first
certify the King, under the Great Seal of that Land, the causes, etc. and such
causes, etc. affirmed by the King and his Council, to be good and expedient for
the Land, and his License thereupon, etc. A Parliament to be holden after the
former before, etc. And any Parliament holden contrary etc. to be void in Law.
Upon which Act, diverse Doubts were conceived.

1. And first, Whether the said Act 10 H. 7. does extend to the Successors of
H. 7. the Act speaking only of the King generally, and not his Successors.

2. If the Queen Mary were within the word King, and both were held
affirmatively: for the word King being spoke indefinitely, does extend in Law
to all his Successors: And this is so expounded by the Act 3 and 4 P. and M.
viz. That the said Act 10 H. 7. shall extend to the King and Queens Majesty,
her Heirs and Successors. Secondly, where Povnings Act says the Kings
Lieutenant and Council, the said Act 3 and 4 P. and M. explains it to extend to
all other Officers the King shall Depute, by what Name soever.

3. The greatest Doubt was upon these words of Poynings Act; And such Causes,
Considerations, and Acts, affirmed by the King and his Council, to be good and
expedient for the Land, etc. Whether the King may make any change or alteration
of the Causes, etc. which shall be transmitted hither from the Lieutenant and
Council of Ireland: for that it is not affirmative, but correction and
alteration of them: and therefore it was necessary to explain, that the Act 3
and 4 P. and M. was in these words; Either for the passing of the said Acts,
and in such form and tenor as they should be sent into England; or else for the
change or alteration of them, or any part of them.

4. Another Doubt arose from these words; That d^ne, a Parliament to be had: If
at the same Parl. other Acts, which have been affirmed or altered here, may be
Enacted there, which is explained by the said last Act in these words, viz. For
passing and agreeing upon such Acts, and no others, as shall be returned, etc.

5. A fifth Doubt arose from the same words; Whether the Lieutenant and Council
of Ireland, after the Parliament begun, and pendente Parliamento, may upon
debate there transmit any other Considerations, etc. the which said Act 3 and 4
P. and M. is by express words explained, they may.

And it was unanimously Resolved, That the Causes, Considerations, and Acts,
transmitted hither under the Great Seal of Ireland, ought to be kept in the
Chancery in England, and not be remanded.

2. I^ they be affirmed, they must be transcribed under the Great Se^l, and so
returned into Ireland.

3. If the Acts transmitted hither be in any part altered or changed here, the
Act so altered must forthwith be returned under the Great Seal of England, for
the Transcript under the Irish Great Seal, to remain in Chancery here shall not
be amended; but the Amendment shall be under the English Great Seal. See 10 H.
6. 8. which begins, Mich. 18 H. 6. Rot. 46. coram Rege: how a Parliament was
holden there before Poynings Act. See also another Act made in Ireland the same
10 H. 7. c. 22. vide R. 3. 12. Hibernia habet Parliamenta and faciunt leges and
nostra statuta non ligant ^os, quia non mittunt milites ad Parliamentum: sed
personae co^um sunt subjecti Regis, sicut inhabitant^s Calinae, Gascogniae, and
Guienae.

But question is made of this in some of our Books; vid. 20 H. 6. 8. 32 H 6 25.
1 H. 7. 3. 8 H. 7. 10. 8 R. 2. Precess 204. 13 Ed. 2. Tit. Bastard, 11 H. 47. 7
Ed. 4. 27. Plow. Comment. 368. 13 Eliz. Dyer 35. 2 Eliz. Dyer 366. Calvin's
Case, 7th of my Reports 226. 14 Ed. 3. 184. A Pr^bend in England, made Bishop
of Dublin in Ireland, his Prebendary is vo^d. See the S^atute of Ireland, etc.
That the Acts of Parliament made in England, since the 10 H. 7. do not hind
them in Ireland; but all made in England before the 10 H. 7. by the Act made in
Ireland, 10 H. 7. c. 22. do bind them in Ireland.

Note, Cambden King at Arms told me, that some held, if a Baron dies, having
Issue diverse Daughters, the King confer the Dignity to him who marryes any of
them, as has been done in diverse Cases, viz. In the case of the Lord Cromwell,
who had Issue diverse Daughters: And the King did confer the Dignity upon
Burchier, who married the youngest Daughter, and he was called Cromwell; and so
in other Cases.

Note, (by Linwood) it appears by the Canons Ecclesiastic, none may exercise
Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, unless he be within the Orders of the Church;
because none may pronounce Excommunication, but a Spiritual Person: But now by
the 37 H. 8. c. 17. a Doctor of Law or Register, though a Layman, may execute
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

No Ecclesiastical may cite a Churchwarden to the Court, but so as he may
return home the same day. Also the Canons limit how many Courts, Ex Officio,
they may have in a year.

Mich. 11 Jac. Regis.
Note, If a man give to one of his Children a certain sum in his life, and
after dies; though this is not given as a Child's full Portion, yet it shall be
sufficient for him: But if the Father by Writing declare, that it is but part
of a Child's portion, then he shall have a full Child's part, otherwise not.

Note, It was holden by the Judges in the King's Bench, That if a man be
possessed of a House and Term for years, does devise for years, does demise
this to his Wife for Life, the remainder over the dies, all his Debts being
paid; If the Widow enters generally, and converts the profi^s to her own use,
and not to pious Works, this is a Determination of her Election. And this is
the general case; and therefore it is good that it be specially found.

H^yn's Case.
In the Lent Assize holden at Leicester, 11 and 12 Jac. the Case was, One
William Haynes had dug up the several Graves of three men and one Woman in
the Night, and had taken their Winding-Sheets from their Bodies, and buried
them again: And it was Resolved by the Justices at Sergeants Inn in
Fleetstreet, that the property of the Sheets remains in the Owners, that is, of
him that had the property therein, when the dead body was wrapped therewith; as
in 11 H. 4. If Apparel be put upon a Boy, this is a Gift in Law, for the Boy
has Capacity to take it; but a dead Body, being but a Lump of Earth, has no
capacity: Also, it is not a Gift to the Person, but bestowed on the Body, for
the Reverence toward it, to express the hope of Resurrection. And therefore at
the second Assizes he was severally Indicted for taking these Sheets: The first
Indictment was of Petty-Larceny, for which he was whipped: And at the same
Assizes he was Indicted for the Felonious taking the other three Sheets, for
which he had his Clergy, and escaped Death.

Hill. 11 Jacobi Regis.
Earl of Derby's Case.
In Chancery between Sir John Egerton Plaintiff, and William Earl of Dirby,
Chamberlain of Chester, and others, Defendants; It was Resolved by the Lord
Chancellor, the Chief Justice of England, the Master of the Rolls, Dodderidge
and Winch Justices,

1. That the Chamberlain of Chester, being sole Judge of Equity, cannot Decree
any thing wherein himself is party: but in such Case, the Suit shall be heard
here in Chancery, coram Domino Rege.

2. If the Defendants dwell out of the County Palatine, he who has to complain
in Equity, may complain here in Chancery: And therefore the Suit shall be here
in Chancery, Ne Curia Domini Regis deficient in justitia exhibenda: Else the
Subject shall have good Right, and yet have no Remedy. And this pursues the
Reason of the Common Law, 13 Ed. 3. Tit. Jurisdiction, 8 Ed. 2. Ass. 382. 5 Ed.
3. 30. 30 H. 6. 6. 7 H. 6. 37. For where the particular Courts cannot do
Justice to the Parties, they shall sue in the Kings general Courts at
Westminster, 11 H. 4. 27. 8 Ed. 4. 8.

3. It was Resolved, That the King cannot grant a Commission to any to
determine any matter of Equity, but it ought to be determined in Chancery,
which has had Jurisdiction in such case time out of mind, and had allowance by
Law: whereas such new Commissions have been resolved to be against Law, as was
agreed in Pott's Case.

4. Upon Consideration of the Lord Dyer, and other Justices in Queen
Elizabeth's time, concerning the Jurisdiction of the County Palatine; It was
Resolved, That for things Transitory, though in truth they be in the County
Palatine, the Plaintiff may allege them to be done in any place of England,
and the Defendant may not plead to the Jurisdiction of the Court, See Dyer, 13
Eliz. sol. 202, 716.

Forms and Orders of Parliament.
In the House of Commons, when the Speaker is chosen, he in his place where he
shall first sit down, shall disable himself, and pray them to proceed a new
Election: But after he is put into the Chair, then he shall pray them that he
may disable himself to the King.

Note, The King, the first day of the Parliament, shall sit in the Upper-House;
and there the King, or Chancellor by his Command, shall show the Causes of
Calling the Parliament; and in Conclusion of the Oration, the Commons are
commanded to choose a Speaker; which after 2 or 3 days they present, where He
makes an Oration, disabling himself, etc.

In the Lower House when a Bill is read, the Speaker opens the parts of it, so
that each Member may understand the intent thereof; and the like is done by the
Lord Chancellor in the Upper House: Then upon the second Reading, sometimes it
is Engrossed without Commitment: Then it is put to the Question; and so in the
Upper House: But neither in the Upper or Lower House, the Chancellor or
Speaker, shall not repeat a Bill, or an Amendment but once.

When a Bill is committed to the second Reading, then if Committees do amend it
in any Point, they shall write their Amendments in a Paper, and shall direct to
a Line; and what Words shall be interlined, and where; and then all shall be
engrossed in a Bill.

And if a Bill pass the Commons House, and the Lords amend it, they do as
before show the Line, etc. and after the Amendments are engrossed, with
particular References, and the Bill sent down to the Commons, the Amendments
are road three times; and so e^converso, of a Bill passing the Upper House.

No Lord, Knight, Citizen, or Burgess, may speak above once to one Bill in one
day.

No private Bill ought to be read before public Bills.

In the Commons House, those that are for the New Bill (if there be a Question
of Voices) shall go out of the House; and who are against the Bill, or for the
Common Law, or any former, shall fit still, for they are in possession of the
Old Law.

In the Upper House, two Lords are appointed to number the Voices.

In both Houses, he that stands up first to speak, shall speak first without
difference of Persons.

When a Bill is engrossed at the third Reading, it may be amended in the same
House in matter of substance, ^ fortiori, the Error of the Clerk in the
engrossing may be amended, etc.

P^sch. 12. Jac. Regis.
Walter Chute's Case.
Walter Chute Sewer to the King, exhibited a Petition to the King, That for
safety of the Realm, etc. that he would erect a new Office to Register all
Strangers within the Realm, except Merchant-Strangers, to be kept at London,
and to grant it to the Petitioner, with a Fee, or without. And all Strangers,
except Merchant-strangers, to depart the Realm in a certain time, unless they
take a Billet under the said Registers Hand. Which Petition, the Lords of the
Council referred to Me, by their Letters of the 13 November. 1613. to consider
what the Law is in that behalf, etc. And upon Conference with the Justices of
the Common Pleas, and other Justices and Barons at Sergeants Inn in
Fleetstreet, It was Resolved,

That the Erection of such New Offices, for the benefit of a private man, was
against all Law, of what nature soever: Therefore when one Captain Lee made
suit to the King, to have an Office to inventory the Goods of those that dyed
Testate or Intestate, It was Resolved by my Lord Chancellor, and my Self, That
such Grant shall be utterly void, being both against the Common Law, and the
Statute 21 H. 8. In like manner, when another sued to have the Registring of
Birth-dayes, and the time of death, etc. So Mich. 19 Jac. To make a New Office
in the King's Bench only for making Lattitats, was resolved void. So Littletons
Suit, to name an Officer to be a Genesis Reg. etc. But the Suit was rejected
(notwithstanding the fair Pretenses of it) by the two Chief Justices, and
others: See Hill. 12 Jac. Regis.

2. Secondly, It was Resolved, That it was inconvenient for diverse Causes: 1.
For a private man to have private ends. 2. The numbering of Strangers by a
private man, would in^er a Terror, and other Kings and Princes will take
offense at it. 3. It is to be considered, what breach it will be to former
Treaties.

3. As to the third, It may be performed without any Inconvenience; and so it
was divided by the Lord Burleigh, and other Lords of the Council, 37 Eliz. To
write Letters to the Mayors, Bailiffs, etc. of every City, Borough, etc. where
any strangers are resident, to certify how many, and of what quality, etc.
which they are to know, in respect of their Inhabitants, etc. and this may be
done without any Writing; which being shown to the Lords, was by them well
approved, and the Suits utterly disallowed.

December. 3. Anno 3 H. 8. Commission was granted to diverse, to certify the
number of Strangers, Artificers, etc. within London and Suburbs, according to
the Statutes. See Candish Case, 29 Eliz.

13 Eliz. A Grant of an Office to Thomas Kniv^t, to examine his Majesty's
Auditors, and Clerks of the Pipe, etc. Resolved by the Court to be against Law,
for it belongs to the Barons who are Judges, 25 Eliz. A Grant of an Office to
Thomas Lichfield, to examine all Deceits, etc. of the Queens Officers for 8
years; Resolved to be void.

Sub-poena's in Chancery, belonged anciently to the Six Clerks; Queen Elizabeth
granted the same to a particular man.

Affidavits Filing and keeping, belonged to the Register; King James granted
them to a particular man: So the erecting and putting down Innes did belong to
the Justice of Peace; the same King granted it to a particular man: So likewise
the taking of Depositions, etc.

The Office of Alneger, granted by the King to Simon Darlington, and the Fees
limited. The Drawing, Engrossing, and Writing all Licenses, and Pardons,
granted to Edward Bacon, with former Fees, and a Restraint to all others. The
Spa Office granted to Thomas George, and others during life, with the Fee of 2
s. and a restraint to others. The Office of making and Registring all manner of
Assurances and Policies, etc. granted to Richard Gandler, Gent. with such Fees,
as the Lord Mayor and others should rate, and a Restraint to others, etc. The
Office of writing Tallies, and Counter-Tallies, granted to Sir Vincent Skinner.
The Office of engrossing Patents to the Great Seal, with increase of Fees,
granted to Sir Richard Young, and Mr. Pie. Sed de hoc quaere.

Sir Stephen Proctor's Case.
In an Information in the Star Chamber, against Stephen Proctor, Berkenhead,
and others, for Scandal and Conspiracy against the Earl of Northampton, and
the Lord Wooton; At the Hearing of the Case, were present eight Lords, viz. the
Chief Baron, the two Chief Justices, two Bishops, one Baron, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, and the Lord Chancellor: And the three Chief Justices, and the
Temporal Baron, condemned Sir Stephen Proctor, and fined and imprisoned him:
But the Lord Chancellor, the two Bishops, and the Chancellor of the Exchequer,
acqui^ted him. And the Question was, if Sir Stephen Proctor shall be condemned
or acquitted: And the matter was referred to the two Chief Justices, calling to
their assistance the Kings Learned Council.

And first they Resolved, That this Question must be determined by the
Presidents of the Court of Star Chamber, that Court being against the Rule and
Order of all Courts: For in all other Courts, if the Justices are equally
divided, no Judgment can be given: So also is it in the Parliament; and
therefore this course must be warranted by the Custom of the Court. And as to
that, two Presidents only were produced, viz. One in Hillary Term, 39 Eliz.
Gibson Plaintiff, and Griffith and others Defendants, for a Riot; where at
Hearing, 8 being present, 4 gave Judgment, that the Defendants were guilty, and
4 ^ contra, and no Sentence of Condemnation was ever entered, because the Lord
Chancellor was one of the 4 that acquitted them. The other was in Hillary 45
Eliz. in an Information against Katherine and others, for Forging a Will, etc.
where 4 finding the Defendants guilty of Forgery, and 4 only of Misdemeanour,
whereof the Lord Chancellor was one, Sentence was entered according to the
Chancellors Voice; and no other President could be found in this Case, as I
reported this Term.

Concerning Benevolence.
Note, The Exaction under the good Name of Benevolence began thus: When King
Edw. the 4th had a Subsidy granted him by Parl. in the 12th year of his Reign:
because he could have no more by Parl, and with a Parl. he could not have a
Subsidy, he invented this Devise; wherein observe 3 Things:

1. The Cause. 2. The Invention. 3. The Success.

1. The Duke of Burgundy, who married Edw. the 4th Sister, solicited the King
to join in War with him against the French King: whereto he easily consented,
to be revenged of him for aiding the Earl of Warwick, etc. And this was the
cause.

2. The Invention was; The King called before him several times many of his
wealthiest Subjects, to declare to them his Necessity and Purpose to levy War,
and demanded of each of them a Sum of Money; which by the King's extraordinary
courtesy to them, they very freely yielded to. Amongst the rest, there was a
Rich Widow, of whom the King merrily asked what she would give him for
maintenance of his Wars: By my Faith (quoth she) for your lovely Countenance
sake, you shall have 20 l. which being more than the King expected, he thanked
her, and vouchsafed to kiss her: Upon which, she presently swore, he should
have 20 l. more.

3. The Success was, That where the King called this a Benevolence, yet many of
the People did much grudge at it, and called it a Malevolince.

Primo* Ed. 5. The Duke of Buckingham in Guild Hall, London, among other
Things, inveighed in his Speech against this Taxation; and 1 R. 3. c. 2, a
Statute is made against it.

6 H. 7. The King declaring in Parl, that he had just cause of War against the
French King, desired a Benevolence, according to the Example of Edw. 4. and
published, That he would by their open Hands, measure their Benevolent Hearts.
By this means he collected great S^ms of Money, but with some grudge, 11 H. 7.
ca. 20. An Act was made for levying that Benevolence. 20 H. 7. A Commission to
levy what was granted, 11 H. 7.

15 H 8. A Commission under the Great Seal, called A Commission of
Anticipation. 16 H. 8. For War with France, a Benevolence levied, with great
Curses against the Council; for it was for a sixth part of the value in Money
or Plate, against the Subjects good will. 26 H. 8. Another Benevolence levied
by Commission against the Subjects Will* But if the Subjects will of their free
Will give the King any Moneys, this is not prohibited by any Stature: This is
proved by the 11 H. 7. c. 18.

Feb. Anno 40 Eliz. Resolved by all the Justices and Barons, That a free Grant
to the Queen, without coertion, is lawful, and accordingly they granted the
Queen. Quod not a hene; Quia, etc.

Pasch. 12 Jac. Regis.
The Case of Dungannon in Ireland, being a New Corporation, was thus: The King
Constituted the Town of Dungannon to be a Free Borough; Et ulterius volumus,
etc. quod Inhabitant^s Villae praedictae sint unum corpus corporatum per nomen
Praepositio, 12 Burgensium and Communi^atis Dungannon, etc. Et quod ipsi
praedicti Praepositi and Burgenses and successores sui habeant potestaten
eligendi duos Burgenses, etc. ad Parl. etc. And the Doubt was, If this Grant of
Election of Burgesses of Parliament were good, because it was granted but to
parcel of the body, viz. the Provost and Burgesses, and not to the Commonalty.
And the Chief Baron thought this being but a Nomination, it was sufficient to
make the Provost and Burgesses only to have it; but this was denied by all
Justices and Barons: For the power to Elect Burgesses, is an Inheritance which
the Provost and Burgesses are not capable of, and ought to be vested in the
entire Corporation. And so it was Resolved by all, That such a Grant made by
the King should be void; for the Inhabitants have not Capacity to take an
Inheritance; as in 15 Ed. 4. to have Common. And Littleton says in his Chapter
of Burgage, That the Buroughs which send Burgesses to Parliament, were the
most ancient and chief Cities, etc. So that it shall be intended, that at first
they were incorporate. Also, Plus valet saepenumero vulgaris consuetudo, quam
regalis concessio.

But it was Resolved, by H^bbard, Tanfield, Altham, Wi^th, Nicols, and
Haughton, that Quod Volumus was a good word of Grant, as Pigot was of Opinion,
21. Edw. 4. and this shall be employed a Grant to all the Corporation, that the
Provost and Burgesses shall Elect, etc. And regularly, when the Grant is
indefinite, viz. First, Concedimus, an uncertain thing, and ulterius volumus
quod Praepositus and Burgenses and Successores sui eligerint. This shall be
within the first Concedimus to all the Body. But the Chief Justice of England
and Dodderidge thought the contrary.

Note, All the New Corporations were of the same Form, and in none of them is
any Clause to Elect New Burgesses; so that when the modern Burgesses dye, the
power to Elect Burgesses is gone.

Mich. 12 Jacobi Regis.
A Question was moved to the Chief Baron and Justices of Sergeants Inn in
Chancery Lane; That if a Felon be convict, either by Verdict or Confession, if
immediately by his Conviction his Goods and Chattels be forfoited: And it was
said, That if the Felon, after Conviction, pray his Clergy, he then shall
clearly forfeit his Goods and Chattels; for Quodam modo, this is a Flight;
because refusing the Common Law, he flies to Privilege of Holy Church. But it
was Resolved by the chief Baron and Justices, That immediately by his
Conviction, his Goods and Chattels are forfeited, and the praying of his Clergy
is not any Forfeiture: and with this agrees Stamf. sol. 192. a. and also 1 R.
3. And of the same Opinion was the Chief Justice and Justices of Sergeants Inn
in Fleetstreet. Vid. Trin. 41 Eliz. 332.

Mich. 12 Jacobi Regis.
Anne Hungate's Case, in Came. Stell.
In this Term a great Case was heard and determined in the Star Chamber,
between Sir Henry Day, (who dyed pendent the Bill) and Anne his Wife, and
Nicholas Bedingfield Esque and Elizabeth his Wife Plaintiffs: And Anne Hungate
Widow, Sir Robert Wind, Henry Branthwait Esque Thomas Townesend Esquire Thomas
Blomfield Gent. and George Min Gent, Defendants. The Case was thus: Henry
Hoogan Esquire; being seized of the Manor of Hamonds, and of diverse Lands of
East-Bradenham, etc. in Norfolk in Fee; by Deed enfeoffed them in the use of
the said Anne, who took Hungate to Husband, and had Issue by him a Son and a
Daughter, and he dyed. Anne obtained the Wardship of the Son; and after, when
the Son was of the Age of 21 years, wanting only 6 Weeks, by Dedimus
potestatem, directed to Sir Robert Win^e, Henry Branthwayt then Feo^ary, and
Thomas Townesend, they took Cognizance of a Fine of the said Son, being of the
Age aforesaid, and sick: And the Bill charged them all with Practice, in
procu^ing the said Son to acknowledge the said Fine, they knowing him under
Age, and in Wardship as aforesaid; but there was no practice used by any of the
Defendants, but the Son of his own good will levied it: And by Ind^nture, the
use was limited to his Mother the said Anne and her Heirs, with power of
Revocation by the Son, upon tender of 10 s. And this was in consideration, that
the Mother had paid the Debts of his Father, which were very great, and had
obtained the Wardship of him, and to confirm her Jointure: And that his Mother,
if she pleased, might give it to his Brother, by Hungate, who was but of
half-bloud. And it appeared, the Mother knew the Son to be within Age, but the
Commissionars were ignorant of it; nor did they send for the Church-Book, in
which his Age did appear, being in the same Parish. And the Plaintiffs Council
prayed, that the Defendants should be punished for their Misdemeanour; And that
the Women Plaintiffs, who were Cosins, etc. Heirs to the said Son of the entire
blood, should be dis-inherited by the said Fine.

To which it was Resolved, by the two Chief Justices, and chief Baron, That
there was not any Crime punishable by the Law in this Case; for the Judges of
the Law, and of this Court, may punish Offenses, etc. but they cannot create
Offenses: nor do as Hannibal did, to make his Way over the Alps, when he could
find none: for Judicandum enim legibus, and ubi non est lex ibi nec est
transgressio: And therefore if a Fine levied by an Infant, be not Reversed
during his Minority, it is unavoidable in Law, because the Infants Age is to be
tried, Non testium testimonio, non juratorum veredicto, sed Judicis inspectione
solummodo. F. N. B. sol. 21. And for this it was Resolved by the said Justices,
That forasmuch as no Corruption and Circumvention was proved in any of the
Parties, of which they may be Indicted at the Suit of the King, or punished in
this Court, that the Fine shall stand: And it was not apparent to the
Commissioners he was within Age, seeing he wanted but six Weeks; but if they
had known it, it had been a Misdemeanour in them.

And for this, in this Court, Mich. 24. and 25 Elliz. 15. Between William
Cavendish, and Anne his Wife, one of the Coheirs of Henry Knightly, against
Robert Worsley, and Katharine, another Coheir, and Trafford, and others,
Defendants; The Case was, That Robert Worsely, and Katharine his Wife, being
within Age, acknowledged a Note of a Fine, before Trafford and another of the
Defendants, by Dedimus Potestatem; And by the Decree, the Commissioners knew
Katharine was within Age; and therefore every one of them was Fined, but the
Fine stands.

Mich. 38 and 39 Eliz. In this Court one Alexander Gilderbrand seized of Lands
in Windham, in the County of Norfolk, in Fee: one Hubbard procured one Roger to
take upon him the Name of Alexander Gilderbrand, who was then beyond Sea, to
acknowledge a Fine to the said Hubbard, of the said Lands; and they were Fined
in this Court, and the Lands ordered to be re-assured to Alexander, on pain of
a greater Fine: But the Fine was not drawn off the File, nor Damages awarded to
the party grieved.

Mich. 12 Jac. Regis.
Mansfield's Case.
23 Eliz. In the Court of Wards the Case was this: Henry Bushly seized in Fee
of Lands in Northmims, in the County of Hartford, by his Will in writing,
demised the said Lands to Henry Bushly his Son in Tail, the remainder to
William Bushly. And because his Son was within Age, he demised the Education of
him to Thomas Harrison, whom he made his Executor. Afterward it happened, that
Henry the Son became a deformed Cripple, and proved an Idiot, a Nativitate:
which Idiot, by the practice of Nichols, and others, was ravished from his
Guardian, and carried upon men's shoulders to an unknown place, and there kept
in secret, till he had acknowledged a Fine of his Lands to one Bothome, before
Justice Southcot, 9 Eliz. and by Indenture, the use of the Fine was declared to
be to the use of the Cognizee and his Heirs: which Bothome 12 Eliz. conveyed the
said Land to one Henry Mansfield. And 22 Eliz. the said Henry Bushly the Son,
was by Inquisition found an Idiot, a Nativitate: And upon this, 33 Eliz. the
Court of Wards took order for possession of the Lands. And it was moved, That
though the Fine binds the Idiot; yet the Indentures are not sufficient to
direct the Uses. But it war Resolved, That forasmuch as he was enabled by the
Fine as to the Principle, he shall not be disabled to limit the Uses, which are
but as accessory: The same is the Law of an Infant, and a Feme-Court. And the
said Mansfield brought an Action of Trespass in the Common Pleas against one
Trott, Farmer of the said Lands, and the Issue was tried at the Bar; and the
Deformed Idiot brought out of the Court of Wards, to be shown to the Judges of
the Common Pleas, and to the Jurors: And the Judges hearing that Mansfields
Title was under the Fine levied by that Idiot, the Lord Dy^r and Court caused a
Juror, by consent, to be withdrawn; and the Lord Dyer said, That the Judge who
took the Fine was never worthy to take another: yet notwithstanding: all the
Fine stood good.

Mich. 12 Jac. Regis.
Warcombe and Carrel's Case.
20 October. 6 Eliz. In the Star Chamber the Case was, Edward Carrel an
Apprentice of the Laws, for a great sum of money bought the Wardship of Joan,
the Daughter and Heir of Warcomb, in the County of Hereford, and married her to
Edw. Car^el his youngest Son: And after Hill. 5 Eliz. the said Joan fell sick;
and being of the Age of 19 years, and having no Issue, Edward her Husband
persuaded her, to acknowledge a Fine of her Inheritance, by which should be
conveyed an Estate to the Husband and Wife in Tail, the remainder to the right
Heirs of the Wife; and Cognizance was taken by Ded. Potest. directed to Sir
Thomas Sanders, and one Ch^snel of Grays-Inne before Easter, diverse Judges
being here who might have examined her, and on Friday in Easter Week she dyed;
but the Fine, and l'argent du Reign, was entered, as of the last Term, viz.
H^llary Term 4 days before the Wives death. The Original Writ of Covenant bore
Test 15 Jan. ret. Crastin. Pur. and the Ded. Potest. 18 Jan. And James
Warcombe, Cousin and Heir of Joan, complained by Bill against Edw. Carrel, for
getting the said Fine by indirect Pract^ces; and thereupon the Sentence of the
Court was as follows:

This day a right honorable Assembly being in this Court, the matter depending
in the same, between James Warcombe Esque Plaintiff, and Edw. Carrel of London
Gent. Defendan^, as well concerning the validity of a Fine, levied by the said
Edward, and Joan his wife: which ^oan, as the Plaintiff alle^dges, was under
age at the time of the F^^^ levied; and also for certain undue means committed
by the said Edw. Carrel, in the suing out and getting the said Fine; and upon
hearing all that could be alleged on both parts, the said Fine was by the
Opinion of the whole Conrt, adjudged good and effectual in Law. And also no
fault judged to be in the said Edward Carrel, in suing out the said Fine; but
that the some was sued out in du^ form and order of the Laws of this Realm^ and
this is within the Rule, Facta tenent multa quae fieri prohibentur.

And as Carrel was not punished, though he knew his Wife within Age; so nor
Hungate shall be punished, though she knew her Son so; and the rather, by
reason of that ancient Verse,

I^ges Communes sinescit Faemina, isles, M
Clericus ^t Cultor, Judix sibi parcet et ultor.
And by Sentence all were dismissed, etc.

Among the Records in ^he Treasury, Inter placita etc. de Term. Sanct. Mich. 42
Ed. 3. Rot. 27. ^ Cornubi^: Helena filia Hugonis Allo^, brought an Appeal of
Robbery against I aw^ence Boskosleak, Rich. C^horta, Jo. Gilmin, and Joan his
Wife, and others; and the Defendants plead not guilty, and were found not
guilty, Nec unquamse subtraxerunte Iden praedictus Laurentius, and omnes alii,
etc. cant inde quieti. El praedicta Elena pro falso appello suo committitur,
etc. et super hoc praed. Laurentius and alii petunt juxta forman Stat. quod
Ju^atores inquirant quae damna, etc. Et super hoc quaesitum est a praefatis
Juratoribus, etc. Quidicunt quod praed. Laurentius sustinuit ad valentiam 10 l.
etc. et sic singulatim de caeteris etc. dicunt etiam quod Helena praed. non est
sufficient, etc. et quod Johannes Riddel sen. and Jo. Riddel jun. etc.
abettaverunt praed. Helenam, ideo ipsi etc. Out of which Record, these things
are to be observed:

1. Though it is Enacted by the Stat. West. 2. cap. 21. That in this Case
Justiciarii, etc. puniant appellatorem per prisonam unius Anni, etc. so that
they were not Bailable: yet quia eadem Helena praegnans fuit and in periculo
mortis, she was let to Bayl, to have her Body 15 Mich. ad satisfaciendum
praedicto Laurentio et aliis, etc. And the Reason of this is, because the
Common Law requires in every Case convenience; and it is inconvenient a Woman
with Child should remain in Common-Gaol: And the Judges of the Common Law ought
to know what the Moral Poet spoke, Red^ere personae sit convenientia cuique and
agrees with Advice of Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 2.

2. That the Defendants recover their Damages, either wholly against the
Principle, or wholly against the Abettors: and with this agrees Ed. 4. 3.

3. Though the Statute says, Restituant Appellatores damna, etc. yet the
Damages shall be singulatim assessed; for as the Defamation of one may be
greater than another; so the Damages of one may be greater than another.

4. Though the Appellor be not sufficient to pay; yet his body shall be taken
ad satisfaciendum, Quia qui non habet in aere, luat in corpore.

5. Though the Jurors in the Appeal, have found the Defendants Abettors; yet
insomuch as they are strangers to the Original, they shall not be concluded,
Quia res inter alios actae alteri nocere non debent.

Vide the Book of Entries, Title Appeal Divisione Damages, 1 and 2. Vide
Placita coram rege apud Ebor. in Crast. Sancti Trin. 7 Ed. 3. 44. Divisione.
Indictments are very well worth observing.

Duresse per Jailer.
See there diverse sorts of Presentiments; as of Wollingover, John Alnner, Thomas
Ballivus de Flaxwel and Laughton. Thomas de Mandon Ballivus de Boby of Grafton,
Thomas Carleton Undersheriff of the County of Lincoln, and Hugo de Baxter, etc.

False Affidavits.
In an Action su^le case, it was Resolved, per totam Curiam, That i^ a Sumner
return one certified upon his Oath in Court-Christian, where in truth he was
not, and thereon he is pronounced contumax, and so becomes excommunicate, he
shall have his Action sur le case; for here is damaum et injuria.

And it was Resolved, That Perjury, by which Damages do accrue, may be punished
as a Misuemeanour, at the Suit of the King; and also the Party may have his
Action upon the Case; for Perjury may not be committed with Impunity: And for
that Reason, If Jurors themselves use Perjury, an Attaint ^yes by the
Common Law: as appears by Glanvil, lib. 2. cap. 29. 15 H. 8. Title Attaint, 75.
6 H. 3. ibid. 73 and 75. and in the time of Ed. 1. ^ttaint. 70. West. 1* cap.
38. Vide F. N. B. 109 Vid. 27 H. 6. 25.

In like manner it was agreed, That if one make a false Affidavit, by which the
Party is Arrested with Process of Contempt, he may have an Actio^ sur le case,
and recover Damage: And though the Court-Christian may punish, pro salute
animae; yet they cannot award Damages to he party. And though the matter be
merely Ecclesiastical; yet if the Party grieved has Damages, either by
wrongful Proceedings of the Judge, or M^sfeasans, or Nonfeasans, or falsity of
any Minister, etc. the Party grieved may have an Action sur le c^se, and
recover Damages.

Doctor and Stud. 118, 119. Action sur le Case, lies against the Ordinary, for
a wrongful Excommunication, touching any thing out of his Jurisdiction, etc. So
in Fitz. 47 H. 6. 8. If an Archdeacon refuse to induct the Clerk, etc. he
shall have Action sur le case: Which was affirmed for good Law by all the
Court: with which agrees 26 H. 8. 3. a. If a man proceed against a Prohibition,
the Party may have an Action upon the Case against him, for prosecuting in
Court-Christian. Vid. Trin. 20 Ed. 3. Rot. 46. in the Treasury, Richard
Tresil's Case. So the like, Pasch. 13 Ed. 3. Rot. 78. Philip de Har^eshals
Case. Hill. 32 Ed. 3. Rot. 78. and Trin. 37 Ed. 1. and Mich. 29 Ed. 3. Rot. 19.
similiter: and diverse other Records you may have. See in my Book of Presidents.

Pasch. 14 Jac. Regis.
An Habeas Corpus to the Marshal of the Admiralty, granted in Hillary Term last
past for Haukridge, Prisoner in the custody of the said Marshal, who did
return, Quaed^m causa spolii, etc. contra Haukridge pendet indecisa pro judicio
and sententia paratus, etc. Qui quidem Will: Haukridge remanet donec antedict.
causa per praefat. Daniel Dun suerit and hoc est causa. And also upon another
Habeas Corpus, he made such a Return; and otherwise, Parata sit, etc. Which the
Court took to be very insufficient, and gave diverse days to amend the Return,
and to show the cause of Delay, and why Sentence was not given; and the Marshal
would not amend his Return. Upon which, the Party being in Prison 16 or 18
Weeks, always the Return was est parata, etc. And after in another Writ
returnable, Crast. Ascentionis was another Return of Parata, etc. without
showing cause of Delay. The Return also was insufficient, because Quaedam causa
spolii civilis and maritima quae coram, etc. which is too general, for two
Causes;

1. Because ( spolii) is uncertain, and ought to be specified in some more
certainty: besides, it shows not the value of the Goods.

2. That Maritima est super littus; or, in portu maris: and yet the Admiral
has not Jurisdiction, Super littus maris, or in portu; because they are infra
corpus comitat. And so it was adjudged in Lacies Case, Dyer 15 Eliz. the Abbot
of Ransey's Case, 15 Eliz. Dyer, fol. 236. Pasch. 17 Eliz. in Scaccar. ac
contra Digges; for which cause he ought to have said, Super altum mare intra
Jurisdictionem Admiralli. See the Stat. 13 R. 2. c. 5. 2 H. 4. c. 11 19 H. 6. 7.

For the first, all the Court Resolved, that it was insufficient; also there
was shown no time of the spoil: And for this, in the same Term, the said
Haukridge was bailed in open Court till the next Term, according to the Books,
6 H. 6. 44. 28 H. 8. c. 15.

Note, It was said by some, That when Judgment is given, that one shall be
hanged till he be dead; the King cannot alter the Judgment, and command that he
shall be beheaded: for the Execution ought to be conform to the Judgment: and
with this accords 35 H. 6. fol, 58. and Stamf. lib. 1. fol. 13. Vide 27 Ass.
pl. 41. F. N. B. 144. 22 Ass. pl. 49. Duke of Somersets Case; and the Lord
Sturtons Case in Queen Mary's time; and the Lord Datres his Case in H. 8. both
which were hanged for Felony.

It was Resolved also, That King H. 8. could not by the Law behead his Wives
for Treason: for judicandum est legibus, non exemplis.

T^i^. 9 Jacob. Regis.
In this Term, I moved the Justices in Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet, upon the
Stat. 27 Jac. cap. 6. If the Justices of Peace may make a special Warrant to
Constables, etc. to have the bodies of parties, who are to take the Oath
according to the Statute before them: And it was Resolved by all, una voce,
that they may; and that for two Reasons.

1. When the Statute gave power to Justices of the Peace, to require any
persons etc. to take the Oath; the Law implicit gave power to make a Warrant
to have the body: for Quando lex aliquid alicui concedit, conceditur, et id
sine quo res ipsa esse non potest.

2. It is against the Offices of the Justices, and the Authority given them by
that Statute, that they shall go and seek the parties: Then I moved, if in such
case the Constables may break the Houses of the Parties named in their
Warrants; and it seemed to Us all that they cannot, because they are not
Offenders, till they refuse to take the Oath before them, or commit some
Contempt to the King.

Note, If the person be fugitive in another County, he evades the Statute for
the present; but he may be indicted for Recusancy, and the Indictment be
removed into the King's Bench, and they may make Process against them into any
County of England. Also, if they are in their Houses, the Door being shut, etc.
they may be indicted before the Justices of Assize, or Quarter-S^ssions; and
then after a Venire Facias, etc. by force of a Capias, their Houses may be
broken by the Sheriff, 10 Eliz. cap. 2. to which the 23 Eliz. refers.

Memorandum, Hill. 9 Jac. All the Justices of England, by the Kings Command,
were assembled, to consider of these two Statutes: And in the beginning of this
Term they were recited and debated; and after good consideration and Conference
together, It was Resolved by all, That if one be indicted for Recusancy, the
Court may proceed by Process, upon the Stat. 23 Eliz. or by Proclamation,
according to 28 Eliz. And that the Process upon the Indictment, and Venire
Facias, and Capias, etc. and upon the Capias, the Sheriff, upon Request made to
open the Door, (as in Seymans Case) and when by the Sheriff brought into Court,
he may, upon refusal of taking his Oath, be generally indicted, etc. But the
Justices, upon the second day of Conference, did not speak to the other Point.
And this Resolution being reported to the Lords of the Council a^ Whitehall,
(all the Judges being present, 7 Feb. Hill. 9 Jacob. Regis. We were desired to
put our Resolution into Writing: I answered, The Judges never used so to do:
But if the Attorney or Solicitor came to us, we will deliver our Opinions to
them ore tenus, but not in Writing.

At the third day, upon the Conference in this Term, it seemed upon the Statute
3 Jac. If Justices of Peace, upon Refusal before them, commit any person to
Gaol with Bay^, and mention in their Warrant, the Tender and Refusal, then the
Oath ought to be tendered again. But if the Mittimus do not comprehend the
Tender and Refusal, then they may be generally indicted, as upon Refusal in
upon Court. And it was Resolved, That the major number of Justices of Peace,
who commit the Parties, have Election to commit to the next Assizes, or the
next S^ssions: And observe, that two Justices (whereof one of the Quorum) by
the Stat. 7 Jac. may commit any person above the Age of 18. and under the
Degree of Nobility, alt^ough he be not indicted or convict. And it was Resolved
by all, That if the Indictment be commenced upon the Stat. 3 Jac. upon Refusal
in open Court, then the Indictment may be short and general, etc. Not so, if
the Indictment be upon the Commitment made by two Justices of the Peace. This
is good of any person whatsoever.

Mich. 10 Jac. Regis.
The Earl of Northampton's Case.
1. The Attorney General informed against Thomas Goodrick Gent. Sir Richard Cox
Knight. Henry Vernon Gent. Henry Minors, Thomas Lake Gent. and James Ingrum
Merchant, ore t^nus, in the Star Chamber; and charged Goodrick, that he had
spoken and published of the E. of Northampton, a Peer of the Realm, etc. diverse
false and horrible Scandals, scil. That more Jesuits, Papists, etc. have come
into England, since the Earl of Northampton was Guardian of the Cinque Ports,
then before.

2. That the said Earl had writ a Book openly against Garnet, etc. but secretly
had writ a Letter to Bellarmine, intimating, that he writ the said Book, ad
placandum regem sive ad faciendum populum; and requested, that his Book ^ight
not be answered: and that the Archbishop of Canterbury had told it the King:
and that the said Goodrick told it to one Deusbery, who acquainted the Earl
with it. Goodrick being examined, vouches Sir Richard Cox for Author; Sir
Richard Cox vouched the said Vernon; Vernon cited Lake; Lake, that he heard it
from Sergeant Nichols; Nichols said one Speaket related it to him, and that he
heard it from James Ingrum; and James Ingrum said, that in October he heard the
said words of two English Fugitives at Ligorn; but never published them till
the Earl of Salisbury's death, in May last: And all the Defendants conf^ssed at
Bar, all that they were charged with; and at the Hearing of this Case were 11
Judges, Fleming being absen^ propter aegritudinem.

And so it was Resolved, That the publishing of false Rumors, concerning the
King or the Peers, was in some Cases punishable by the Common Law: But of this
were diverse Opinions;

1. And first, as to Rumors themselves.

1. They ought to be fase and horrible. 2. Such of which Discord may arise
betwixt the King and his People, etc. West. 2. c. 24. 2 R. 2. cap. 53. 3. The
Subversion and Destruction of the Realm, ibidem.

2. As to Persons, they declared to be Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, etc.
Justice of the one Bench or other, or any great Officers, etc. 2 R. 2. c. 5.
And the King is contained within West. 1. c. 34. as appears in Dyer, 5 Mary 155.

3. As to the third Point, it was Resolved, That if one hear such false and
horrible Rumors, it is not lawful to relate them to others: And this appears by
the Stat. viz. That the Party shall be imprisoned, until he find out the party
who spoke them. Which proves, it was an Offense, else he should not be punished
by Fine and Imprisonment.

It was also Resolved, That the Offenders at the Bar, if against them the
Proceedings had been by Indictment, upon these Statutes, no Judgment could be
had against them, that they should be imprisoned, till they found their Author:
for Goodrick did not relate to Deusbery, that he heard from Sir Richard Cox;
but he related the same as of himself: and for this he ought to be indicted for
the words which he himself spoke: and then De non apparentibus and non
existentibus eadem ratio.

And it was Resolved, That if A. say to B. Did you not hear that C. is guilty
of Treason, etc. This is tantamount to a Scandalous Publication. If J. S.
publish, that he has heard generally, without a certain Author, that J. G. was
a Traitor or Thief; there an Action, Sur le case, lies against J. S. And a
Record was vouched, Mich. 33 and 34 Ed. 3. and in the 30 Ass. pl. 10. and in
the Exchequer, Mi^h. 18. Ed. 1. Rot. 4.

The Defendants, in the Case at Bar, for publication of the said words, all the
Defendants were punished by all the presence, una voce, nullo contradicente, by
Fines and Imprisonment; Goodrick and Ingrum were Fined the most, because one
could find no Author for the Words, concerning the Cinque Ports; nor the other,
any other than unknown persons of Ligorn; and therefore 'twas taken as a
Fiction of his own.

Trin. 10 Jac. Regis.
Eastwick's Case i^ Curia Wardorum.
King Philip and Queen Mary, by their Letters Patent de gratia speciali, etc.
granted to Aringal Wade in Fee, the Farm called Milton Grange, in the County of
Bedford; parcel of the Possessions of the late dissolved Monastery of Wooburn.
Tenendum praed. firmam de nobis and successoribus nostris ut de Manerio nostro
de East-Greenwich in Com. Kent, in capite, per servitium vicessimae partis
unius Feodi Militis pro omnibus redditibus, etc. quibusc^nque: Which Grange, by
mean Conveyance, came to Christopher Eastwick; after whose death, the Tenure
was found verbatim, according to the words of the Patents: And the Question
was, If the Tenure was by a mean, as of the said Honor, or in Capite. And
their principal Reason was, That the Letters Patent shall be construed to the
Kings Intention expressed; and in this Case, some Words ought to be rejected,
scil. these words ( in Capite) or these words, ( De mancrio nostro de
East-Greenwich) for both together cannot stand; and then the better shall be
taken for the King: as 5 Mary, Dyer 162. 15 H. 7. 7. 14 Ed. 4. 5. 3 H. 7. 12. 9
H. 7. 9. 6. per Huffey. 13 H. 7. 4. per Fineaux, 19 H. 8. Title Office. Brooks
58. Action.

But it was Answered, and Resolved, That the said Grange was held of the King,
as of the Honor, and not in Capite: And the Reason was, because that Tenure of
the King in Capite, is as much as to say, Tenure in gross, or of the Person of
the King. And it appears by ancient Records, that in Old Time, all Tenures in
Gross, or of the Person of a Subject, were called Tenures in Capite; as in
Claus. 9 H. 3. membr. 28. and many other Records; but of late time, Dicitur de
rege solummodo terras teneri in Capite: And therefore when it is said, Tenendum
de nobis in Capite ut de manerio nostro de East-Greenwich, etc. Inasmuch, as it
is limited to hold of the King who is Chief, it may be vulgarly said, That the
Tenure is in Chief; inasmuch as it is of the King, as of a Manor.

Secondly, It was Resolved, That the abundant Words shall be extended in
Construction of the Law; and not the Words subsequent, which limit the Term in
certainty: And with this Resolution agrees Mich. 17 and 18 Eliz. 345. Nota,
That a Tenure of any ancient Honors; as of Rawl^igh, Hagenet, and Peverel, are,
by way of Usage and Allowance in all Ages, taken to have the effect of a Tenure
in Cap^te, viz. To have all the Lands in Guard, etc. Et non valet ratio contra
experimentum. See Mag. Chart. cap. 31. and 11 H. 7. in Rot. Parliam. not
Printed: and 1 H. 6. c. 4. Bracton, lib. 2. fol. 87. 30 H. 8. Dyer 8. 58. 29 H.
8. Brook, Title Livery, 28. 57. 5 Ed. 3. 5.

Finis Libri Duodecimi.
LIB. 13. and ult.
Mich. Anno 6. Jacobi Regis; In the Common Pleas.
Willow's Case.
IN Trespass brought by Richard Stallon, against Thomas Bradye (which began in
Easter Term, 6 Jac. rot* 1845.) for breaking his House and Close at Fenditton
in Com. Cambridge: And the New Assignment was in an Acre of Pasture. The
Defendant pleads, that the Place where, etc. was the Land and Freehold of
Thomas Willowes, and Richard Willowes; and that he, as Servant, etc. The
Plaintiff for Replication says, That the Place where was parcel of the Manor
of Fenditton, and demisable, etc. by Copy of Court-Roll in Fee-simple; and that
the Lords of the Manor, granted the Tenements, in which etc. to John Stallon
and his Heirs, who surrendered them to the said Willowes, and Willowes, Lords of
the said Manor, to the use of the Plaintiff and his Heirs, who was admitted,
etc. The Defendant rejoyns, and says; True it is, that the Tenements in which
etc. were parcel of the Manor, and demisable etc. and the surrender and
admittance such prout, etc. But the said Bradye further says, That the
Tenements in which, etc. at Richard Stallons Admission, were, and yet are of
the clear yearly value of 53 s. 4 d. and that within the Manor there is such a
Custom, Quod rat^onabilis denariorum sumna legalis monetae Angliae, super
quamlibet admissionem cujus^ibet perso^ae tea^at. per Domi^um vel Dominos
Manerii praed. sive per se^^sch. etc. ad aliquas terras, etc. secundum cons.
Manner. illius debetur, and a tempore quo etc. debitum fuit Dom. etc. tempore
ejusdem admission. pro fine etc. quod idem Dominus vel Domini vel seneschallus
suus Cur. ejusdem M^nerii pro tempore existen. usus fuerit, vel usi fuer. per
tot. tempus praed. in plena Cur. Man^r. illius pro admissione ejusdem personae,
seu earund. personar. sic facta assidere and appunctuare. Anglice, Assess and
Appoint eand. rationabil. summam denarior. etc. Et summam sic assessam personae
admissae, etc. solverent etc. eidem Don. etc. And further says, That the
Steward of the said M^nnor, at a Court holden the first of October, Anno quarto
Regis nunc, admitted the Plaintiffs to the Tenements, in which etc. and
assessed and set a reasonable sum of money, viz. 5 l. 6 s. 8 d. viz. Valorem
eo^undem tenementor. per duos annos and non ultra pro fine pro praed.
admissione etc. And the said Steward, at the same Court, gave notice to the
Plaintiff, the said sum was to be paid, etc. And further says, That the
Willowes and Willowes afterward, viz. 2 Novem. in the 4th year aforesaid, at
Fenditto^ aforesaid, requested the said Richard Stallon to pay them the said 5
l. 6 s. 8 d. which the said Richard utterly refused, etc. By which, the said
Richard forfeited to the said Thomas and Richard Willowes all his Right,
Estate, etc. The Plaintiff surjoyneth, and says, that the said sum of 5 l. 6
s. 8 d. etc. was not rationabilis finis, as the said Thomas Bradley above has
alleged, etc. Upon which, the Defendant does demur in Law, etc. And in this
Case, these Points were Resolved by Coke Chief Justice, Walmesly, Warberton,
Daniel, and Foster, Justices.

1. If the Fine had been reasonable, yet the Lords ought to have set a certain
time and place when the same should be paid, because it stands ^^on the point
of Forfeiture. As if a man assures Lands to one and his Heirs, upon condition
to pay to the Bargainee and his Heirs 10 l. at such a place; or that he and his
heirs shall re-enter: there, because no time is limited, the Bargainor ought to
give notice to the Bargainee, etc. when he will tender the money, and he cannot
tender it when he pleases: and with this agrees 19 Eliz. Dyer 244. So in the
Case at the Bar, the Copyholder is not bound to carry his Fine always with
him, etc. And though that the Rejoinder is, that the Plaintift refused to pay
the Fine; so he might well do, when the Request is not lawful or reasonable:
And he that is to pay a great Fine, as 100 l. or more, it is not reasonable
that he carry it always with him; And the Copyholder was not bound to do it,
because the Fine was uncertain and arbitrable; as was Resolved in Hulbarts
Case, in the 4th Part of my Reports, among the Copyhold Cases.

2. It was Resolved, That though the Fine be uncertain and arbitrable; yet it
ought to be secundum arbitrium boni viri; and it ought to be reasonable,
because Excessus in re qualibet, jure reprobatur communi: for the Common Law
forbids any excessive Distress, as appears 41 Ed. 3. 26. And this does appear
to be the Common Law; for the Statute of Articuli super Chartas extends only
for a grievous Distress taken for the Kings Debt. See F. N. B. 147. a. and 27
Ass. 51. 28 Ass. 50. 11 H. 4. 2. and 8 H. 4. 16. etc. And so if an excessive
Amerciament be imposed in any Cou^t-Baron, or other Court not of Record, the
Party shall have Moderata mis ericordia. And Magna Charta is but an Affirmance
of the Common Law in this Point. See F. N. B. 75. And the Common Law gives an
Assize of Sovient Distress, and multiplication of Distress found, which is
Excess. And with this agrees 27 Ass. 50, 51. F. N. B. 178 b. And if Tenant in
Dower, has Tenants at Will, that are rich, and makes them poor, by excessive
Tallages and Fines, this is wast, F. N. B. 61. b. 16 H. 3. Wast. 135. and 16 H.
7. Vide also the Register Judicial. fol. 25. B. Waste lies in Exulando
Henricum and Hermanum, etc. Villeynes, Quorum quilibet tenet unum messuagium
and unam Virgat. terrae in Villenagio in Villa praed. etc. By all which it
appears, the Common Law forbids excessive oppressing of Villains, etc. So in
the Case at Bar, though the Fine is uncertain, yet it ought to be reasonable;
and so it appears by the Custom alleged by the Defendant. See Hubbard's Case
before, in the 4th Part of my Reports. And when reasonableness concerning a
Fine is in question, the same shall be determined by the Court, in which the
Action depend, 21 H. 6. 30. 22 Ed. 4 27. and 50 29 H. 8. 32. etc.

3. It was Resolved, That the Fine in the Case at the Bar was unreasonable,
being for the admittance of a Copyholder in Fee-simple, upon a Surrender made;
for this is not like a voluntary Grant, etc. for there Arbitrio Domini res
estimari debet. But when the Lord is compellable, to admit him to whose use the
Surrender is; And when C^stuy que use is admitted, he shall be in by him who
made the Surrender, and the Lord is but an Instrument to present the same.

4. It was Resolved, That the Surjoinder is no more, than what the Law says:
And for the Causes aforesaid, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

And Coke Chief Justice said in this Case, That if the Court of Admiralty
amerce the Defendant excessively at discretion (as seems by 19 H. 6. 7.) the
same shall not bind the Party; and be it excessive or not, it shall be
determined in the Court, where the Action shall be brought: And a Writ of
Account against a Bailiff or Guardian, Quod reddat ^i rationabilem comp^tum,
etc. for the Law requires Reason, and no excuse or extremity in any thing.

Mich. 6 Jac. Regis. in the Common Pleas:
Porter and Rochester's Case.
This Term Lewis and Rochester, who dwelt in Essex, in the Diocese of London,
were sued for subtraction of Tithes growing in B. in the said County of Essex,
by Porter, in the Court of the Arches of the B. of Canterbury in London: And
the Case was; The Archbishop of Canterbury ^ath a peculiar Jurisdiction of 14
Parishes, called a Deanery, exempt from the Authority of the Bishop of London,
whereof the Parish of St. Mary de Arcubus is the chief: And the Court is called
the Arches, because it is holden there. And a great Question was moved, If in
the said Court of Arches holden in London, he might cite any dwelling in Essex,
for substraction of Tithes growing in Essex; or if he be prohibited by the
Statute 23 H. 8. cap. 9. which after Debate at Bar by Council; and also by Dr.
Ferrard, Dr. James, and others, in open Court; and lastly, by all the Justices
of the Common Pleas: A Prohibition was granted to the Court of Arches. And, in
this Case, diverse Points were Resolved by the Court.

1. That ^^l Acts of Parliament, made by the King, Lords, and Commons, in
Parliament, are parcel of the Laws of England, and therefore shall be expounded
by the Judges of the Laws of England, and not by the Civillians and Cannonist,
although the Acts concern Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. And in 10 H. 7. the
Bishop of London caused on^ to be imprisoned, because the Plaintiff said, he
ought not to pay his Tithes to his Curate: And the imprisoned Party brought his
Action of false Imprisonment, against those that arrested him by the Bishops
Command; and there the Matter is well argued what words are within the Statute,
and what words are not: So upon the same Statute, was Resolved in 5 Ed. 4. in
Keysar's Case, in the Kings Bench; which see in my Book of Presidents: And so
the Statutes of Articuli Cleri de Prohibitione regia: De Circu^ sp^cte agitis,
of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. etc. have always been expounded by the Judges of the
Common Law, as was adjudged in Wood's Case, Pasch. 29 Eliz. So 21 H. 8. cap.
13. See 7 Eliz. Dy^r 233. 15 Eliz. Dyer 251. 14 Eliz. Dyer 312. 15 Eliz. Dy^r
327. 18 Eliz. Dyer 352, and 347. 22 Eliz. Dyer 377.

2. Resolved by Coke Chief Justice, Warb^^ton, Daniel, and Foster, Justices,
That the Archbishop of Canterbury is restrained by the 23 H. 8. cap. 9. to c^^e
any one out of his own Diocese: for Dioc^ses dicitur distinctio, etc. quae
divisa vel diversa est ab Ecclesia alterius Episcopatus and commissa gubernatio
in unius, and is derived a Di, that signifies duo, two; et Electio, quia
separat duas Jurisdictiones: And because the Archbishop of Canterbury has a
peculiar Jurisdiction in London, for this cause it is fitly said in the Title,
Preamble, and Body of the Act, that when the Archbishop sitting in his exempt
Peculiar in London, cites one dwelling in Essex, he cites him out of the Bishop
of Londons Diocese; ergo, out of the Diocese. And in the Clause, of the Penalty
of 10 l. it is said, Out of the Diocese. etc. where the Party dwells; which
agrees with the signification of Diocese before: And the words ( far off) were
put in the Preamble, to show the great mischief that was before the Act; as the
32 H. 8 cap. 33. in the Preamble, it is disseizins with strength. And the Body
of the Act says, such Disseizor, the same extending to all Disseizors: but
Disseizin with force, is the greatest mischief, 4 and 5 Eliz. Dyer 219. So
West. 2. cap. 5. adjudged 44 Ed 3. 18. So 21 H. 8. cap. 15. In all which, the
Case is stronger, than the Case at Bar; there the word ( such) in the Body of
the Act, referring to the Preamble, which is not in our Case.

2. The Body of the Act is, No Person shall be henceforth cited before any
Ordinary, etc. out of the Diocese, or peculiar Jurisdiction, where the Person
shall be dwelling; and if so, then a fortiori, the Court of Arches which sits
in a Peculiar, shall not cite others out of another Diocese. And the words (
out of the Diocese) are meant of the Diocese or Jurisdiction of the Ordinary
where he dwells.

3. Observe, the Preamble of the Act recites expressly, That the Subjects were
called by compulsory Process to appear in the Arches, Audience, and other
Courts of the Archbishopric of this Realm: So that the Intention of the Act
was to reduce the Archbishop to his proper Diocese, unless in five Cases.

1. For any Spiritual Offense or Cause committed, or omitted, contrary to Right
and Duty by the Bishop, etc. which word ( omitted) proves, there ought to be a
Default in the Ordinary.

2. Except it be in Case of Appeal, and other lawful Cause, where the Party
shall find himself grieved by the Ordinary, after the matter there first begun,
ergo, it ought to be first begun before the Ordinary.

3. In case the Bishop or Ordinary, etc. dare not, or will not convent the
Party to be sued before him.

4. In case the Bishop or Judge of the place, within whose Jurisdiction, or
before whom the Suit by this Act should be begun and prosecuted, be party,
directly, or indirectly, to the Matter or Cause of the same Suit.

5. In case any Bishop, or other inferior Judge under him, etc. make Request
to the Archbishop, Bishop, or other inferior Ordinary or Judge; and that to be
done in Cases only, where the Law Civil or Common does affirm, etc.

1. Also there are two Provisoes which explain it also, viz. That it shall be
lawful for every Archbishop, to cite any person inhabiting in any Bishop,
Diocese in his Province for matter of Heresy: by which it appears, that for
all Causes not excepted, he is prohibited by the Act.

2. There is a saving for the Archbishop, calling any Person out of the Diocese
where he shall be dwelling, to the Probate of any Testament: which Provisoe
should be vain, if notwithstanding that Act should have concurrent Authority
with every Ordinary throughout his whole Province: Wherefore it was concluded,
That the Archbishop out of his Diocese, unless in the Cases excepted, is
prohibited by the 23 H. 8. to cite any man out of any other Diocese: which Act
is but a Law declaratory of the ancient Canons, and a true Exposition of them.
And that appears by the Canon, Cap. Romana in sexto de Appellationibus, and
Cap. de competenti in sexto. And the said Act is so expounded, by all the
Clergy of England, at a Convocation at London, Anno 1 Jac. Regis, 1603. Canon
94.

And whereas it is said in the Preamble of the Act, in the Arches, Audience,
and other High-Courts of this Realm: It is to be known, that the Archbishop of
this Realm, before that Act, had power Legantine from the Pope; By which they
had Authority not only over all, but concurrent Authority with every Ordinary,
etc. not as Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. but by his Power and Authority
Legantine. Et tria sunt genera Legatorum; 1. Quidam de latere Dom. Papae
mittuntur, etc. 2. Dativi qui simpliciter in Legatione mittuntur, etc. 3. Nati
seu nativi, qui suarum Ecclesiarum praetextu legatione fingantur, et sunt 4.
Archiepiscopus Cant. Eboracensis, Remanensis, et Pisanis: Which Authority
Legantine is now taken away and abolished utterly.

3. It was Resolved, That when any Judges are by Act of Parliament, if they
proceed against the Act, there a Prohibition lies. As against the Steward and
Marshal of the Household; Quod non teneant placita de libero tenemento, de
debito, de Conventione, etc. So Articuli super Chartas, cap. 3. Register fol.
185. So against the Constable of Dover. So to Justices of Assize; Quod
inquisitiones quae sunt magni exactionis non capiantur in Patria. So to the
Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer^ upon Art. super Chart. c. 4. Stat,
Rutland. cap. ult. See F. N. B. 45. 46, etc. 17 H. 6. 54. vide 13 Ed. 3. Title
Prohibition. So against all Ecclesiastical Judges, upon 2 H. 5. 3. and
therewith agrees 4 Ed. 4. 37. and F. N. B. 43. etc. So the Case upon the Stat.
2 H. 5. c. 15. as appears by the President, 5 Ed. 4. Keysons Case, 10 H. 7. 17.
See Paston's Opinion, 9 H. 6. 3. See the 35 H. 6. 6. when any things is
prohibited by a Statute, if the Party be convicted, he shall be fined for the
Contempt to the Law. And if every person should be put to his Action upon the
Statute, it would increase Suits, and a Prohibition is the shorter and easier
way. And the Rule of the Court was, Fiat prohibitio Curiae Cantuar. de Arcubus.
Inter parts praedict. per Curiam. And Sherly, and Harris, jun. Sergeants at
Law, were at Council of the Case.

Mich. 6 Jac. Reges.
Edward's Case.
The High-Commissioners, in Causes Ecclesiastical, objected diverse English
Articles, against Thomas Edwards of Exeter: As,

1. That Mr. John Walton, being trained up in Oxferd University, was there
worthily admitted to several Degrees of Schools, and deservedly took upon him
the Degree of Dr. of Physic.

2. That he was a Reverend and well-practised man in the Art of Physic.

3. That you the said Thomas Edwards, are no Graduate.

4. That you knowing the Premises, notwithstanding you the said Edwards, etc.
of purpose to disgrace the said Dr. Walton, etc. did, against the Rules of
Charity, write and send to the said Dr. Walton, a lewd and uncharitable Letter,
taxing him therein of want of Skill and Judgment in his Profession, etc. And so
far you exceeded in your said uncivil Letter; that you told him therein, in
plain terms, He may be crowned for an Ass, etc.

5. And further to disgrace the said Mr. Dr. Walton, in the said University,
did publish a Copy of the said Letter to Sir William Courtney, and others; and
in your Letter was contained Sips^lam lichenen mentegram; Take that for your
Inheritance, and thank God you have a good Father. And did you not covertly
imply thereby, that the said Dr. Waltons Father (late Bishop of Exeter) was
subject to the French Pox and Leprosy, etc.

6. That in another Letter you sent to Dr. Maders, Dr. in Physic also, you
named Dr. Walton, and made a Ho^n in your Letter: Whether you meant not
thereby, that they were both Cuckolds; or what other meaning you had.

7. You knowing Dr. Walton to be one of the High Commission in the Diocese of
Exeter; and having obtained a Sentence against him in the Star Chamber, for
contriving and publishing a Libel, did triumphingly say, You had gotten on the
Hip a Commissioner for Causes Ecclesiastical, etc. which you did to disgrace
him, and in him the whole Commission in those Parts.

8. That after the Letter Missive sent to you, you said arrogantly, That you
cared not for any thing this Court can do, for that you can remove this Matter
at your pleasure.

And this Term it was moved to have a Prohibition in this Case; and the matter
was well argued: And at last it was Resolved by Coke Chief Justice, Warberton,
Daniel, and Foster, Justices; That the first six Articles were merely Temporal;
and, in truth, is, in the nature of an Action upon the Case, for Scandal of Dr.
Walton in his Profession of Physic: and therefore, for them a Prohibition does
lie, for diverse Causes.

1. Because the Persons and Matters are Temporal.

2. Because it is for Defamation; which if any such shall be for the same, it
ought to begin before the Ordinary, because it is not such an enormous Offense,
which is to be determined by the High-Commissioners; nor does Suit lie before
them, for calling the Doctor Cuckold, as in the seventh Article: And 'twas
said, the Commissioners ought to incur the danger of Praemunire.

2. It was Resolved, That the Ecclesiastical Judge cannot examine any man upon
his Oath, upon the Intention and Thought of his Heart; for cogitationis poenam
nemo ^moret: for the Proverb says, Thought is free. And therefore for the 6th
and 7th, were Resolved, as well for the Matter, as for the Form, to be such, to
which the Defendant was not compelled to answer: And that to the 7th, he might
justify the same; because it appears upon his own showing, that the Doctor was
sentenced in the Star Chamber: Also, the Libel is mere Temporal; and if it were
Spiritual, such a Defamation is not examinable before the High-Commissioners.

As to the last Article, it appears now by the Judgment of this Court, that
he might well justify the said Words: Also, the Commissioners shall not have
any Conuzance of Scandal to themselves, they being Parties; and such Scandal
punishable by the Common Law, as was resolved in Hales Case in Dyer, and in my
Book of Presidents, Hales Indictment, etc.

The Bishop of Winchester, being Visitor of Winchester-School, and other his
Colleagues, Anno 5 Car. cited the Usher of the said School, by force of the said
Commission, to appear before them, etc. for which they incurred the danger of
Praemunire: So did the Bishop of Canterbury, and his Colleagues, for citing one
Humphry Frank, Master of Arts, and Schoolmaster of Sevennock School, etc. and
proceeding, etc.

Mich. 6 Jac. Regis.
Tailor and Shoyl's Case.
Tailor informed upon the Statute, 5 Eliz. cap. 4. Tam pro Dom. R^ge qua^
prose, in the Exchequer: That the Defendant had used the Art and Mystery of a
Brewer, etc. and averred, That Shoyl the Defendant did not exercise the Art or
Mystery of a Brewer, at the time of making the Act, nor had been Apprentice 7
years, etc. The Defendant demurred in Law, upon the Informa^^on, and Judgment
was given against him by the Barons. And now in this Term, upon a Writ of
Error, the Matter was argued at Sergeants Inn before the two Chief Justices:
And two matters were moved.

1. One, That a Brewer is not within the said Branch of the said Act; for the
words are, That it shall not be lawful to any Persons, other than such as now
use lawfully any Art, Mystery, or Manual Occupation, to set up or use any Art,
Mystery, or Manual Occupation, except he shall have been brought up therein 7
years at least as an Apprentice. And 'twas said, That the Trade of a Brewer is
not any Air, Mystery, or Manual Occupation within the said Branch, because it
is easily and presently learned, and needs not 7 years Apprenticeship to learn
the sam^, it being every Country Housewifes Work: And the Act of H. 8. is, That
a Brewer is not a Handicraft Artificer.

2. It was moved, That the said Averment was not sufficient; for it ought to be
as general, as the Exception in the Statute is.

1. To the first, it was Resolved, That the Trade of a Brewer, viz. To hold a
Common Brewhouse, to sell Beer or Ale to another, is an Art and Mystery within
the said Act: for in the beginning of it, it is Enacted, That no Person shall
be retained for less time than a whole year in any the Services, Grafts,
Mysteries, or Arts of Clothing, etc. Bakers, Brewers, etc. Cooks etc. Upon
which words in the said Branch, the Information is grounded: Also, because
every Housewife brews for her private use; so also she bakes and dresseth meat;
yet none can hold a Common Bakehouse, or Cooks Shop, to sell to others, unless
he has been an Apprentice, etc. And the Act 22 H. 8. c. 13. is explained, That
a Brewer, Baker, Surgeon, and Scrivener, are not Handicrafts mentioned in
certain penal Laws; but the same does not prove, but they are Arts or Mysteries.

2. As to the second, it was Resolved, That the Intention of the Act was, that
none should take upon him any Art, but he who has Skill or knowledge in the
same: for, Quod quisque norit in hoc se exerceat. And so the first Judgment was
affirmed.

Mich. 6 Jac. Regis. In the Common Pleas;
The Case of Modus Decimandi.
Sherly Sergeant moved to have a Prohibition, because a Parson sued to have
Tithes of Sylva Coedua, under 20 years growth in the Weild of Kent, where by
the Custom no Tithes were ever paid of any Wood: And if such a Custom, in non
Decimando, for all Lay People within the said Weild, were lawful or not, was
the Question. And to have a Prohibition, it was said, That though one
particular man shall not prescribe in non Decimando; yet such a general Custom
within a great Country might well be; as in 43 Ed. 3. 32. And the 45 Ed. 3.
Custom 15. where an Abbot purchased Tenements after the Statute etc. and
says, That being Lord of the Town, etc. there was a Custom in the said Town,
that when Tenant cesseth for 2 years, the Lord may enter, etc. And that his
Tenant cessed for 2 years, and he entered: And the Rule of the Court is, Because
it was an usage only in that Town, he was put to answer, by which appears, that
a Custom was not good in a particular Town; that perhaps might be good in a
Country, etc. See 40 Ass. 21. and 27. 39 Ed. 3. 2. See also 7 H 6. 26. b. 16
Ed. 2. Prescription 53. Dyer 363. 22 H. 6. 14. 21 Ed. 4. 15. and 45 Ass. 8.
Doct. and Stud. lib. 2. cap. 55, A particular Country may prescribe to pay no
Tithes for Corn, etc. but with this Caution, that the Minister has sufficient
portion besides to maintain him, to celebrate Divine Service. And fol. 172. it
is holden, That where Tithes have not been paid to Under-^oods, under 20 years
growth, that no Tithes shall be paid for the same: And fol. 174. that such a
Custom of a whole Country, that no Tithes of a Lordship shall be paid, is
good: But the Court would advise, Whether such a Custom of a Town or Country be
good: But in an^ient times, the Parishioners have given or procured to the
Parson, a Wood, or other Lands, etc. To hold to him and his Successors, in
satisfaction of all Tithes of Wood in the same Parish, the Parson so seized of
the same, that without question is a good discharge of his Tithes; and if he
sue for the same, a Prohibition lies.

I will cite an ancient Judgment many years past, Mic. 25 H. 3. Wilts. Rot. 5.
before the King at Westminster; Samson Folyet brought an Attaint upon a
Prohibition, against Thomas Parson of Swindon, because he sued him in the
Spiritual Court, for a Lay^ee of the said Samson in Draycot, contrary to the
Kings Prohibition, etc. and the Parson was condemned in 20 Marks, etc. which
agrees with the Rule and Reason of the Law, continued unto this day: For
Presidents in Ed. 2. Ed. 1. H. 3. and King John, and more ancient, are not to
be now followed, unless they agree with the Law and practice at this day;
Statutes having changed some, and Desuetudo antiquated others. There are two
Points adjudged by the said Record.

1. That satisfaction may be given in discharge of payment of Tithes: And if
the Successor of the Parson enjoy the thing given in satisfaction of the
Tithes, and yet sueth for Tithes in kind, he shall have a Prohibition, because
that he charge his Layfee with Tithes, which is discharged of them: By which
it does appear, that Tithes cannot be discharged, and altogether taken away and
extin^. And herewith agrees the Register, which is the most ancient Law-Book,
fol. 38. By which also it appears, That Tithes may be discharged, and that the
matter of discharge ought to be determined by the Common Law, and not in the
Spiritual Court. Also by the Act of Circumspecte agatis, made 13 Ed. 1. It is
said, S. Rector petat versus Paro^hianos oblationes and decimas debita^ and
consuetas etc. Which proves, there are Tithes in kind; and other Tithes due by
Custom, as a Modus Decimandi etc. And yet it is Resolved, 19 Ed. 3.
Jurisdiction 28. the Ordinance of Circumspecte agatis is not a Statute, and
that the Prelates made the same; and yet then the Prelates acknowledged, That
there were Tithes due by Custom, which ^is a Modus Decimandi. By which it
appears also, that Tithes, by Custom, may be altered to another thing. See 8
Ed. 4. 14. F. N. B. 41. g. vide 3 Ed. 3. 17. 16 Ed. 3. Annuity 24. 40 Ed. 3. 3.
b. and F. N. B. 152. And if the Lord of a Manor has always holden his Manor
discharged of Tithes, and the Parson had before time of memory diverse Lands in
the same Parish of the Gift of the Lord, of which the Parson is seized at this
in Fee; in respect of which, the Parson, nor any of his Pred^cessors, ever had
received any Tithes of the said Manor: If the Parson now sue for Tithes of the
said Manor, the Owner of the Manor may show that special Matter, etc. And the
Proof, that the Lord of the Manor gave the Lands, that Tithes should never be
paid, at this day is good Evidence, to prove the surmise of the Prohibition.

19 Ed. 3. Tit. Jurisdiction 28. It is adjudged, That Title of Prescription
shall be (...) in the Kings Court: And therefore a Medus Lecimandi, which
accrues by Custam and Prescription likewise. It appears 6 H. 4. cap. 6. that
the Pope, by his Bulls, discharged diverse from payment of Tithes, against which
the Act was made, 31 H. 8. cap. 13. Possessions of Religious Persons given to
the King were discharged of payment of Tithes in certain Cases, 32 H. 8. cap.
7. provides all Tithes to be set as formerly, except such as are discharged. So
2 Ed. 6. c. 13. by which appears, one may be discharged of Tithes five ways.

1. By the Law of the Realm, viz. the Common Law, as Tithes shall not be paid
of Coals, Quarries, Bricks, Tyles, etc. F. N. B. 53. and Reg. 54. nor of the
after-Pasture of a Meadow, etc. nor of Rakings, nor of Wood to make Pales, or
Mounds, or Hedges, etc.

2. By the Statutes of the Realm, as 31 H. 8. 13. 45 Ed. 3. etc.

3. By Privilege; as those of St. John's of Jerusalem in England, the
Cistertians, Temptors, etc. as appears 10 H. 7. 277 Dyer.

4. By Prescription; as by Modus Decimandi, annual recompense in satisfaction
as aforesaid.

5. By real Composition; as appears by the Writ cited out of the Register: By
all which appears, That a man may be discharged of payment of Tithes as
aforesaid. So as now it is apparent by the Law of England, both Ancient and
Modern, that a Layman ought to prescribe in Modo Decimandi, and not in non
Decimando; and that, in effe^^, agrees with Thomas Aquinas, in his secunda
secundae, Quaest. 86. ar. ultimo. See Doct. and Stud. Lib. 2. cap. 55. fol.
164. That the Tenth Part is not due by the Law of God, nor by the Law of
Nature, which he calls the Law of Reason: And he cites John Gerson, a Doctor of
Divinity, in a Treatise which he calls, Regulae morales, viz. Solutio
Decimarum Sacerdotibus est de Jure Divino, quatenus inde sustente^tur, sed
quoad tam hanc vei illam assignare aut in alios reditus commutar^ positivi
Juris est. And he holds, that a Portion is due by the Law of Nature, which is
the Law of God: but it pertains to the Law of Man to assign Hane v^l illam
portionem. And says further, That Tithes may be exchanged into Lands, Annuity,
or Rent, etc. And also, that in Italy, and other the East-Countries, they pay
not Tithes, but a certain Portion, according to the Custom: And forasmuch as
the Tenth Part is now due, Ex Institutione Eccl^^^ae, that is, by their Canons;
and it appears by 25 H. 8. cap. 19. That all Canons, etc. made against the
King's Prerogative, etc. are void, and that Law was but Declaratory; for no
Statute or Custom of the Realm can be abrogated by any Cannon, etc. and that
well appears by 10 H. 7. fol. 17. cap. 18.

The second Point, which agrees with the Law at this day, which was adjudged in
the said Record, 25 H. 3. is, That the Limits and Bounds of Towns and Parishes,
shall be trayed by the Common Law, and not by the Spiritual Court. And in this
the Law has great Reason, for thereupon depends the Title of Inheritance of
the Layfee, whereof the Tithes were demanded; for Fines and Recoveries are the
common Assurances of Lay-Inheritances; and if the Spiritual Court should try
the Bounds of Towns, if they determine that my Land lies in another Town, than
is contained in my Fine, Recovery, or other Assurance, I am in danger to lose
my Inheritance; and therewith agrees 39 Ed. 3. 29. 5 H. 5. 10. 32 Ed. 4.
Consultation, 3 Ed. 4. 14. 19 H. 6. 20. 50 Ed. 3. 20. and many other Presidents
to this day. And Note, There is a Rule in Law, that when the Right of Tithes
shall be tried in the Spiritual Court, and the Spiritual Court has
Jurisdiction of the same, that our Courts shall be o^sted of the Jurisdiction,
35 H. 6. 47. 38 H. 6. 21. 2 Ed. 4. 15. 22 Ed. 4. 13. 38 Ed. 3. 36. 14 H. 7. 17.
13 H. 2. Juris^. 19* and when not ousted, 12 H. 2. Jurisdiction 17. 13 ^. 2.
ibid. 19. 7 H. 4. 34. 14 H. 4. 17. 38 Ed. 3. 56. 42 Ed* 3. 12. And the Causes
why the Judges of the Common Law would not permit the Ecclesiastical Judges to
try Modum Decimandi, being pleaded in their Court, is, because that if the
Recompense which is to be given to the Parson, in satisfaction of his Tithes,
does not amount to the value of his Tithes in kind, they would overthrow the
same: And that appears by Linwood, among the Constitutions, Simonis Mepham tit.
de Decimis cap. Quoniam propter, fol. 139. b. verbo Consuetudines. And that is
the true Reason, and therefore a Prohibition lies: and therewith agrees 8 Ed.
4. 14. and the other Books aforesaid, and infinite Presidents. See 7 Ed. 6.
Dyer 79. and 18 Eliz. Dyer 349. the Opinion of all the Justices.

Mich. 6 Jacobi Regis. In the Exchequer;
Baron and Boyse Case.
In the Case between Baron and Boys, in Information upon the Stat. 5 Ed. 6.
cap. 14. of Ingrossers, after Verdict, it was found for the Informer, that the
Defendant had engrossed Apples, against the said Act. The Barons held clearly,
that Apples were not within the Act, and gave Judgment against the Informer,
upon the matter apparent to them, and caused the same to be entered in the
Margin of the Record, where the Judgment was given. The Informer brought a Writ
of Error in the Exchequer Chamber; and the only Question was, Whether Apples
were within the said Act. The Letter of which is, viz. That whatsoever person,
etc. shall ingross, or get into his or her hands, by buyi^^, etc. any Corn
growing, or other Corn, or Grain, Butter, Cheese, Fish, or other dead Victual,
etc. to sell the same again, shall be accepted, etc. an unlawsul Ingrosser. And
though the S^at. 2 Ed. 6. 6. 15. numbreth Butchers, Brewers, Bakers, Cooks,
Coster Mongers, and Fruiterers, as Victuallers; yet Apples are not dead
Victuals within the 5 Ed. 6. there being no Provisoe for Coster-mongers and
Fruiterers in the said Act, as there are for Buyers and Sellers of Corn, and
other Victual^. Also, ever since the Act, they have bought Apples by Ingross
and sold them again; and yet no Information was ever before this for the same;
being for Delicacy, more than necessary Food. But the Stat. 5 Ed. 6. is
intended of things necessary for sustenance of man, where the Statute of 2
Edward the 6. 15. made against Conspiracies, to enhance the Prices, was done by
express words, to extend it to things, which are more of pleasure, than profit.
But this was not resolved by the Justices, because the Information was
conceived upon that Branch of the Statute concerning Ingrossers.

Hill. 27 Eliz. in Chancery.
Hill. 27 Eliz. In Chancery the Case was thus: Ninian Menvil seized of certain
Lands in Fee, took a Wife, and levied a Fine of the said Lands with
Proclamations, and afterward was indicted and outlawed of High Treason, and
dyed: The Conusees convey the Land to the Queen, who is now seized: The five
years pass after the Husband's death, the Daughters and Heirs of the said
Ninian, in a Writ of Error in the King's Bench, reverse the said Attainder M.
26 and 27 Eliz. and thereupon the Wife sues to the Queen by Petition,
containing all the special matter: Which Petition being indorsed by the Queen,
Fait droit aux Parties etc. the same was sent into Chancery, as the manner is.

And in this Case, diverse Objections were made against the Demandant.

1. That the Fine with Proclamations, should bar the Wife of Dower, and the
Attainder of her Husband should not help her; for as long as that remained in
force, the same was a Bar also of her Dower: But admit the Attainder of the
Husband shall avail the Wife, the same being reversed by a Writ of Error, and
so in Judgment of Law, as if it had never been, and against which a man might
plead there is no such Record, agreeing with the Book 4 H. 7. 11. and the Case
in 4 H. 7. 10. b. is, A. seized of Land in Fee, was Attaint of H^gh-Treason:
The King grants the Land to B. and afterward A. committed Trespass upon the
Land: and after by Pa^l, A. was restored, and the Attainder void: This shall be
as auciplable and ample to A. as if no Attainder had been. Afterward B. brin^s
Trespass for the Trespass Mesne; and it was adjudged 10 H. 7. f. 22. b. that
the Action of Trespass was not maintainable, because the Attainder was
annulled, ab initio.

2. It was objected, That the Wife could not have a Petition, because there was
not any Offic^, by which her Title of Dower was sound, viz. her Marriage, her
Husbands Seizin and Death: for it was said, that though he was married, yet if
her Husband was not seized after the Age that she is Dowable, she shall not
have Dower: And the Title of him that sueth by Petition, ought to be found by
Office, as appears by the Books, 11 H. 4. 52. Ass. 31. 30. Ass. 28. 46 Ed. 3.
bre. 618. 9 H. 7. 24. etc.

1, As to the first, it was Resolved, That the Wife should be endowed, and that
the Fine with Proclamations was not a Bar to her: and yet it was Resolved, That
the Act 4 H. 7. c. 24. shall bar a Woman of her Dower by such a Fine, if the
Woman bring not her Writ of Dower within five years after the Husbands death,
as was adjudged Hill 4 H. 8. Rot. 344. in the Common Pleas, and 5 Eliz Dyer
224. For by the Act, the Title of Fe^e-Covert i^ saved by taking Action in 5
years, after she is uncovert, etc. But it was R^solved, That the Wife was not
to be a^d^d by that saving; for in respect of her Husbands Attainder, she had
not any Right of Dower at his death, nor could sue for the same after his
death: But it was Resolved, That the Wife was to be aided by another former
saving in the same Act, viz. And saving to all other persons, viz. who were not
Parties to the Fine, such Action, Right, etc. as shall first grow or come, etc.
to them, after the Fine engrossed, and Proclamations made, by force of any Gift
in Tail, or other Cause or Matter before the Fine levied; so that they take
their Action, and pursue their Title, within 5 years after such Right come to
them, etc. And, in this Case, the Action and Right of Dower accrewed to the
Wife, after the Reversal of the Attainder, by reason of a Title of Record
before the Fine, by reason of the Seizin in Fee ( had) and Marriage ( made)
before the Fine levied, according to the meaning of the said Act.

And as to the Point of Relation, it was Resolved, That sometimes by
construction of Law, a thing shall relate, ab initio, to some intent, and to
some not: for relatio est fictio Juris, to do a thing which was and had
essence, to be adnulled, ab initio, betwixt the same Parties, to advance a
Right, but not to advance a Wrong, which the Law hates; or to defeat Collateral
Acts, which are lawful, and chiefly, if they concern Strangers: for true it is,
as has been said, that as to the mean profits, the same shall have relation by
construction of Law, till the time of the first Judgment given; and that is to
favor Justice, and advance his Right that has Wrong by the Erroneous
Judgment. But if a Stranger has done a Trespass upon the Land in the mean
time, he who recovereth, after the Reversal, shall have an Action of Trespass
against the Trespassors: and if the Defendant pleads, there is to such Record,
the Plaintiff shall show the Special Matter, and maintain his Action. And for
the better apprehending the Law on this Point, it is to know, That when any man
recovers any Possession or Seizin of Land, in any Action, by Erroneous
Judgment, and afterward the Judgment is reversed, as is said before; and
thereupon the Plaintiff, in the Writ of Error, shall have a Writ of
Restitution, and that Writ reci^es the first recovery; and the Reversal of it
in the Writ of Error, is, That the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, shall be
restored to his Possession and Seizin, Una cum exitibus thereof, from the time
of the Judgment, etc. Tibi praecipimus quod cadem A. ad plenariam seizinam
tenementor. praed. etc. restitui facias, and per Sacramentum proborum, etc.
dilig^nter inquiras ad quantum exitus and proficua tenementor illor. etc. a
tempore falsi Judicii etc. usque ad Oct. Sanct. Mich. anno etc. quo die
Judicium illu etc. revocat. fuit etc. et qu^liter hoc praecept. etc. in Oct^b.
etc. By which it appears, that the Plaintiff, in the Writ of Error, shall have
Restitution against him who recovereth, of all the mean Profits, without any
regard by them taken: for the Plaintiff, in the Writ of Er^our, cannot have
Remedy against a Stranger: and therefore the words of the said Writ command the
Sheriff to inquire of the Issues and Profits generally etc. And therefore the
Plaintiff, in the Writ of Error, after the Reversal, shall have any Action of
Trespass for a Trespass mean; and therewith agrees Brian Chief Justice, 4 H 7.
12. a. See Butler and Baker's Case, in the third Part of my Reports, good
matter concerning Relations: So as it was Resolved in the Case at Bar, though
to some intent the Reversal has relation; yet to bar the Wife of her Dower by
fiction of Law, by the F^ne with Proclamations, and five years past after the
Husbands death; when, in truth, she had not cause of Action, nor any Title, so
long as the Attainder stood in force, should be to do a Wrong by a fiction in
Law, and to bar the Wife, who was a mere stranger, and could have no Relief,
till the Attainder was reversed.

As to the other Objection, That the Demandant on the Petition, ought to have
an Office found for her, It was Resolved, That it needed not in this Case,
because the Title of Dower, stood with the Queens Title, and affirmed it. Also,
in this Case, the Queen was not entitled by any Office, that the Wife should be
driven to traverse it, for then she ought to have had an Office: But in case of
Dower, though that Office had been found for the Queen, which does not
disaffirm the Title of Dower, in such Case the Wife shall have her Petition
without Office. See S^dlers Case, in the Fourth Part of my Reports.

And the Case put on the other side, was utterly denied by the Court; for it
was Resolved, That if a man seized of Lands in F^e, take a Wife of eight years
of Age, and alien his Lands; and after the Wife attains to the Age of nine
years, and afterward the Husband dies, that she shall be endowed; because the
Title of Dower being not consummate till the death of the Husband, and there
being Marriage, Seizin in Fee, age of 9 years, and the Husbands death, for that
cause she shall be endowed; it being sufficient, that the Marriage, Seizin, and
Age happen during the Coverture. So if a man seized of Lands in Fee take a
Wife, and after she elopes from her Husband, now she is barrable of her Dower,
if during the elopement, the Husband alien; and after the Wife is reconciled,
she is Dowable: So if a man has Issue by his Wife, and the Issue dies, and
afterward Land discends to the Wife, or she purchase Lands in Fee, and dies
without other Issue, the Husband (for the Issue which he had before the Descent
or Purchase) shall be Tenant by the Courtesy. But if a man takes an Alien to
Wife, and afterward he aliens his Lands, and after that she is made a Denizen,
she shall not be endowed; for she was not by her Birth capable of Dower, but by
her Denization it began. But in the other Case, there was only a Temporary
Bar, until such Age or Reconcilement; which being accomplished, the Temporary
Bar cease.

Trin. 44 Eliz. In the King's Bench;
Sprat and Heale's Case.
John Sprat Libelled in the Spiritual Court against Walter Heal, for
Substraction of Tithes; the Defendant in the Spiritual Court, that he had
divided the Tithes from the Nine Parts. And then the Plaintiff made Addition to
the Libel (in nature of a Replication) viz. That the Defendant divided the
Tithes from the Nine Parts, quod praed. the Plaintiff non fatetur sed prorsus
diffitetur: yet presently after this pretended division, in fraudem legis, he
took and carried away the same Tithes, and converted them to his own use: and
thereupon the Plaintiff obtained Sentence in the Spiritual Court, and to
recover thetreble value, according to the Statute 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. And
thereupon Heal made a Surmise, that he had divided his Tithes, and that the
Plaintiff ought to sue in the Spiritual Court for the double value, and at the
Common Law for the treble value.

But it was Resolved by the whole Court, That the said Division mentioned in
the Libel, was nnt any Division within the said Stat. 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. for
that Act provides, That all the King's Subjects henceforth, shall truly and
justly without Fraud, divide, set out, yield and pay all manner of other
Predial Tithes in their proper Land: So as when he divides them to carry them
away, he divides them not justly withont Fraud; and therefore the same is out
of the Statute: And where the words of the Statute are, divide, set out, etc.
their Predial Tithes, etc. And if any person carry away his Corn and Hay, and
other Predial Tithes, etc. And to make an evasion out of these words, this
Invention was devised; The Owner of the Corn, by Covin sold his Corn, before
severance, to another, who as Servant to the Vendee reaped it, and carried it
away without any Severance, pretending that neither the Vendo, because he did
not carry them away; nor the Vendee, because he had no property in them, should
be within that Statute: But it was Resolved, That the Vendor should be charged
in that Case with the Penalty of the Statute, for he carries them away, and
hi^ Fraud and Covin shall not help him. See 8 Ed. 3. 290. 9 H. 6. 41. 33 H. 6.
5. But it was Resolved, That the Plaintiff could not sue in the Spiritual Court
for the treble value, but for the double value he might.

Hill. 6 Jac. Regis. In the Common Pleas,
Neal and Rowses Case.
At a Nisi Prius in London, before my Self this Term, the Case was this: Edward
Neal informed upon the Stat. 21 H 8. c 5. Which Plea began Mich. 6 Jac. Rot.
1031. against James Rowse, Commissary and Official within the Archdeaconry of
Huntington, in the Diocese of Lincoln; and having Probate of Wills, etc. in the
same Archdeaconry: And that Nicholas N^al, in the 3d year of the Reign of the
said King James, made his Testament in Writ^ng, and made the Plaintiff his
Executo, and dyed possessed of Goods and Chattels, to the value of 150 l. The
D^f^ndant, then Commissary and Official, etc. the 23 Feb. 1605. at the Parish
of St. Mary Bow, Testament. praed. proba it etc. ac per manuscujusdam Thomae
N^cke, tunc Minist^i ipsius Jacobi Rowse etc. 14 s. 10 d. pro prob^tione etc.
Testament. p^aed. de eodem Edwardo, etc. qui tam etc. Color Officii sui praed.
ad tunc ^t ibid. extortive recepit et habuit contra formam Statuti: With this,
that the said Edward qui tam, etc. will add, That the Writing of the said
Testament, according to the Rate of a penny for every ten Lines, every Line
containing in length ten Inches, non attingebat, to the Sum of 12 s. 4 d.
according to the form of the Statute aforesaid, etc. The Defendant pleaded
nihil debet; and at the Nisi Prius, the Evidence of two Witnesses was, That the
Plaintiff caused the said Testament, which was in Paper, to be engrossed in
Parchment; and the Plaintiff offered both to the said Rowse to be proved; who
answered it should, if his Fees shall be paid him: And the Plaintiff asking
him, What were his Fees? and be wrote them in a Paper, which amounted to 14 s.
and 10 d. Whereupon the Plaintiff laid upon the Table 20 s. and desired him to
take what was due to him, ( all this being in the Officials house) but he would
take nothing there, but appointed the Plaintiff to come into Court, where he
would receive his Fees: And accordingly the Plaintiff coming into Court, and
praying to have the said Will proved; the Defendant required the said Nicke to
take of him for the Probation, Insinuation, Registring, and Sealing, 14 s. 10
d. and thereupon put the Seal of the Office to the same Parchment, that the
Plaintiff brought him, etc.

And it was objected, That this Case was out of the Statute; for thereby, as to
this purpose, it is provided, viz. And where the Goods of the Testator, etc.
amount above the value of 40 l. that then the Bishop, nor Ordinary, nor any of
his or their Registers, Scribes, Praysors, etc. or any other their Ministers,
for the Probation, Insinuation, and Approbation of any Testament, etc. for the
Registring, Sealing, Writing, etc. any Inventories, Acquittances, Fines, or any
thing concerning the same Probate of Testaments, etc. shall take, etc. but
only four shillings, and not above. Wh^r^of, etc.

And the Defendants Council objected, That the Defendant did not take the 14 s.
10 d. etc. For no Probate was written upon the Testament it self, nor any Seal
put to it, but the Testament was ingress^d in Parchmeat, and the Probate and
Seal put to the Transcript, and not the Testament, and so out of the Statute:
The Statute extends only when the Probate and Seal is put to the Testament it
self, etc. But I conceived, that the said taking the 14 s. 10 d. in the Case at
Bar, was clearly against the Statute; for the Act is in the Negative: And if
the Executor requires the Testament to be engrossed in Parchment, he ought to
agree with him, that he requires to do it, as he may. But the Ordinary,
Official, etc. ought not to exact any Fee for the same, as due to him, for
diverse causes.

1. Because the words of the Act are expressed for the Probation, etc. and for
the Registring, Scaling, Writing, etc. Which word ( Writing) extends expressly
to this Case.

2. The words are, ( or any thing concerning the same Probate) and when the
Seal and Probate is put to the Transcript, the same (without question) concerns
the Probate.

3. Such a Construction would make the Act idle and vain; for if the Ordinary,
Official, etc. might take as much as he pleases, for the Engrossing done by
his Ministers, as a due to him, all the purview of the Statute, which is penned
so precisely concerning persons, should be all in vain, by that evasion of
Transcribing it, as well against the express Letter of the Act, as the
intention of it. And the Act ought to be expounded, to suppress Extortion,
which is a great affliction and impoverishing of the Subjects.

4. As this Case is, he annexes the Probate and Seal to the Transcript
engrossed, which the Plaintiff brought him; so as the Case at Bar was with
question: And afterward the Jury found for the Plaintiff. And of such Opinion
was Walmesly, Warberton, Daniel, and Foster, Justices, the next Term in all
things: But upon Exception, in Arrest of Judgment, for not pursuing of the Act,
in the Information, Judgment is not yet given, etc.

Hill. 6 Jac. Regis. In the Common Pleas.
In this Term, a Question was moved to the Court, which was this: If Tenant in
Burgage should pay aid to the King, to make his eldest Son Knight. And the
Point rests upon this: If Tenure in Burgage, be a Tenure in Socage; for by the
ancient Common Law every Tenant in Knights Service, and in Socage, was to give
to his Lord a reasonable Aid, to make his eldest Son a Knight, and to marry his
eldest Daughter; and that was uncertain at Common Law, and also uncertain when
the same should be paid. And this appears by Glanvil, lib. 9. cap. 8. fol. 70.
who wrote in the time of Henry the second, Nihil autem certum statutum and de
hujus modi auxil^is dandis vel exigendis, etc. And in the beginning of the
Chapter it is called rationabile auxilium, because then it was not certain, but
to be moderated by Reason, in respect of Circumstances: The like appears by the
Preamble of the Statute, West. 1. 3 Ed. 1. cap. 35. The said Act put those
incertainties to a certainty.

1. That for a whole Knights Fee there be taken but 20 s. and of 20 l. Lands
holden in Socage 20 s. and of more, more; and of less, less; whereby the Aid it
self became certain.

2. That none might levy such Aid, to make his Son a Knight, until his Age of
15 years; nor to marry his Daughter, till her Age of 7 years: And Fleta, who
wrote after that Act, calls them rationabilia auxilia, etc. And by the Stat. 25
Ed. 1. where it is provided, That Taxes shall be taken, but by common consent
of the Realm, there is an Exception of the Ancient Ayds; which is to be
intended of these Ayds: But notwithstanding the said Act of West. 1. it was
doubted, if the King were bound by it, being not expressly named: And therefore
Ed. 3. in the 20 year of his Reign, took ^n Aid of 40 s. of every Knights Fee,
to make the Black Prince Knight, and then nothing of Lands holden in Socage:
and to take away all question concerning the same, it was confirmed by
Parliament, and after 25 Ed. 3 cap. 11. It is Enacted, That reasonable Aid, to
make the Kings eldest Son Knight, and to marry his eldest Daughter, shall be
levied after the form of the Stat. made thereof; and not in other manner. Now
Littleton, lib. 2. cap. 10. fol. 36. b. Burgage Tenure is, where an ancient
Borough is, whereof the King is Lord; and those who have Tenements within the
Borough, hold of the King, That every Tenant, for his Tenement, ought to pay to
the King a certain Rent. And such Tenure, is but Tenure in Socage; and all
Socage Land is contributary to Aid; and therefore a Tenant in Burgage shall be
contributary to Aid.

It appears in the Register, fol. 1, 2. in a Writ of Right, Lands held in
Knights Service, are said, Quas clamat tenere perservitium unius Fe^di militis.
And Socage Lands, Quas clamat per liberum servitium unius cumini, etc. So F. N.
B. 82. Rationabile auxilium de militibus et liberis tenentibus; where Militibus
distinguishes Knights Service from Socage, which is called libtris tenentibus.
But it appears by the Books of Avowry 26. and 10 H. 6. So Ancient Demesne 11.
It was Resolved by all the Justices in the Exchequor Chamber, That no Tenure
shall pay for a reasonable Aid, but Tenure by Knights Service, and by Socage;
but not by Grand Sergeanty, nor no other. And 13 H. 4. 34. agrees to the Case o
Grand S^rgeanty. And I conceive, that Petit Sergeanty shall also pay Aid: for
Littleton, lib. 2. cap. 8. fol. 36. says, That such a Tenure is but Socage in
effect; though Fitzh. N. B. 83. a. avouch the contrary, 13 H. 4. 34. And I
conceive, That he who holds a Rent of the King by Knights Service, or in
Socage, shall pay Aid, according to the words in West. 1. cap. 35. And though
it was said, that a Tenure in Socage, in servitium Socae, as Littleton says;
and the same cannot be applied to Houses: To that it was answered, That the
Land upon which the Houses are bu^l, or if the House fall down, may be made
arable and plowed. See Huntington, Polydor Virgil; and Hollinsheads Chron. fol.
35. 15 H. 4. Aid was levied by H. 1. 7. to marry Mawd his eldest Daughter to
the Emperor, viz. 3 l. of every Hide of Land etc. See also, The Grand
Customary of Normandy, cap. 35. there is a Chapter of Ayde^. See also the Stat.
made 19 H. 7. which begins thus: Item Praefati Communes in Parliamento
praed. existent. ex assensu etc. concesserunt praefat. Regi quand. pecu^iae
summam, in loco duorum rationabilium auxilior suae Majestat. de jure debit.
etc. See Rot. 30 H. 3. Ex part Reman. Dom. Th^saur. in scemino, in auxilio
nobis concess. ad primogenitam filiam no^^ram maritand. And H. 3. had an Aid
granted by Parliament, Ad Is abellam sororem suam Imperatori. But that was of
Benevolence.

Rot. 42 H. 3. ibid. 6. Monstrat. R. Johanne, le Francois Baro de Scaccario
quod cum Dom. Rex non caperet nisi 20 s. de integro Feodo Mil. de auxilio etc.
Ibid. in Regno 2 Ed. 1, Rot. 3. de auxilio ad Militiam; Which is meant of
Knight: of the Kings Son. Note, If one with^n Age, be in Ward of the King, he
shall not be contributary to Aid; but his Tenants that hold of him shall, as
appears by that Record.

Ibid. 30 Ed. 1. Ibid. T. R. 34 E. 1. Ibid. Hill 4 H. 4. Rot. 19. de
rationabili auxilio de Will. Dom. Roos. The like M. Rot. 5 H. 4. Rot. 33.
Lincoln* and Ro^. 34. Lincoln, and Rot. 35 Lincoln, and Tr. R. 5 H. 4. Rot. 2.
Kanc. and Rot. 3. Kanc. and Rot. 5. Kanc. See ibid. R. 21 Ed. 3. Rot. Cantab.
^e auxilio adfilium Regis primogenit^m faciend. per Episcopum EEliens. See
also, ibid. 20 Ed. 3. Rot. 13 and 14. de auxiliendo ad primogenitum filium
R^gis Militem faciend. By all which before cited, it appears, that Tenure in
Burgage is subject to the payment of Aid.

Hill. 6 Jacob. Regis.
Prohibitions.
Upon Ashwednesday in Feb. 1606. A great Complaint was made by the President of
York, to the King, That the Judges of the Common Law, had, in Contempt of the
Kings Command last Term, granted 50 or 60 Prohibitions out of the Common-Pl^as,
to the President and Council of York, after the 6th of February, and named 3 in
particular. 1. Between Bell and Thawptes. 2. Another between Snell and Hu^t. 3.
And another, in an Information of a Riotous Rescue by English Bill, by the
Attorney General, against Christopher Dickenson, one of the Sheriffs of York,
and others, in rescuing one William Watson, out of the Custody of the Deputy of
one of the Purseyvants of the said Council, who had Arrested the said Watson,
by force of a Commission of Rebellion, by the said President and Council
awarded: Which Prohibition, upon the Information, was (as was said) denied,
upon a Motion in the King's Bench the last Term; but granted by Us. And the King
sent for me, to answer the Complaint; and I only, all the rest of the Justices
being absent, waited upon the King; who, in the presence of Egerton, Lord
Chancellor, and others of the Privy-Councel, rehearsed to me the Complaint
aforesaid. And I perceived well, that the King had thereupon conceived great
displeasure against the Judges of the Common Pleas, but chiefly against Me: To
which (I having the Copy of the Complaint sent me by the Lord Treasurer)
answered in this manner: That I had made search in the Office of Prothonotaries
of the Common Pleas; and as to the Cases between Bell and Thawpts, and Snell
and Huet, no such could be found; but I would not take advantage of a
Misprisal: And the truth was, the 6th of February, the Court of Common Pleas
had granted a Prohibition to the President and Council of York, between Lock
Plaintiff, and Bell and others Defendants; and that was a Replevin in English
was granted by the said President and Council, which I affirmed was utterly
against Law: for at Common Law no Replevin ought to be made, but by Original
Writ directed to the Sheriff: and the Statute of Marlbridge, cap. 21. and West.
1. cap. 17. authorize the Sheriff to make a Replevin. So 29 Ed. 3. 21. 8 Eliz.
Dyer 245. And the King by his Instructions neither had made the President and
Council Sheriffs, nor could grant them Power to make a Replevin against Law;
which the Lord Chancellor affirmed for very good Law; and it may well be, we
have granted others in the like Case. Another Prohibition, I confess, we have
granted between Sir Bethel Knight, now Sheriff of the County of York, as
Executor to one Stephenson, who made him and another his Executors, and
preferred an English Bill against Chambers, and others, in nature of an Action
of the Case, upon a Trover and Conversion of Goods and Chattels in the
Testators Life, to the value of 1000 l. And because the other Executor would
not join with him, he had no remedy at Common Law; but was forced to pray
remedy there in Equity. And I say, the President and Council have not any
Authority to proceed in that Case, for diverse causes.

1. Because there is an express Limitation in their Commission, that they shall
not hold Plea between Party and Party, etc. unless both or one of the Parties,
tanta paupertate sunt gravati, that they cannot sue at Common Law; and in that
Case the Plaintiff was a Knight, Sheriff, and man of great quality.

2. Because by that Suit the King was deceived of his Fine, which was 200 l.
because the Damages amounted to 4000 l. And that was one of the Causes, that
the Sheriff began his Suit there, and not at Common Law. Another Cause was,
that their Decrees which they take upon them, are final and uncontrollable,
either by Error, or any other Remedy; which is not so in the Kings Courts,
where there are five Judges: for they can deny Justice to none who has Right;
nor give any Judgment, but what is controulable by Errou^, etc. And if we shall
not grant Prohibitions, in Cases where they hold Plea without Authority, then
the Subjects shall be wrongfully oppressed without Law, and we denied to do
them Justice. And their Ignorance in the Law appeared, by allowing that Suit,
viz. That the one Executor had no Remedy at Common Law, because the other would
not join in Suit with him; whereas every one Learn^d in the Law knows, that
Summons and Severance lies in any Suit brought as Executors. And this was also
affirmed by the Lord Chancellor.

Another Prohibition, I confess, we granted between the L. Wharton, who by
English Bill, before the Council, sued Bank S. Buttermere, and others, for
fishing in his several Fishings in Darwent, in the County of C. in nature of an
Action of Trespass at Common Law, to his Damages of 200 l. and for the Causes
before recited; and because the same was merely determinable at Common Law, we
granted a Prohibition: And that also was allowed by the Lord Chancellor. Then
the King asked me the Case of Information upon the Riotous Rescous: To which, I
answered, That one exhibited a Bill there, in the nature of an Action of Debt,
upon a Mutuatus against Watson, who upon his Oath affirmed, that he had
satisfied the Plaintiff, and owed him nothing: yet because he did not deny the
Debt, the Council Decreed the same against him; And upon that Decree, the
Pursuyvant was sent to Arrest the said Watson, who Arrested him; upon which the
Rescous was made: And because the Action was in the nature of an Action of
D^b^, upon a Mutuatus, where the Defendant at Common Law might have waged his
Law, the Prohibition was granted; and that was also affirmed by the Lord
Chancellor. Also, I affirmed it was Rescous, because the principal cause
belonged not to them; but it might be a Riot, yet not punishable by them, but
by course of Law, by a Commission of Oyer and Terminer.

Also, I confess, that we have granted diverse Prohibitions to stay Suits there
by English Bill, upon penal Statutes, for the manner of prosecution, as well
for the Action, Process, etc. as for the Count, is to be pursued, and cannot be
altered: and therefore, without question, the Council, in such Cases, cannot
hold Plea; which was affirmed also by the Lord Chancellor. And I said, no Court
of Equity can be Erected at this day without Act of Parl, as was Resolved in Q.
Eliz. time in Parots Case; and lately in the Case of the President and Council
of Wales.

And the King was well satisfied with these Reasons, who gave me his Royal
Hand, and I departed from thence in his favor.

Pasch. 7 Jac. Regis.
This Term a Question was moved at Sergeants Inn, who, by the Common Law,
ought to repair the Bridges, common Rivers and Sewers, and the Highways, and
by what means they shall be compelled to it; and first of Bridges. And as to
them, it is to be known, that of common right all the Country shall be charged:
and therewith agrees, 10 Ed. 3. 28. b. and the Star. 22 H. 8. cap. 5. was but
an affirmance of the Common Law in that Point. He that has Toll of Men or
Cattle passing over a Bridge, ought to repair the same, when no other is bound
by Law to do it, for he has Toll to that purpose: Et quisentit commodam,
sentire debet and onus: and with this agrees 14 Ed. 3. Bar. 276. Also, a man
may be bound to repair a Bridge, ratione tenurae, of certain Land, but a
particular person cannot be bound by Prescription: for if he have not profit by
the same, his Ancestors Act shall not bind him: But an Abbot or Corporation may
be charged by Prescription, and may bind their Successors. Vide 21 E. 4. 28. 27
Ed. 3. 8. 22 Ass. 8. 5 H. 7. 3. Yea^ they shall be compelled, if time out of
mind they have repaired it, though of Alms; and therewith agrees 10 E. 3. 28.
So of a Highway, all the Country ought to repair it; but some may be bound
particularly, as in the Case of Bridges. As he who has Land adjoining, ought
to scour and cleanse the Ditches, next to the way to his Land; and therewith
agrees the Book, 8 H. 7. 5. So of a common River, all who have Passage by it,
ought to scour and cleanse it, for it is as a common Street; as it is said, 17
Assi. and 37 Ass. 10.

Pasch. 7 Jacobi Regis.
Sir William Reads and Booth's Case.
In the great Case of Forgery in the Star Chamber, between Sir William Read
Plaintiff, and Roger Booth, and Cuthbert Booth, and others, Defendants; the
Case was thus: Roger Booth 38 Eliz. was Convict in that Court of publishing a
Writing under Seal, forged in Sir Thomas Greshams Name, of a Rent charge of 100
l. out of all his Lands, etc. to one Markham for 99 years, dated 21 year of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, knowing it to be forged: And afterward the said Sir
William Read exhibited the said Bill against the said Boothes, and others, for
forging another Writing under Seal, dated the 20th of Elizabeth, in the said
Sir Thomas Gresham's Name, purporting a Deed of Feoffment of all his Lands
(except certain) to Sir Rowland Heyward, and Edward Hoogen and their Heirs, in
effect, to the use of Markham the younger, and his Heirs, and for publishing
the same, knowing it to be forged, was the Bill exhibited. And upon hearing
this Cause this Term, these Doubts were moved upon the Star. 1 Eliz.

1. If one who is Convict of publication of a Deed of eoffment or Rentcharge,
knowing the same to be forged, again at another day forge another Deed of
Feoffment or Rentcharge, if he be within the Case of Felony within the A^t:
which Doubt arises upon these words ( est-soons) committed again any of the
said Offenses.

2. The second Doubt was, If a man commit two Forgeries, one in 37 Eliz. the
other, in 38 Eliz. and he is first convicted of the last, if he may now be
impeached for the first.

3. When Roger Booth was Convict in 38 Eliz. and after is charged with a new
Forgery, in 37 Eliz. If the Witnesses moving in truth, that it was forged after
the (...) Conviction, if the Star Chamber has Jurisdiction of (...).

4. When Cuthbert Booth, who was never Convict of Forgery before, if in truth
the Forgery was done, and so proved in 38 Eliz. If he might be convicted upon
this Bill, because the Forgery is alleged before it was done.

1, 2. To the first and second Doubts, It was resolved by the two Chief
Justices, and Chief Baron; That if one be Convict of Forgery, or publishing any
Writing concerning Freehold, etc. within the first Branch, or concerning
Interest or Term of Years, etc. in the second Branch, and be convicted, if
afterward he offend, either against the first Branch or second, that the same
is Felony. As if he forge a Writing concerning an Interest for Years within the
second Branch, and be convicted; and after he forgeth a Charter of Feoffment
within the first Branch, et e converso, that is Felony, by express words of the
Act. But if one forge a Writing in 37 Eliz and after he forge another in 38
Eliz. yet it is not Felony, though he forge many Writings one after another;
for the Forgery, etc. which is Felony by the Act, ought to be after Conviction,
or Condemnation, of a former Writing.

3. As to the third Doubt, It was Resolved, That the Allegation of the time, by
the Plaintiff in the Bill, shall not alter the Offense, but shall give to the
Court Jurisdiction: But if it appear, that the Forgery or Publication was after
the Sentence, then the Court shall surcease.

4. As to the last Point, It was Resolved, That the time of the Forgery is not
material, if it be committed before the exhibiting the Bill. But if the date of
such Writing, supposed to be Forged, had been mistaken, there the Defendant
could not be condemned of a Deed of another Date.

Pasch. 7 Jac. Regis.
The Case of Sewers.
The Case was, There was a Cawsey or Milstank of Stone in the River of Dee, and
in the City of Chester; which Cawsey, before the Reign of King Edward the
first, was Erected for the necessary maintenance of certain Mills at the end of
the said Cawsey. And now a certain Decree was made by certain Commissioners of
Sewers, for a Breach to be made by ten Poles in length, in the said Cawsey: and
if by any Decree of the Commissioners, by force of any Statute, any breach may
be made in that Cawsey, was the Question: And it was referred, by Letters of
the Lords of the Privy-Councel, to the Chief Justices, and Chief Baron; who,
upon hearing of Council Learned, at diverse days, and good Consideration had of
all Statutes of Sewers, and Conferences among themselves, It was Resolved as
follows;

1. That the Stat. of Magna Chart. cap. 23. Quod omn^s Kidelli deponantur, etc.
extended only to Kidels, viz. Open Wears for taking Fish: But the first Stat.
that extended to pulling down or abating any Mills, Mill-Stanks, or Cawseyes,
was 25 Ed. 3. cap. 4. which appointed only such to be pulled down, as were
Erected in the Reign of King Edward the first, or after. But by 1 H. 4. cap.
12. upon complaint in Parliament, of great damages, by inhansing Mills,
Mill-stanks, etc. made before Edward the first's Reign, that Act appoints them
to be surveyed; and such as were found to be much inhansed, to be corrected.
None of which Acts, extend to the Case in question: for that Cawsey was erected
before Edw. 1. and never inhanced since the Erection. And the 12 H. 4. c. 7.
confirms all the said Acts. And by the 23 H. 8. c. 5. none of the said Statutes
are repealed, as to the Case in question: for thereby the Form and Effect of
the Commission of Sewers is appointed, and power given to the Commissioners to
survey Walls, etc. Fences, Cawseys, etc. Mills, etc. and to correct, repair, or
pull down, etc. as cause requires, according to their discretions, etc. after
the effect of the Statute, made before the 1. of March, 23 H. 8. By which
appears, that the Commissioners discretion was limited, viz. to proceed
according to the Statutes and Ordinances before made, etc. And the said Act
provides, That all and every Statute, Act, and Ordinance heretofore made,
concerning the Premises, not contrary to this Act, nor repealed, shall stand
good, and be effectual for ever. But the said Acts 25 Ed. 3. and 1 H. 4. are
not contrary to the said Act, nor repealed: and always such construction ought
to be made, that one part of the Act may agree with another. And, according to
this Resolution, We certified the Lords of the Council, that the said Star. 25
E. 3. and 1 H. 4. remained yet in force; and that the Authority given by the
Commission of Sewers, did not extend to Mills, Mill-stanks, Cawseys, etc.
erected before Ed. 1. unless they have been inhanced; and then they are not to
be subverted, but reformed, by abating the Inhancement only.

Trin. 7 Jacobi Regis.
The Case de modo Deci^ andi, and of Prohibitions.
Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Bishops of London, Bath and Wells,
and Rochester, diverse Doctors of the Civil and Canon Law; as Dr. Dun, Judge of
the Arches, Dr. Rennet Judge of the Prerogative, Dr. James, Dr. Martin, and
others, came and attended the King at White Hall, the Thursday, Friday, and
Saturday, after Easter Term, in the Councel-Chamber; where the Chief Justice,
and I my self, Daniel Judge of the Common Pleas, and Williams Judge of the
King's Bench, by the King's Command attended also; where the King, assisted with
his Privy-Councel, all sitting at the Councel-Table, spoke as a most Gracious
Sovereign, to this effect: As He would not suffer any Novelties or Innovations
in his Courts of Justice, Ecclesiastical and Temporal; so he would not have any
the Laws, which had Judicial Allowances, in the Times of his Predecessors Kings
of England to be forgotten. And forasmuch as Contentions between the Temporal
and Ecclesiastical Courts, cannot but breed great Inconvenience to the
Subjects, especially when the Controversy arises upon the Jurisdiction of his
Ordinary Courts of Justice; And because he was the Head of Justice, immediately
under God, and knowing what hurt may grow to his Subjects, when the
Jurisdiction of his Courts are drawn in question; He thought it concerned him,
as a King, to hear the Controversies between the Bishops and Clergy, and the
Judges of his Laws of England, and to take Order, that the one do not encroach
upon the other. And He said, The only Question then to be disputed was, If a
Parson or Vicar of a Parish, sues one of his Parish in the Spiritual Court for
Tithes, in Kind, or Layfee; and the Defendant alleges a Custom or
Prescription, de modo Decimandi; if that Custom or Prescription shall be tried
and determined before the the Judge Ecclesiastical, where the Suit is begun, or
a Prohibition lies to try the same by the Common Law. And the King directed,
that We who were Judges, should declare the Reasons of our Proceedings, and
what Authorities in the Law we had to warrant our Proceedings, in granting
Prohibitions in Cases de modo Decimandi. But the Archbishop of Canterbury
kneeled before the King, and desired he would hear him, and others, provided to
speak in the Case, for the good of the Church of England. And the Archbishop
inveighed chiefly against two things.

1. That a Modus Decimandi should be tried by a Jury, because they themselves
claim more or less modum Decimandi; so as, in effect, they were Tryers in their
own Cause, or in the like Cases.

2. He inveighed much the precipitate and hasty Trials by Juries; and after him
Dr. Bennet made a large Invection against Prohibitions, in causis
Ecclesiasticis; and he made five Reasons, why they should try modum Decimandi.

1. The first and principal was out of the Register, fol. 58. quia non est
consonans rationi, quod cognitio accessarii in Curiae Christianitatis
imp^diatur ubi cognitio causae principalis ad forem Ecclesiasticum noscitur
pe^tinere. And the principal cause is Right of Tithes, and the Plea of Modus
Decimandi sounds in satisfaction of Tithes; and therefore the Conuzance of the
Original Cause, viz. the Right of Tithes belonging to them, the Conuzance of
the Bar of Tithes belonged to them. And whereas it is said in the second Part
of my Reports, in the Bishop of Winchesters Case; and 8 Ed. 4. 14. that they
would not accept of any Plea, in discharge of Tithes, in the Spiritual Court;
he said, they would allow such Pleas, and had allowed them, being duly proved
before them.

2. There was great inconveniency, that Laymen should be Tryers of their own
Customs, for they shall be Jurors in their own Cause.

3. That the Custom of Modo Decimandi is of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, for it
is a manner of Tything, and all manner of Tything belongs to Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; and therefore he said, if the Right of Tithes be of
Ecclesiastical Conuzance, and the Satisfaction also for them of the same
Jurisdiction, the same shall be tried in the Ecclesiastical Court.

4. In the Prohibitions of Modus Decimandi, Averment is taken, that though the
Plaintiff in the Prohibition offer to prove Modum Decimandi, the Ecclesiastical
Court does refuse to allow it: but he said they would allow such Plea; and
therefore, Cessante causa cessabit et effectus, and no Prohibition shall lie.

5. He said, he can show many Consultations granted in the Cause, de modo
Decimandi, and a Consultation is of greater force then a Prohibition. And Bacon
Solicitor General, being (as is said) assigned with the Clergy by the King,
said less then Dr. Benn^t; but he vouched, 1 R. 3. 4. the Opinion of Hussy,
when the Original ought to begin in the Spiritual Court, and afterward a
thing comes in Issue, and is Tryable by our Law, yet it shall be tried by
their Law. See the Register 57, 58. 38 Ed. 3* 5. and 38 Ed. 3. 6.

And the Judges made humble Suit to the King, That in regard they perceived his
Majesty, in his Princely Wisdom, derested Novelties and Innovations, that He
vouchsafe to suffer them to inform him of one Innovation, which they did
conceive would tend to hinder the Administration of Justice within his Realm.

Your Majesty, for the due Administration of Justice, has made 14 Judges, to
whom you have committed not only the Administration of ordinary Justice, but
crimina Laesae Majestatis: Also, in Parliament, we are called by Writ, to give
our Advice and Council to your Majesty and the Lords, when we are required. We
two Chief Justices sit in the Star Chamber, Chancery, Court of Wards, and other
High-Courts of Justice; We, in our Circuits, do visit twice in the Year your
Realm, and execute Justice according to your Laws: and if We receive any
diminution of such Reverence and Respect in our Places, which our Predecessors
had, We shall not be able to do You such acceptable Service as they did. The
state of the Question is not in statu deliberativo, but in statu judiciali; it
is not disputed de bono, but de vero, non de lege fienda sed de lege lata: Not
to devise or frame new Laws, but to inform You what Your Law of England is: And
it was never seen before, that when the Question is of the Law, that your
Judges of the Law have been made Disputants with their Inferiors, that daily
plead before them in the several Courts at Westminster. And though we are not
afraid to dispute with Mr. Bennet, and Mr. Bacon; yet this Example being primae
impressionis, and your Majesty detesting Novelties, We leave it to your
Princely Consideration, whether you will permit our answering in hoc statu
judiciali. But in obed^ence to your Majesty's Command, We will inform your
Majesty touching the said Question, which We and our Predecessors before Us
have oftentimes adjudged, upon Judicial Proceedings in your Courts of Justice
at Westminster; which Judgments cannot be reversed or examined for any Error
in Law, if not by a Writ of Error in a more High and Supreme Court. And that
this is the ancient Law of England, appears by the Stat. of 4 H. 4. c. 22.

And We being commanded to proceed, all that was said by Us the Judges, was to
this effect: That the Trial de modo Decimandi, ought to be by the Common Law,
by a Jury of Twelve Men, it appears in three Manners: 1. By the Common Law. 2.
By Acts of Parliament.


3. By infinite Judgments, and Judicial Proceedings, long times past without
interruption.

But first, it is to see what is a Modus Decimandi: Now Modus Decimandi is,
when Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, have been given to the Parson and his
Successors, or an Annual certain Sum, or other Profit, always time out of
mind, in full Satisfaction and Discharge of all Tithes in kind in such a place:
and such manner of Tything is now confessed by the other Party, to be a good
Bar of Tithes in Kind.

1. That Modus Decimandi shall be tried by the Common Law; and therefore put
that which is the most common Case: That the Lord of the Manor of Dale
prescribes to give to the Parson 40 s. yearly, in full Satisfaction and
Discharge of all Tithes, growing within the said Manor of Dale, at the Feast
of Easter. The Parson sues the Lord of the Manor of Dale for his Tithes, of
his Manor in kind, and he in Bar prescribes ut supra. The Question is, If the
Lord of the Manor of Dale may upon that have a Prohibition; for if the
Prohibition lie, then the Ecclesiastical Court ought not to try it.

1. First, The Law of England is divided into Common Law, Statute, and Customs;
and therefore the Customs of England are to be tried by the Trial, which the
Law of England appoints.

2. Prescriptions by the Law of the Holy Church, and by the Common Law, differ
in the times of Limitation: and therefore Prescriptions and Customs of England,
shall be tried by the Common Law. See 20 H. 6. f. 17. 19 E. 3. Jurisdiction 28.
The Bishop of Winchester brought a Writ of Annuity against the Archdeacon of
Surrey, and declared, That he and his Successors were seized by the Hands of
the Defendant, by Title of Prescription; and the Defendant demanded Judgment,
is the Court would hold Jurisdiction between Spiritual Persons, etc. Stone
Justice, Be assured, That upon Title of Prescription, we will there hold
Jurisdiction.

And upon that, Wilby Chief Justice, gave the Rule, Answer: Upon which it
follows, That if a Modus Decimandi which is an Annual sum for Tithes by
Prersciption, comes in Debate between Spiritual Persons, that the same shall be
tried here. 32 E. 2. Jurisdiction 26. There was a Vicar who had only Tithes
and Oblations, and an Abbot claimed an Annuity or Pension of him by
Prescription; and it was adjudged, That the same Prescription, though between
Spiritual Persons, shall be tried here. Vide 22 H. 6. 46. 47.

3. See the Record, 25 H. 3. cited in the Case of Modus Decimandi before; and
see Register fol. 38.

4. See the Stat. of Circumspecte agatis, Decimae debitae, seu consuctae; which
proves that Tithes in kind, and a Modus by Custom, etc.

5. 8 E. 4. 14. and F. N. B. 41. g. A Prohibition lies for Lands given in
discharge of Tithes, 28 E. 3. 97. a. There was a Suit for Tithes, and a
Prohibition lies.

6. 7 E. 6. 79. If Tithes are sold for Money; by the Sale, the Things Spiritual
are made Temporal: And so in the Case de modo Decimandi, 42 E. 3. 12. agrees.

7. 22 E. 3. 2. Because any Appropriation is mixed with the Temporalty;
otherwise, of that which is mere Temporal. So it is of real Composi^ion, where
the Patron ought to join. Vid. 11 H. 4. 85.

2. Secondly, By Acts of Parliament.

1. The said Act of Circumspecte agatis, that gives power to the Ecclesiastical
Judge, to sue for Tithes first due in Kind* or by Custom, viz. Modus Decimandi.
So as by that Act, though the Yearly Sum sounds in the Temporalty, which was
paid by Custom, in discharge of Tithes; yet because the same comes in the place
of Tithes, and by Constitution, the Tithes are changed into Money, and the
Parson has not any remedy for the same, which is the Modus Decimandi at the
Common Law. For that cause the Act is clear, that the same was a Doubt at the
Common Law. And the Stat. of Articuli Cleri, cap. 1. If that corporal
punishment be changed into poenam pecuniariam; for that Pain, Suit lies in the
Spiritual Court: For which, see Mich. 8 H. 3. Rot. 6. in Thesaur. And by the 27
H. 8. cap. 20. It is Enacted, That all Subjects of the Realm, according to the
Ecclesiastical Law, and after the laudable Usages and Custom of the Parish,
etc. shall yield and pay his Tithes, etc. and for substraction thereof, may, by
due process, etc. compel him to yield the Duties: and with that, in effect,
agrees 32 H. 8. c. 7. By the 2 Ed. 3. c. 13. it is Enacted, That all the Kings
Subjects shall henceforth truly and justly, without Fraud, etc. divide etc. and
pay all their Predial Tithes in their proper kind as they rise, etc. And
always, when an Act of Parl. commands or prohibits any Court, be it Spiritual
or Temporal, to do any thing Spiritual or Temporal, if the Stat. be not
obtained, a Prohibition lies; as upon the Stat. de artic. super chart. cap. 4.
Quod communio Placita non tenentur in Scaccario. A Prohibition lies to the
Court of Exchequer, if the Barons hold a common Plea there; as appears in the
Register 187. b. So upon the Stat. West. 2. Quod inquisitio^^es quae magnae
sunt examinationis non capiantur in Patria. A Prohibition lies to the Justices
of Nisi Prius. So upon Articuli super chartas, cap. 7. to the Constable af
Dover, Regist. 185. So upon the same Stat. cap. 3. to the Steward and Marshal
of the Household, 185. and yet no Prohibition is given by express words, in any
of these Statutes. So upon the Statutes 13 R. 2. c. 3. 15 R. 2. c. 2. 2 H. 4.
c. 11. a Prohibition lies to the Admiralty Court. So upon West. 2. c. 43.
against Hospitals and Templers, Regist. 39. a. So upon the Stat. de
Prohibitione regia, a Prohibition lies. So upon the Stat. 2. H. 5. c. 3. and
upon that Stat. 4 E. 4. 37. the Case was; Pierce Peckham took Letters of
Administration, of the Goods of Rose Brown, of the Bishop of London: afterward
T. T. sued to Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, to have Administration committed
to him, because Rose Brown had Goods in his Diocese, and they were granted to
him. Afterward T. T. Libelled in the Court of the Arches against Pierce
Peckham, to repeal his Administration; and Pierce Peckham, according to the
Stat. prayed a Copy to the Libel, and could not have it; and thereupon he sued
a Prohibition, and upon that an Attachment. And there Catesby Sergeant moved,
that a Prohibition did not lie for two Causes.

1. The Statute says, that the Libel shall be delivered, but not that the Plea
shall surcease.

2. The Statute is not intended of Matter merely Spiritual: And there Danby
Chief Justice; If you will not deliver the L^bel, according to the Statute, you
do wrong, which wrong is a Temporal matter, and punishable at the Common Law,
and therefore the party shall have a special Prohibition. And always after the
said Act, in every Term, throughout the Reigns of Ed. 6. Q. Mary, and Q. Eliz.
to this day, Prohibitions have been granted in Modo Decimando, and Judgments
given upon many of them, without any contradiction; and accordingly all the
Judges Resolved, 7 Ed. 6. Dyer 79. Et contemporanea expositio est optima et
fortissima in lege, et minime mutanda sunt quae certam habuerunt
interpretationem.

1. As to the first, Objectio, That the Plea of Modus Decimandi, is but
accessory to the Right of Tithes; It was Resolved, That the same was of no
force, for three Causes:

1. In this Case, admitting there is a Modus Decima^di, then by the Custom; and
by the Act 2. E. 6. and the other Acts, the Tithes in Kind are extinct and
discharged; for one and the same Land cannot be subject to two manner of
Tithes; but the Modus Decimandi is all the Tithe with which the Land is
chargeable: and it shall be intended, that the Modus Decimandi began at first
by real Composition: So as in this Case, there is neither Principal. nor
Accessory, but an Identity of the same things.

2. The Stat. 2 Ed. 6. being a Prohibition in it self, and that in the
Negative; If the Ecclesiastical Judge does against it, a Prohibition lies; as
appears clearly before.

3. Though the Rule be general, yet it appears by the Register it self, that a
Modus Decimandi is out of it: for there is a Prohibition, in causa modi
Decimandi, when Lands are given in satisfaction of the Tithes.

2. As to the second Objection, It was Answered and Resolved, That that was
from, or out of the Question; for status Quaestionis non est deliberativussed
judicialis: for convenient, or inconvenient, is not the Question, but what the
Law is.

3. As to the third Objection, it was answered and resolved; First, That
satisfactio pecuniaria of it self, is Temporal: But because the Parson has not
remedy, pro modo Decimandi, at Common; by force of the Acts cited before he
might sue, pro modo Decimandi, in the Ecclesiastical Court: But that proves
not, That if he sue for Tithes in Kind, which are utterly extinct, etc. that
upon the Plea de modo Decimandi, that a Prohibition should not lie: for the
contrary appears, without all question, by what has been said before: See also
12 H. 7. 24. b. 39 Ed. 3. 22 E. 4. Consultation.

As to the Objection, That Averment is taken of the Refusal of the Plea, of
Modus Decimandi; It was answered and Resolved, That the same is of no force,
for diverse Causes.

1. It is only to enforce the Contempt.

2. If the Spiritual Court ought to have the Trial, de modo Decimandi, then the
refusing to accept such a Plea, should give cause of Appeal not of Prohibition.

3. From the beginning of the Law, no Issue was ever taken upon the Refusal of
the Plea, in causa modi Decimandi, nor any Consultation granted to them;
because they did not refuse, but allow the Plea.

4. The Refusal is no part of the matter issuable or material in the Plea; and
therefore the Modus Decimandi is proved by two Witnesses, according to the
Stat. 2 E. 6. cap. 13. and not the Refusal; which proves, the Modus Decimandi
is only the Matter of Suggestion, not the Refusal.

5. All the said five Matters of discharge of Tithes, mentioned in the said Act
of 2 Ed. 6. ought to be proved by two Witnesses, and so have been always, since
the making of the said Act. And therefore it clearly intended, that
Prohibitions should be granted in such Cases.

6. Though they would allow, bona fide de modo Decimandi, without Refusal; yet
if the Parson sue there for Tithes in Kind, when the Modus is proved, (the same
being expressly forbidden by that Act 2 Ed. 6. 13.) a Prohibition lies, though
the Modus be Spiritual; as appears by the Book, 4 E. 4. 37.

Afterward, the third day of the Debate of this Case before the King, Dr.
Bennet, and Dr. Martin, had reserved diverse Consultations granted in causa modi
Decimandi, thinking they might work upon the King's Opinion: and thereupon they
said, That Consultations were the Judgments of Courts had upon Deliberations;
whereas Prohibitions were only granted upon Surmises. And they showed 4
Presidents.

1. One, where three jointly sued a Prohibition, in the Case of modo Decimandi;
and the Consultation says, Pro co quod suggestio materiaque in eodem content a
minus sufficiens in lege existit, etc.

2. Another, in causa modi Decimandi, to be paid to the Parson or Vicar.

3. Where the Parson sued for Tithes in Kind, and the Defendant alleged,
modus Decimandi, to be paid to the Vicar.

4. Where the Parson Libelled for Tythe-Wooll, and the Defendant alleged a
Custom to reap Corn, and make it into Sheaves, and set forth the Tenth Sheave
at his Charges: and so of Hay, to sever it from the Nine Cocks at his Charge,
in full satisfaction of the Tithes of the Corn, Hay, and Wool.

To which I answered, and humbly defir'd the King to observe, these were
reserved for the last and center-point of their Proof. And herein these things
may be observed,

1. That the Kings Courts do them Justice, when with their Consciences and
Oaths they can.

2. That all the said Cases are clear, in the Judgment of those who are Learned
in the Laws, that Consultation ought by the Law to be granted.

1. For as to the first President, the Case upon their own showing, is, Three
Persons joined in one Prohibition, for three several parcels of Land, each
having a several sort of Tything; and their Interests being several, they could
not join; and therefore a Consultation was granted.

2. To the second, the manner of Tything was alleged to be paid to the Parson
or Vicar, which is uncertain.

3. To the third, The Modus never came in Debate, but whether the Tithes did
belong to the Parson or Vicar: which being between two Spiritual Persons, the
Ecclesiastical Court shall have Jurisdiction; and therewith agrees 38 E. 3. 6.

4. To the last, The same was upon the matter of a Custom of a Modus Decimandi
for Wool: for to pay the Tithe of Corn or Hay in Kind, in satisfaction of
Corn, Hay, and Wool, cannot be a satisfaction for the Wool: for the other two
were due of common right.

The Bishop of London answered, That the words of the Consultation were, Quod
suggestio praedicta mattriaque in eadem cohtenta minus sufficiens in lege
existit, etc. So as materia cannot be refer^ed to Form, and therefore it ought
to extend to the Mo^us Decimandi.

To which I answered, That when the Matter is insufficiently or uncertainly
alleged, the Matter it self fails; and though the Matter be in truth
sufficient, yet if it were insufficiently alleged, the Plea wants matter.
Then the Lord Treasurer sa^d, he wondered they would produce things that made
more against them, then any thing had been said.

And when the King relied, upon the Prohibition in the Register, when Land is
given in discharge of Tithes, the Lord Chancellor said, That was not like this
Case; For there by the Gift of the Land, the Tithes were discharged; but in the
Case de modo Decimandi, an Annual Sum is paid; yet the Land remains charged,
and is to be discharged by Plea, de modo Decim^ndi. All which I utterly denied:
For the Land was as absolutely discharged of the Tithes, in casu de modo
Decimandi, as where Lands are given. All which the King heard with patience,
and the Chancellor answered no more.

After the King, with all his Council, had for 3 days together, heard the
Allegations on both sides, he said, He would maintain the Laws of England, and
that his Judges should have as great respect from all his Subjects, as their
Predecessors. And for the Matter, he said, for any thing had been said on the
Clergies part, he was not satisfied; and advised Us the Judges to confer among
our selves, and that nothing be encroached in the Ecclesiastical Jurisd^ction,
and they to keep within their Jurisdiction. And this was the end of these three
days Consultation.

Note, Dr. Bennet, in his Discourse, inveighed much against the Opinion, 8 E.
4. 14. and, in my Reports, in Wrights Case, That the Ecclesiastical Judge would
not allow a Modus Decimandi; and said, that was the Mystery of Iniqui^y, and
they would allow it. The King asked for what cause it was so said in the said
Books. To which I answered, That it appears in Linwood, who was Dean of the
Arches, and a Profound Canonist, who wrote in Henry the Sixth's time, in his
Title, De decimis cap: Quoniam propter etc. fol. 139. b. Quod decimae soluantur
absque ulla diminutione. And in the Gloss it is said, Quod consuetudo de non
Decimando aut de non been decimando non valet. And that being written by so
great a Canonist, was the cause of the said Saying in 8 E. 4. that they would
not allow the said Plea de modo decimandi. And it seemed to the King, that that
Book was a good cause for them in Edward the Fourth's time, to say as they had
said. But I said, I did not rely thereon, but on the Grounds aforesaid.

Lastly, The King said, that the High Commission ought not to meddle with any
thing, but that which is enormous, and which the Law cannot punish; as Heresy,
Schism, Incest, and the like great Offenses: And the King thought that two
High-Commissions, for either Province one, should be sufficient for all
England, and no more.

Mich. 39 and 40 Eliz. In the King's Bench;
Bedel and Sherman's Case.
Mich. 39 and 40 Eliz. Which is entered, Mich. 40 Eliz^ in the Common Pleas,
Rot. 699. Cantabr. the Case was this: Robert Bedel Gent. and Sarah his Wife,
Farmers of the Rectory of Litlington, in the County of Cambridge, brought an
Action of Debt against John Sherman, in custodia mariscalli, etc. and demanded
550 l. and declared, that the Master and Fellows of Clare-Hall in Cambridge,
were ieized of the said Rectory in Fee, in right of the said College; and the
10 Jun. 29 Eliz. by Indenture d^nised to Christopher Phes^nt the said Rectory
for 21 years, rendering 17 l. 15 s. 5 d. and reserving Rent-corn, according to
the Statute, etc. which Rent was the ancient Rent; who entered, and was
possessed, and assigned all his Interest to one Matthew Bats, who made his last
W^ll, and made Sarah his Wife Executrix, and dyed. Sarah proved the Will and
entered, and was thereof possessed as Executrix, and took to Husband the said
Robert Be^el; by force whereof, hey in right of the said Sarah entered, and were
possessed; and the Defendant was th^n Tenant, and seized for his life of 300
Acres of Arable Lands, in Litlington aforesaid, which ought to pay Tithes to
the Rector of Litlington, and in 38 Eliz. the Defendant S^minavit grano, 200
Acres pa^c. ^. etc. the Tithes whereof amounted to 150 l. And the Defendant did
not set forth the same from the Nine Parts, but carried them away, contrary to
the Statute 2 E 6 etc. The Defendant pleaded, Nihil debet. And the Jury ^ound,
that the Defendant did owe 55 l. and to the rest they found Nihil debet: And in
Arrest of Judgment, diverse Matters were moved:

1. That Grano Seminata is too general, and it ought to be expressed, with what
kind of Grain the same was sowed.

2. It was moved, If the Parson ought to have the treble value, the Forfeiture
being ^xoresly limited to none by the Act. or that the same be^ong to the Queen.

3. If the same belong to the Parson, if he ought to sue for it in the
Ecclesiastical Court, or in the King's Temporal Court.

4. If the Husband and Wife should join in the Action, or the Husband alone;
and upon solemn Argument at the Bar and Bench, Judgment was affirmed.

Trin. 7 Jac. Regis. In the Court of Wards;
John Bayley's Case.
It was found by Writ of Dien clausit extremum, that the said John Bayley was
seized of a Message, and of and in the 4th part of one Acre of Land, late
parcel of the Demesne Lands of the M^nnor of Newton in the County of Hereford,
in his Den^esne as of Free, and found the other Points of the Writ; and it was
holden by the two Chief Justices, and the Chief Baron.

1. That M^ss^agium vel Tenementum is uncertain; for Tenementum is nomen
collectivum, and may contain Land, or any thing that is holden.

2. It was holden, That it was void for the whole, because no Town is mentioned
in the Office, where the M^ssuage or Tenement, etc. lies: and it was holden,
that no melius inquirendum shall issue forth, because the whole Office is
uncertain and void.

Trin. 7 Jac. Regis. In the Court of Wards.
The Attorney of the Court of Wards moved the two Chief Justices, and the Chief
Baron, in this Case: A man seized of Lands in Fee-simple, covenants for the
advancement of his Son, and his Name, Blood, and Posterity, that he will stand
seized of them to the use of himself for life, and after to the use of his
eldest Son, and to such Woman as he shall marry, and the Heirmales of the body
of the Son, and afterward the Father dies, and after the Son takes a Wife and
dies; if the Wife shall take an Estate for Life. And it was Resolved, by the
said two Chief Justices, and Chief Baron, That the Wife should take well
enough; being within the consideration, which was for the advancement of his
Posterity; and without a Wife the Son cannot have Posterity. Secondly, It was
Resolved, that the Estate of the Son shall support the use to the Defendant;
and when the Contingent happens, the Estate of the Son shall be changed,
according to the Limitation, viz. to the Son and the Woman, and the Heirs of
the Body of the Son. And so it was Resolved in the King's Bench, by Popham Chief
Justice, and the whole Court, in Sheffields Case, in Q. Elizabeth's time.

Trin. 7 Jac. Regis. In the Court of Wards:
Spary's Case.
John Spary seized in Fee, in the Right of his Wife, of Lands holden by
Knight Service, had Issue by her, and 22 Dec. 9 Eliz. alienated to Edward Lord
Stafford: The Wife dyed, the Issue of full age; the Alienee holds the Lands.
And 10 years after the Fathers death, and 12 years after the Mothers, Office is
found, 7 Jac. finding all the special Matter after the Mothers death. The
Question was; Whether the mean Profits are to be answered to the King: And it
was Resolved, by the two Chief Justices, and Chief Baron, that the King should
have the mean Profits, because the Alienee was in by Title: and until Entry,
the Heir has no Remedy for the mean Profits, but that the King might seize and
make Livery, because the Entry of the Heir is lawful by the Stat. 32 H. 8.

Trin. 7 Jac. Regis. In the Court of Wards.
It was found by force of a Mandamus at Kendal in Westmerland, 21 Dec. 6 Jac.
that George Earl of Cumberland, long before his death, was seized in Tail to
him, and to the Heirs-male of his body, of the Castles and Manors of Browham,
Appl^by, etc. the remainder to Sir Ingram Clifford, with diverse Remainders in
Tail; the remainder to the right Heirs of Henry Earl of Cumberland, Father of
the said George: and that the said George Earl so seized, by Fine and Recovery,
conveyed them to the use of himself, and Margaret his Wife, for their Lives,
for the Jointure of Margaret; and after, to the Heir-males of the body of
George Earl of Cumberland; and for want of such Issue, to the use of Francis,
now Earl of Cumberland, and the Heir-males of his body; and for want of such
Issue, to the use of the right Heirs of the said George: And after, by another
Indenture, conveyed the Fee-simple to Francis, Earl. By force of which, and of
the Statute of Uses, they were seized accordingly; and afterward, the 30 of
October. 3 Jac. George Earl of Cumberland dies, without Heirs male of his body,
etc. And found further, that Margaret, Countess of Cumberland, that now is, was
alive, and took the profits of the Premises, from the death of the said
George, Earl, till the taking the Inquisition; and further found the other
Points of the Writ.

1. And first, it was objected, Here was no dying seized found by Office, and
therefore the Office shall be insufficient: But to that, it was Resolved, That
by this Office the King was not entitled by the Common Law; for then a dying
seized was necessary: But this Office is to be maintained upon the Stat. 32 and
34 H. 8. by force of which no dying seized is necessary; and so it was Resolved
in Vincents Case, Anno 23 Eliz.

2. The second Objection was, It does not appear that the Wives Estate
continued in her till the Earls death: for the Husband and Wife had aliened
the same to another, and then no primer seizin shall be, as is agreed in
Binghams Case. And to that it was Resolved, That the Office was sufficient,
prima facie, for the King, because it is a thing collateral, and no point of
the Writ: And if such Alienation be, the same shall come in of the other part
of the Alienee, by a Monstrans de droit. And the Case at Bar is a stronger
Case, because it is found, the Councess took the Profits from the death of
George the Earl, till the finding the Office.

Trin. 7 Jac. Regis. In the Court of Wards;
Wills Case.
Henry Wills seized of the 4th Part of the Manor of Wryland, in the County of
D^von, holden of Q. Eliz. i^ Socage Tenure in capite, of the said 4^h part,
enfeoffed Zathary Irish, and others, and their Heirs, to the use of the said
Henry for his Life; and after his Dec^ase to Thomas Wills his second Son in
Tail, and after to the use of Richard Wills, his youngest Son in Tail; and
after the said Henry so seized as aforesaid, dyed. All this Matter is found by
Office. And the Question was, If the King ought to have primer seizin in this
Case, that Livery and Ouster le main should be sued by the Statutes of the 32
and 34 H. 8. And it was Resolved by the two Chief Justices, and the Chief
Baron, that not; if in this Case by the Common Law no Livery or Ouster le main
shall be sued, and that was agreed by them all, by the experience and course of
the course. See 21 Eliz. Dyer 362. and 4 Eliz. Dyer 213.

And two Presidents were showed, which were Decreed in the same Court, by the
Advice of the Justices, Assistants to the Court.

One in Trin. 16 Eliz. Thomas Stavely enfeoffed, William Strelley and Thomas
Law, of the Manor of Ryndly in Nottingh ^shire, on condition, that they
re-enfeoffe the Feoffor and his Wife for their Lives; the remainder to Thomas
Stavely, S^n and Heir apparent of the Feoffer in Fee: Which Manor was holden
of Q. Elizabeth, in Socage Tenure in capite; And it was Resolved, That no
Livery or Ouster le maine, shall be sued in such Case, because of the saving of
the Stat. 32 H. 8. The words whereof are, Saving etc. to the King etc. all his
Right etc. of primer seizin, and relief etc. for Tenure in Socage, or of the
nature of Tenure in Socage in chief, as heretofore has bin used: But there was
no Custom before the Act for the King to have primer seizin, etc.

Another President was in Pasch. 37 Eliz. in the Book of Orders, fol. 444.
where the Case was, That William Allet was seized of certain Lands in Pitsey,
called Lundsey, holden of the Queen in Socage Tenure in chief; and by Deed
covenanted to stand seized to the use of his wife for life, and afterward to
the use of Richard his younger Son in Fee, and dyed, and all was found by
Office; and it was Resolved ut supra. But the Doubt o^ the Case at Bar was,
because Henry the Feoffor had a Reversion in Fee, which descended to the said
William his eldest Son.

Trin. 7 Jacobi Regis.
The Case of the Admiralty.
A B^ll was preferred in the Star Chamber against Sir Richard Hawkins,
Vice Admiral of the County of Devon, and was charged, that one William Hull,
and others, were notorious Pirates upon the High Seas, and showed in certain
what Pyracy they had committed: That the said Sir Richard Hawkins knowing the
same, did receive them, and abet, and comfort them, and for Bribes suffered
them to be discharged: And what Offense that was, the Court referred to the
consideration of the two Chief Justices, and Chief Baron, who heard Council of
both sides diverse days at Sergeants Inn: And it was Resolved by them,

1. That the Admirals, by the Common Law, ought not to meddle with any thing
done within the Realm, but only with things done upon the Sea: and that
appears fully by the 13 R. 2. cap. 5. and therewith agrees 2 H. 4. c. 11. and
15 H. 2. c. 3. So also, 2 H. 5. c. 6. 5 Eliz. c. 5. and this agrees with Stamf.
fol. 51. 8 Ed. 2. Coron. 399. See Plo. Com. 37 b. 2 R. 3. 12. 30 H. 6. 6. by
Prisoit.

2. It was Resolved, That the Statutes are to be intended of a Power to hold
Plea, not of a Power to award Execution: for notwithstanding the said Statutes,
the Judge of the Admiralty may do Execution within the Body of the County: And
therefore 19 H. 6. 7. the Case was W. T. at Southwark, affirmed a Plaint of
Trespass in the Admiralty against J. B. of a Trespass done upon the High-Sea:
Whereupon J. B. was cited to appear at the common day next ensuing; at which
day, the said J. B. made default: And according to the usage of the Court, the
said J. B. was amerced to 20 Marks: Whereupon Command was made to P. as
Minister of the said Court, to take the Goods of the said J. B. to make
agreement with the aforesaid W. T. by force of which, he, for the said 20
Marks, took 5 Cowes, and 100 Sheep, in Execution for the said Money, in the
County of Ieicester. And there it is holden by Newton, and the whole Court,
That the Statutes restrain the power of the Court of Admiralty, to hold Plea of
a thing done within the body of the County; but they do not restrain the
Execution of the same Court to be served upon the Lands. In which Case, these
Points were Resolved,

1. Though the Court of Admiralty is not a Court of Record (see Brooks Error.
77. acc.) yet by Custom of the Court they may amerce the Defendant for his
default, by their discretion.

2. That they may make Execution for the same, of the Goods of the Defendant,
in corpore Comitatus; and if he have not Goods, may arrest his Body.

But the great question between them was, If a man commit Pyracy upon the Sea,
and one knowing thereof, receive and comfort the Defendant in the Body of the
County, if the Admiral, and other the Commissioners by the Act 28 H. 8. cap.
16. may proceed by Indictment and Conviction against the Receiver and Abetter,
the Offense of the Accessory having his beginning within the Body of the
County. And it was Resolved by them, That such a Receiver and an Abetter, by
the Common Law, could not be indicted and convicted; because the Common Law
cannot take Cognizance of the Original Offense, being done out of the
Jurisdiction of the Common Law; and where it cannot punish the Principal, it
cannot punish the Accessory: And therefore Coke Chief Justice reported to them
a Case which was in Suffolk, 28 Eliz. where Butler and others, upon the Sea,
next to the Town of Iaystoff, robbed diverse of the Queens Subjects of their
Goods, which they brought into Norfolk, and there were apprehended and brought
before Me, then a Justice of Peace in the same County, and upon Examination,
they confessed a cruel and barbarous Pyracy, and that the Goods then in their
Custody, were part of the Goods which they had so robbed: And I was of Opinion,
that in that Case it could not be Felony punishable by the Common Law, because
the Original Act was not offense, whereof the Common Law takes knowledge; and
then the bringing them into the County, could not make the same Felony
punishable by our Law: Yet I committed them to the Gaol, until the coming of
the Justices of the Assizes: And at the next Assizes, the Opinion of Wray Chief
Justice, and Perian Justices of Assize, was, agreeing with Me ut supra: and
thereupon they were committed to Sir Robert Southwel, then Vice Admiral for
those Countie^: and this, in effect, agrees with Lacies Case: which see in my
Reports cited in Bingham's Case, 2 Rep. 93. and in Constables Case, C. 5. Rep.
107.

See, Pyracy was F^lony, 40 Ass. 25. by Schard, where a Captain of a Ship, with
some Englishmen, robbed the Kings Subjects upon the High Seas; and the says,
'twas Felony in the Norman Captain, and Treason in the Englishmen, which is to
be understood of Petit-Treason: and therefore in that Case, the Pirates being
taken, the Norman Captain was hanged, and the English drawn etc. hanged; as
appears by the same Book. See Stamford 10.

Trin. 7 Jac. Regis; In the Common Pleas,
Pettus and Godsalve's Case.
In a Fine levied, Trinity Term, Anno quinto of this King, between John Pettus
Esquire; Plaintiff, and Richard Godsalve, and others, Deforceants of the Manor of
Castre, etc. in Norfolk, where in the ^hird Proclamation, upon the Foot of the
Fine, the said Proclamation is said to be made in the sixth year of the King
that now is, which ought to have been Anno quinto: And the fourth Proclamation
is altogether left out; because upon view of the Proclamations upon Dorsis upon
Record, not Finis ejusdem Termini per Justiciarios, remaining with the
Chirographer, etc. it appears, the said Proclamations were duly made:
therefore it was adjudged, that the Errors aforesaid should be amended and
made to agree, as well with the Pr^clamation, upon Record of the Fine, and
Entry of the Book, as with the other Proclamations in Dorsis, etc. And this was
done, upon the Motion of Haughton Sergeant.

Mich. 7 Jac. Regis. In the Court of Wards,
Samme's Case.
John Samme's being seized of Grany Mead, by Copy of Court-Roll, of the Manor
of Tellesham the Great; of which Sir Thomas Beckingham, etc. and held the same
of the King by Knights Service in capite: Sir Thomas by Deed indented, dated 22
December. 1 Jacobi, between him of the one part, and John Sammes and George
Sammes. Son and Heir of John, on the other part, did bargain, sell, enfeoffe,
etc. to John Sammes, the said Mead, called Grany Mead, to hold to the said John
Sammes, and George Sams, and their Heirs and Assigns, to the only use of the
said John and George, and their Heirs and Assigns for ever: and Sir Thomas, by
the same Indenture, covenants, to make further Assurance to the said John and
George, etc. and Livery and Seizin was delivered accordingly.

John Sammes the Father dies, George Sammes his Son and Heir within Age; the
Question was, Whether Geo. Sammes should be in Ward to the King, or no: And in
this Case three Points were Resolved,

1. Forasmuch, as George was not named in the Premises, he cannot take by the
Habendum; and the Livery, according to the Indenture, gives nothing to George,
it being to him as void: but though the Feoffment be good only to John and his
Heirs, yet the use limited to John and George, and their Heirs, is good.

2. If the Estate had been conveyed to John and his Heirs, by the Release, etc.
as it may well be to a Tenant by Copy of Court Roll, the use limited to them is
good.

3. But the third was of greater doubt, If in this Case the Father and Son were
Joint-Tenants, or Tenants in common: And it was Resolved, That they were
Joint-Tenants, and that the Son in the Case at Bar should have the said Grange
by the Survivor: for if at the Common Law A. had been enfeoffed, to the use of
him and B. and their Heirs, though that he was only seized of the Land, the
use was jointly to A. and B. for a use shall not be suspended or extinct by a
sole Seizin, or joint Seizin of the Land: and therefore, if A. and B. be
enfeoffed to the use of A. and his Heirs; And A. dies, the entire use shall
descend to his Heirs; as appears 13 H. 7. 6. in Stoner's Case; and by the
Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 10. Of Uses.

And when it was said, that the Estate of the Land which the Father has in it,
as to the moiety of the use, which he himself has, shall not be divested out
of him. To that it was Answered and Resolved, That, that shall well be: for if
a man make a Feoffment in Fee to one, to the use of him and the Heirs of his
body, in this Case, for the benefit of the Issue, the Statute of Uses devests
the Estate vested in him by Common Law, and executes the same in himself by
force of the Statute: And it is to be known, that an Use of Land (which is but
a pernency of Profits) is no new thing, but part of that which the Owner of the
Land had: and therefore if Tenant in Borough-English, or a man seized on the
part of his Mother, make a Feoffment to another without consideration, the
younger Son in the one case, and the Heir, on the part of the Mother, on the
other, shall have the use, as they should have the Land it self, if no
Feoffment had been made; as it is holden 5 E. 4. 7. See 4 and 5 P. and M. Dyer
163. See Fenwick and Milford's Case, Trin. 31 Eliz. So in 28 H. 8. Dyer 11. the
Lord Rosses Case, 13 H. 7. 6. by Butler.

So in the Case at Bar, the Use limited to the Feoffee, and another, is not any
new thing, but the pernancy of the old profits of the Land, which may well be
limited to the Feoffee and another jointly. But if the use had been only
limited to the Feoffee and his Heirs there, because there is not any Limitation
to another person, nec in praesenti nec in futuro, he shall be in by force of
the Feoffment.

And it was Resolved, That Joint-Tenants might be seized to an use, though they
come to it at several times: as if a man make a Feoffment in Fee to the use of
himself, and to such a Woman which he shall after marry, for term of their
lives, or in tail, or in fee; in this Case, if he marry a Wife after, she shall
take jointly with him, though they take the use at several times. See 17 Eliz.
Dyer 340. but otherwise it is of Estates, which pass by the Common Law; as 24
Ed. 3. Joynder in Action 10. If a Grant be made by Deed to one man for life,
the remainder to the right Heirs of A. and B. in Fee, and A. has Issue and
dies, and afterward B. has Issue and dies, and then Tenant for Life dies;
in that case, the Heirs of A. and B. are not Joynt-Tenants; because by the
death of A. the remainder, as to one moiety, vested in his Heir, and by the
death of B. the other moiety vested in his Heir at several times.

And upon the whole matter, it was Resolved, That because in the principal Use,
the Father and Son were Joint-Tenants by the Original Purchase, that the Son
having the Land by Survivor, should not be in Ward, and accordingly it was so
Decreed.

Pasch. 39 Eliz. Rot. 233. In the King's Bench,
Collins and Harding's Case.
The Case was; A man seized of Lands in Fee; and also of Lands, by Copy of
Court-Roll in Fee, according to the Custom of the Manor, made one entire
Demise of the Lands in Fee, and of the Lands holden by Copy, according to the
Custom to Harding for years, rendering one entire Rent, and afterward the
Lessor surrendered the Copyhold Land to the use of Collins and his Heirs: and
at another time granted by Deed the Reversion of the Freehold Lands to Collins
in Fee, and Harding attorned: and afterward, for the Rent behind, Collins
brought an Action of Debt for the whole Rent: And it was objected, That the
reservation of the Rent was an entire Contract; and, by the Act of the Lessee,
the same cannot be apportion^d: and therefore if one d^mise 3 Acres, rendering 3
s. Rent, and afterward bargains and sells the reversion (...) one Acre, the
whole Rent is gone, because the Contract is entire, etc. Also the Lessee by
that shall be subject to two Feal^^es, where he was subject but to one before.

To these Points, it was answered and Resolved, That the Contract was not
entire, but that the same by Act of the Lessor, and Consent of the Lessee,
might be divided and severed; for the Rent is incident to the Reversion, and
the Reversion is severable, and by consequence the Rent also: for accessorium
sequitur naturam su^ princip^lis. And as to the two Fealties, to that the
Lessee shall be subject, though the Rent shall be extinct; for Feal^y is by
necessity of Law incident to the Reversion; but the Rent shall be divided, pro
rata portionis, and so it was adjudged.

And it was also adjudged, That though Collins come to the Reversion by several
Conveyances, and at several times, yet he might b^ing an Action of Debt for
the whole Rent, Hill. 43 Eliz. Rot. 243. West and Lassels Case. So Hill. 42
Eliz. Rot. 108. in the Common Pleas, Ewer and Moyl^s Case.

Note, It was adjudged, 19 Eliz. in the King's Bench, that where one obtained a
Prohibition upon Prescription, de modo Decimandi, by payment of a sum of money,
at a certain day, upon which Issue was taken, and the Jury found the modus
Decimandi by payment of the said sum; but at another day, the Case being well
debated; at last, it was Resolved, That no Consultation should be granted, for
though the day of payment may b^ mistaken, yet a Consultation shall not be
granted where the Soit^tual Court has not Jurisdiction of the Cause. Taafi ld
Chief Baron has the Report of this Cause.

Mich. 7 Jac. Regis.
In an Ejectione Firmae, he Writ and Declaration were of two parts, of certain
Lands in Hetherset and Windham, in the County of Norfolk; and says, not in two
parts, in three parts to be divided: and yet it was good as well in the
Declaration as the Writ: for without question the Writ is good, de duabus
partibus, generally, and so is the Register. See the 4 E. 3. 162. 2 E. 3. 31. 2
Ass. 1. 10 Ass. 12. 10 E. 3. 511. 11 Ass. 21. 11 E. 3. Bre. 478. 9 H. 6. 36. 17
E. 4. 46. 19 E. 3. Bre. 244. And upon all the said Books it appears, that by
the Intendment and Construction of the Law, when any parts are demanded,
without showing in how many parts the whole is divided, that there remains but
one part undivided. But when any Demand is of other parts in other form, there
he ought to show the same specially. And according to this difference, it was
resolved in Jordan's Case in the King's Bench; and accordingly Judgment was
given this Term in the Caseat Bar.

Mich. 7 Jac. Regis; In the Common Pleas,
Muttoa's Case.
An Action upon the Case was brought against Mutton, for calling the Plaintiff
Sorce and Inchanter, who pleaded Not Guilty; and it was found against to the
Damage of six pence. And it was holden by the whole Court in the Common Pleas,
that no Action lies for the laid words: for Sortilegus est qui per sorts
futura praenunciat. Inchantry is vordis aut rebus adjunctis aliquid praeter
naturam moliri. See 45 Ed. 3. 17. One was taken in Southwark, with the Head and
Visage of a dead man, and with a Book of Sorcery in his Mayl; and he was
brought into the King's Bench before Knevet Justice, but no Indictment was
framed against him; for which the Clerks made him swear never after to commit
Sorcery, and he was sent to Prison; and the Head and Book were burned at Tuthil
at the Prisoners charges.

The ancient Law was, as by Britton appears, that who were attainted of Sorcery
were burned; but the Law at this day is, they shall only be fined and
imprisoned. So if one call another Witch, an Action will not lie: But if one
say, She is a Witch, and has bewitched such a one to death, an Action upon the
Case lies, if in truth the party be dead. Conjuration, in the Stat. 5 Eliz.
cap. 16. is taken for Invocation of any evil and wicked Spirits, and the same
by that Act is made Felony: But Witchcraft, Enchantment, Charms, or Sorcery, is
not Felony, if not by them any person be killed or dies.

The first Statute made against Conjuration, Witchcraft, etc. was the Act 33 H.
8. c. 8. and by it they were Felony in certain Cases special; but that was
repealed by the 1 Ed. 6. c. 12.

Mich. 7 Jae. Regis. In the Court of Wards,
Sir Allen Percy's Case.
Sir John Fitz, and Bridget his Wife, being Tenants for life, of a Tenement
called Ramshams, the remainder to Sir John Fitz in Tail, the remainder to
Bridget in Tail, the reversion to Sir John and his Heirs: Sir John, and Bridget
his Wife, by Indenture demised the said Tenement to William Sprey for diverse
years yet to come (except all Trees of Timber, Oaks and Ashes, and liberty to
carry them away) rendering Rent. And afterward Sir John dyed, having Issue Mary
his Daughter, now Wife of Sir Allen Percy Knight; and afterward the said
William Sprey demised the same Tenement to Sir Allen for 7 years. The Question
was, Whether Sir Allen having the immediate Inheritance in right of his Wife,
expectant upon the Estate for the life of Bridget; and also having the
Possession of the said Demise, might cut down the Timber Trees, Oaks, and
Ashes? And it was objected, he might well do it: for it was Resolved in Sanders
Case, in the 5th Part of my Reports, That if Lessee for years or life, assigns
over his term or Estate to another, excepting the Mines or the Trees, etc. that
the Exception is void. But it was answered and Resolved, by the two Chief
Justices, and the Chief Baron, that in the Case at Bar, the Exception was good
without question; because he who has the Inheritance, joins in the Lease with
the Lessee for life. And it was further Resolved; That if Tenant for life
Leaseth for years, excepting the Timber Trees, the same is lawfully and wisely
done; for otherwise, if the Lessee or Assignee cut down the Trees, the Tenant
for Life should be punished in Wast, and should not have any remedy against the
Lessee for years. But when Tenant for life upon his Lease excepteth the Trees,
if they be cut down by the Lessor, the Lessee or Assignee shall have an Action
of Trespass; Quare vi and armis, and shall recover Damages according to his
loss, And this Case is not like the Case of Sanders; for there the Lessee
assigned over his whole Interest, and therefore could not except the Mines,
Trees, etc. But when Tenant for life leases for years, except the Timber Trees,
the same remains yet annexed to his Freehold, and he may command the Lessee
to take them for necessary Reparations of his Houses. And in the said Case of
Sanders, a Judgment is cited between Foster and Miles Plaintiffs, and Spencer
and Bourd Defendants; That where Lessee for years assigns over his Term, except
the Trees, that Wast in such Case shall be brought against the Assignee: But in
this Case, without question, Wast lies against Tenant for life, and so there
is a difference.

Mich. 7 Jac. Regis. In the Court of Wards;
Hulme's Case.
The King (in Right of his Duchy of Lancaster) Lord; Richard Hulms (seized of
the Manor of Male, in the County of Lancaster, holden of the King as of his
Duchy by Knights Service) Mesne, and Robert Male (seized of Lands in Male,
holden of the Mesne, as of his said Manor by Knights Service) Tenant: Richard
Hulme dyed; after whose death 31 H. 8. it was found, that he dyed seized of the
said Mesnalty; and that the same descended to Edward his Son and Heir within
Age, and found the Tenure aforesaid, etc. And during nonag^, Robert Male dyed
seized of the said Tenancy peravail, and that the same descended to Richard his
Son and Meir (as was found by Office 25 H. 2.) within age; and that the said
Tenancy was holden of the King, as of his said Duchy, by Knights Service;
whereas in truth the same was holden of Edward Hulme, then in Ward of the King,
as of his Mesnalty, for which the King seized the Ward of the Heir of the
Tenant. And afterward, Anno quarto Jacobi Rogis nunc, after the death of
Richard Male, the lineal Heir of Robert Male, by another Office it was found,
that Richard dyed seized of the Tenancy, and held the same of the King, as of
his Duchy, etc. his Heir within age: Whereupon Richard Hulme, Cozen and Heir
of the said Richard Hulme, preferred a Bill to be admitted, to traverse the
Office found 4 Jac. Regis. And the Question was, Whether the Office found 35 H.
8. be any Estoppel to the said Hulme? or if that the said Hulme should be first
driven to Traverse that.

And it was objected, That he ought first to traverse the Office of 35 H. 8. as
in the Case 26 E. 65. And that the first Office shall stand as long as the same
remains in force.

To which it was Answered and Resolved, by the two Chief Justices, and Chief
Baron, and Court of Wards; That the finding of an Office is not any Estoppel,
for that is but an Inquest of Office, and the party grieved shall have a
Traverse to it: But when an Office is found falsely, that Land is holden of the
King by Knights Service in capite, or of the King himself in Socage, if the
Heir fue^h a general Livery, it is holden 46 Ed. 3. 12. by Mowbray and Persey,
that he shall not after add, that the Land is not holden of the King: But that
is not any Estoppel to the Heir himself, and shall not conclude his Heir: for
so says Mowbray himself expressly, 44 Ass. pl. 35. See 1 H. 4. 6. b. So 33 H.
6. 7. And there is no Book that says, that the Estoppel shall endure longer
than his life; but that is to be intended of a general Livery; but a special
Livery shall not conclude one. And if a Jury find falsely in a Tenure of the
King, the Lord; of whom the Land is holden, may traverse that Office. Or if
Land be holden of the King in Socage, etc. the Heir may traverse the last
Office; for by that he is grieved, and he shall not be driven to traverse the
first Office. And when the Father sues Livery and dies, the Conclusion is
executed, and past, as is aforesaid.

And note, there is a special Livery, but that proceeds of the King's Grace,
and is not the Suit of the Heir; and the King may grant it either at full age,
before aetate probanda, or to the Heir within age, as appears 21 E. 3. 40. And
then is general, and shall not comprehend any Tenure, as the several Livery
does; and therefore it is not any Estoppel without question: See the 33 H. 8.
cap. 22. 23 Eliz. Dyer 177.

It was also Resolved in this Case, that the Office of 35 H. 8. was not
traversable; for his own Traverse shall prove, that the King had cause to have
Wardship by reason of Ward. And when the King comes to the Possession by a
false Office, or otherwise, if it appears the King have any other Right to have
the Land there, none shall traverse the Office or Title of the King; because
the Judgment in the Traverse is, Ideo consideratum est, quod manus Domini R^gis
amoveantur, etc. See 4 H. 4. fol. 33. in the Earl of Kents Case, etc.

Mich. 7 Jacobi Regis.
Note, The Privilege, Order, or Custom of Parliament, either of the
Upper-House, or House of Commons, belongs to the Determination of the Court of
Parliament; and this appears by two notable Presidents:

1. The one at the Parliament holden in the 27 H. 6. There was a Controversy
moved in the Upper-House, between the Earls of A^undel and Devonshire, for
their Seats, Places, and Pre-eminences of the same to be had in the King's
Presence, as well in Parliament, as in Councels, and elsewhere: The King, by
the Advice of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, committed the same to certain Lords
of Parliament, who not having leisure to examine the same, by the said Lords
Advice, referred it to the Judges of the Land, to hear, see, and examine the
Title, etc. and to report what they conceive herein. The Judges reported as
follows: That this matter ( viz. of Honor and Pre-eminency between the two
Earls, Lords of Parliament) was a matter of Parliament, and belonged to the
King and his Lords in Parliament to be decided: Yet being so commanded, they
showed what they found upon Examination, and their Opinions thereon.

Another Parliament, 31 H. 6. 6th of March begun, and after some continuance,
was prorogued to the 14 of February; and afterward in Michaelmas Term, the
same 31 H. 6. Thomas Thorpe, Speaker of the Commons House, was condemned in the
Exchequer, in 1000 l. Damages, at the Duke of Buckingham's Suit, for a Trespass
done to him. The 14th of Feb. the Commons m^ved in the Upper-House, that their
Speaker might be set at liberty, to exercise his Place, etc. The Lords refer it
to the Judges, and Fort^scue and Prisoit, the two Chief Justices, in the Name
of all the Judges, answered, That they ought not to consider this Question,
etc. but it belongs to the Lords of the Parliament, and not to the Justices.
But as to their Proceedings in the Lower-Courts, in such Cases, they delivered
their Opinions. See 12 E. 4. 2.

Hill. 7 Jac. Regis. In Came. St^ll.
Heyward and Sir John Whitbrook's Case.
In the Case between Hyward and Sir John Whitbrook, in the Star Chamber, the
Defendant was convicted of diverse Misdemeanors, and Fine and Imprisonment
imposed on him, and Damages to the Plaintiff. And it was moved, that a special
Process might be made out of that Court, to levy the said Damages, upon the
Lands and Goods of the said Defendant. And it was referred to the two Chief
Justices, whether any such Process might be made; who this Term moved the Case
to the Chief Baron, and the rest of the Judges and Barons; and it was
unanimously by them all Resolved, That no such Process could or ought to be
made, neither for the Damages, nor for the Costs given to the Plaintiff, the
Court having no such power, but only to keep the Defendant in Prison till he
pay them. For, for a Fine due to the King, they can make no Process to levy it;
but they estreat it into the Exchequer, which has power by Law to write forth
Process, etc. But if a man be convict in the Star Chamber for Forgery, upon the
Stat. 5 Eliz. In that Case, for the double Costs and Damages, an English Writ
shall be made, directed to the Sheriff, etc. reciting the Conviction, and
Statute for levying the said Costs and Damages, etc. and to bring the money
into Star Chamber, and the Writ shall be sealed with the Great Seal, and the
Test of the King. The like Resolution was in Langdale's Case in that Court.

Hill. 7 Jac. Regis. In the Common Pleas,
Morse and Webb's Case.
In a Replevin brought by John Morse, against Robert Webb, of the taking of two
Oxen the last day of November. 3 Jac. regis nunc, in a place called the Downfield
in Luddington, in the County of Worcester; The Defendant, as Bailiff to William
Sherington Gent. made Conuzance, because the place where, is an Acre of Land,
which is the Freehold of the said William Sherrington, and for Damage feasants,
etc. In Bar of which Avowry, the Plaintiff said, That the said Acre of Land is
parcel of Downfield, and that he himself, at the time and before the taking
etc. was, and is yet seized of two Yard-Land, with the Appurtenances, in
Luddington; and that he, and all those whose Estate he has in the said 2
Yard-Land, time out of mind, etc. have used to have Common of Pasture, per
totam contentam, of the said Place called the Downfield; whereof etc. for 4
Beasts called Rother-Beasts, and two Be^sts called Horse-Beasts, and for 60
Sheep, at certain times in the Year, etc. And that he put in the said two Oxen
to use his Common, etc. And the Defendant maintained his Avowry, and traversed
the Prescription, upon which the Parties were at Issue, and the Jury found a
special Verdict: That before the taking one Richard Morse, Father of the said
John Morse now Plaintiff, whose Heir he is, was seized of the said two
Yard-Land, and had Common of Pasture, etc. as is before alleged, and so
seized the said Richard Morse, 20 Eliz. demised to William Thomas, and John
Fisher, diverse parcels of the said two Yard-Land; to which etc. viz. the four
Butts of Arable, with the Common and Inter-Common to the same belonging, for
400 years: By force whereof, the said William Thomas, and John Fisher, entered
etc. so seized dyed: whereby the Possession and Reversion of the said two
Yard-Land descended to John Morse now Plaintiff. And if upon the whole Matter
John Morse now has, and at the time of the taking, etc. had Common of Pasture,
etc. for etc. as to the said two Acres of Land, with the Appurtenances, in Law
or not, the Jury pray the Advice of the Court.

Note, This Plea began Trin. 5 Jac. Rot. 1405. and upon Argument at the Bar and
Bench,

1. It was Resolved, by the whole Court, That it ought to be found against the
Defendant, who had traversed the Prescription: For though all the two
Yard-Lands had been demised for years, yet the Prescription made by the
Plaintiff is true: But if he would take advantage of the matter in Law, he
ought (confessing the Common) to have pleaded the said Lease; but when he
traverseth the Prescription, he cannot give the same in Evidence.

2. Resolved, That if the said Lease had been pleaded, that the Common, during
the Lease for years, is not suspended or discharged; for each of them shall
have Common rateable, and in such manner, that the Land in which etc. shall not
be surcharged.

3. Resolved, That Common appendant to Land, is as much as to say for Cattle
leuant and couchant upon the Land, in which etc.

4. There is no difference, when the Prescription is for Cattle leuant and
couchant, and for a certain numb^r of Cattle leuant and couchant: But when the
Prescription is for Common appurtenant to Land, there a certain number of the
Cattle ought to be expressed, which are intended by the Law to be leuant and
couchant.

Hill. 7 Jac. Regis. In the Common Pleas;
Hughes and Crowther's Case.
In a Replevin between Robert Hughes Plaintiff, and Richard Crowther Defendant,
which began Trin. 6. Jac. Rot, 2220. The Case was, Charles Fox was seized of 6
Acres of Meadow in Bedston, in the County of Salop, in F^^, and 10 October. 9
Eliz. leased the same to Charles Hibbens, and Arthur Hibbens, for 60 years, if
the said Charles and Arthur should so long live, and afterward Charles dyed;
and if the Lease determine by his death, was the Question. And it was adjudged,
That by his death, the Lease was determined: For the life of a man is mere
collateral unto the Estate for years; otherwise, if a Lease be made to for the
Lives of J. S. and J. N. See Brudnel's Case in the 5th Part of my Reports:
which Case was affirmed for good Law by the whole Court.

Pasch. 8 Jac. Regis. In Communi Banco;
Heydon and Smith's Case.
Richard Heydon brought an Action of Trespass against Michael Smith, and
others, of breaking his Close called the Moor in Ugley, in the County of Essex,
the 25 day of June, 5 Jac. Et quandam arborem suam ad valentiam 40 s. nuper
crescen. succiderunt: The Defendants said, that the Close, and at the time of
the Trespass, was the Freehold of Si^ John Leventhrop Knight, etc. and that the
said Oak was a Timber-Tree of 30 years growth and more, and justifies the
cutting down of the Tree by his Command: The Plaintiff replies, and says, That
the said Close, and a House, and 28 Acres of Land in ugley, are Copyhold, and
parcel of the Manor of Ugley, etc. Of which Manor, Edward Leventhrop Esquire;
Father of Sir John Leventhrop, was seized in Fee, and granted the said House,
Lands, and Close, to the said Richard* Heydon, and his Heirs, by the Rod, at
the Will of the Lord, according to the Custom of the said Manor; and that
within the Manor there is such a Custom, Quod quilibet teneres Customar,
ejusdem Manerii sibi and haeredibus suis ad voluntat. Dom. etc. a toto tempore
supradicto usus fuit ad ejus libitum amputare ramos ^mnimodum arborum, called
Pollingers, or Husbords, super terris and tenement, suis Customar. crescen. pro
ligno combustibili, etc. and also, to cut down and take all manner of Trees
called Pollingers and Husbords, and all other Timber Trees, etc. for reparation
of their Houses, and also for Plough-boot and Cartboot; and that all the Trees,
etc. hitherto growing upon, etc. were not sufficient for the necessary uses
aforesaid; And that the said Richard Heydon, from the time of the said Grant,
had preserved, etc. all Treas, etc. growi^g upon the said Lands to him granted:
and that after the said Edward Leventhrops death, the Manor descended to the
said Sir John; and that at the time of the Trespass, the aforesaid Message of
the said Richard Heydon, was in decay, etc. upon which the Defendant demurred
in Law.

The Case was often argued at Bar; and now this Term it was argued at the Bench
by the Justices, and therein these Points were resolved.

1. That the first part of the Custom was absurd and repugnant, but it extends
not to the Case; for the last part of the Custom, which concerns the cutting
down of the Trees, concerns the Point in question; and so the first part of the
Custom is not material. And when it was objected, that the pleading that the
Message of the Plaintiff was in decay, was too general, as appears by the
Book, 10 Ed. 4. 3. To that it was answered by Cook Chief justice, That the said
Book proved the pleading in the Case at Bar was certain enough; and therewith
agrees 7 H. 6. 38. 34 H. 6. 17.

2. It was Resolved, That in this Case, without question, there needs not to
allege more certainty; for the Copyholder does not here take it according to
the Custom; but the Lord of the Manor cuts it down, and preventeth the
Copyholder of his benefit; and therefore he needs not to show any decay at
all, but only for increasing of Damages: for the Lord does the wrong, when he
cuts down the Tree which should serve for Reparations.

3. It was Resolved, That of Common-Right, as a thing incident to the Grant,
the Copyholder may take House-bote, Hedge-bote, and Plough-bote, upon his
Copyhold, Quia concesso uno, conceduntur omnia sine quibus id consistere non
potest: And with this agrees, 9 H. 4. Wast 59. But the same may be restrained
by Custom.

4. It was Resolved, That the Lord cannot take all the Timber Trees, but he
ought to have sufficient for Reparation of the Customary Houses, and for
Plough-bote, etc. for otherwise great Depopulation will follow. And it is to be
understood, that Bote being on old Saxon Word, has two significations.

First, compensatio criminis, as Frithbote signifies to be discharged, for
giving amends for breach ^f the Peace; Manhote, to be discharged of amends for
the death of a man.

And secondly, for Reparation; as Bridgebote, Burghbote, Castlebote, Parkbote,
etc. And it is to be known, that Bote and Estovers are all one. And Estover is
derived of the French Word, Estover, i. e. fovere, i. e. to keep warm, cherish,
etc. And there are four kinds of Estovers, viz.

First, Arandi. Secondly, Ardendi. Thirdly, Construendi. And fourthly,
Claudendi, viz. Ploughbote, Firebote, Housebote, and Hedgebote.

5. It was Resolved, That the Copyholder shall have a general Action of
Trespass against his Lord, Quare clausum fregit and arborem suam succidit: For
Custom has fixed it to his Estate against his Lord. And the Copyholder, in
this Case, has as great an Interest in the Timber Trees, as he has in his
Message which he holds by Copy. And if the Lord break or destroy the House,
without question the Copyholder shall have an Action of Trespass against his
Lord, Quare domum fregit; and by the same Reason for the Timber Trees which are
annexed to the Land, and which he may, for Reparation of his Message, or else
it cannot stand. See Trin. 40 Eliz. Rot. 37. in B. R. between Stebbing and
Grosenor. See Taylor's Case, in the Fourth Part of my Reports; and see 5 H. 4.
2. 2 H. 4. 12. 2 E. 4. 15. 1 H. 6. 4. 7 H. 4. 15. 19 H. 6. 34. 11 H. 4. 28. 11
H. 4. 23. 21 H. 7. 14. b. acc. 35 H. 6. 24. 30 H. 6. Tresp. 10. etc. 21 H. 7.
15. 11 H. 4. 23. See Fitz. Trespass. ultimo in the Abridgement. And afterward,
the same Term, Judgment was given on the principal Case for the Plaintiff.

Pasch. 8 Jacobi. In Communi Ranco.
The Parishioners of St. Alphage in Canterbury, by Custom ought to choose the
Parish-Clerk, whom they chose accordingly: The Parson, by color of a new
Canon, made at the Convocation in the Year of the King that now is (which is
not of force to take away any Custom) drew the Clark before Dr. Newman,
Official of the Archbishop of Canterbury, to deprive him, upon the Point of
right Election, and for other Causes: And upon that, it was moved at the Bar,
to have a Prohibition: And upon hearing of Dr. Newman, and himself, and his
Council, a Prohibition was granted by the whole Court; because the Party chosen
is a mere Temporal Man, And the means of choosing him, viz. the Custom is also
merely Temporal: So as the Official cannot deprive him; but, upon occasion, the
Parishioners may displace him. And this Office is like that of a Churchwarden,
who though they be chosen for two years; yet, for cause, they may displace
them: as is held in 26 H. 8. 5. And though the Execution of the Office,
concerns Divine Service, yet the Office it self is mere Temporal. See 3 E. 3.
Annuity 30. 18 E. 3. 27. And it is to be known, that the deprivation of a man
of a Temporal Office or Place, is a Temporal Thing. Upon which no Appeal lies
by the 25 H. 8. but an Assize, as in 4 Eliz. Dyer 209. And therewith agrees the
Book, 8 Ass. Sirases Case. But if a Dean of a Cathedral Church, be deprived
before the Commissioners of the King, he may appeal to the Delegates within the
said Act, 25 H. 8. For a Deanery is a Spiritual Promotion, and not Temporal:
And before that Act, in such Case, the Appeal was to Rome immediately.

Mich. 5 Jacobi Regis. In Banco Regis.
Prichard and Hawkin's Case.
John Prichard brought an Action upon the Case, against Robert Hawkins, for
Slanderous Words published the last Day of August, 3. Jacob. Viz. That
Prichard, which serves Mistress Shelley, did murder John Adam's Child ( Quandam
Isabellam Adams modo defunct. filia cujusdam Johannis Adams de etc. innuendo:)
Upon which a Writ of Error was brought in the Exchequer-Chamber, upon a
Judgment given for Prichard in the King's Bench; and the Judgment was reversed
in Easter Term, 7 Jac. because it does not appear, that Isabel was dead at the
time of speaking the words; for tunc defunct. ought to have bin in stead of
modo defunct.

Pasch. 8 Jac. In Banco Regis;
Dison and Bestney's Case.
Humphry Dyson said of Nicholas Bestney, a Councellor at Law of Grays-Inne;
Thou a Barrester? Thou art no Barrester; Thou art a Barretor, Thou were put
from the Bar, and dare not show thy self there: Thou study the Law? thou have
as much Wit as a Daw. Upon Not Guilty pleaded, the Jury found for the
Plaintiff, and gave 23 l. Damages; upon which Judgment was given: and upon Writ
of Error, in the Exchequer-Chamber, the Judgment was affirmed.

Pasch. 8 Jac. Regis. In Banco Regis;
Smith and Hill's Case.
Noah Smith brought an Action of Assault and Battery, against Walter Hill in
the King's Bench, which began Pasch. 7 Jac. Rot. 175. Upon Not Guilty pleaded, a
Verdict and Judgment for the Plaintiff, and 107 l. given for Damages and Costs.
In a Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber, the Error was assigned in the
Ve: Fa: which was certified by Writ of Certiorari; and, upon this Writ, no
Return was made upon the Back of the Writ, which is called Returnum Album. And
for that Cause, this Easter Term, the Judgment was reversed.

Trin. 7 Jac. Regis. In Cur. Wardorum.
It was found by Writ of Diem clausit extremum, after Roger Westcots death,
that the said Roger, the day that he dyed, was seized of and in the moiety of
the Manor of Trewalliard, in his Demesne as of Fee, and so dyed seized; and
that the moiety of the said Manor 19 E. 3. was holden of the then Prince, as
of his Castle of Trematon, parcel of his Duchy of Cornwall by Knight Service;
as appears by a certain Exemplification of Trematon for the said Prince, made 9
Martii, 19 E. 3. And the Words of the Extent were, Willielmus de Torr tenet duo
feoda et dimid. Milit. apud Pick Stricklestombe and Trewalliard per servitium
militare and reddit inde per annum 8 d.

And it was Resolved by the two Chief Justices, and Chief Baron, That the
Office, concerning the Tenure, was insufficient and void: for the Verdict of a
Jury ought to be full and direct, and not with a prout patet: for now the force
of the Verdict lies upon the Extent^ which if it be false, he who is grieved
shall have no remedy by any Traverse: for they have not found the Tenure
indefinite, which may be Traversed but with a prout patet, which makes the
Office in that Point insufficient. And upon that a melius inquirendum shall
issue* And herewith agrees F. N. B. 255.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
AUrum Reginae, what, and what right the Queen has to it 19 Alienations by
Bishops, when voidable by their Successors, and when the King or Queen may void
them 75, 76 Admiralty, Jurisdiction thereof, is no Court of Record 82, 83, 84,
85. 88, 89. 109. 199. 200, 201 Absence takes not away a Title of Honor, and
why 111, 112, 113 Affidavits false; when, how, and from whom punishable 134,
135 Arches Court, its Jurisdiction 147 Archbishop of Canterbury his power to
act, and in what cases 148, 149, 150, 151 Apprentice; none may keep a shop,
etc. or set up a Trade, etc. unless he have served seven years 154, 155 Apples,
whether within the Act for engrossing, and what within that Act 160
B.
Bishops, when lawful, and their Authority what, and whence derived 8, 9
Buggery what, and how punishable 36, 37 Baron, who shall be said to be a Baron
of Parliament, and in what cases 73, 74 Benevolence, the nature thereof, and
how may be imposed 124, 125 Burgage, Tenure what, and if tenant in Burgage
shall pay aid to the King to make his Eldest Son Knight 169, 170, 171, 172
Bridges, who ought to repair them 176, 177
C.
Custom, whence to be paid, and of what 16, 17. 33 Commissioners, High
Commissioners, their power 17, 18. 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52. 72, 73. 87, 88, 89,
90 Conspiracy, where such action lies, for what, and against whom 22, 23, 24.
95, 96, 97 Commissions, what of them are against Law, and e contra 29, 30, 31,
32. 93, 94 Consultation, where grantable 43. 46. 67, 68, 69, 70, 71 Court
Christian, their Power 44 Court of Common Pleas their Power and Antiquity 60,
61. 113, 114 Convocation, authority thereof 76 Contempt, what shall be said a
high contempt of the King, and how punishable 100, 101 Chester, Chamberlain
there, his power 118, 119 Court, what judgment shall be given when the Court
is divided in opinion 123, 124 Contract, what shall be said an entire Contract
205, 206 Common, when suspended or discharged, and e contra 214, 215 Custom,
where, and how available 216, 217, 218, 219
D.
Dignity, the King may erect any name of Dignity that was not before, or
transfer it 85, 86. 116, 117 Deed, obtained by Covin, shall not bind 95 Duresse
per Jailer 133 Dower, what a bar thereto, and e contra 161, 162, 163, 164,
165
F.
Forests, what so properly, and what may be done therein 20, 21 First Fruits
and Tenths given to the Crown 46, 47 Ferry-man, when he may throw goods over
board 65 Felony: while an Attainder in force, no Felony before to be answered
for 105 Forgery, where punishable, and how 108, 177, 178 Felon, when his goods
are forfeit 127 Fine levied, how avoidable, and for what, 127, 128, 129, 130,
131, 132, 133. 202 Fine to the Lord of a Manor in Copyhold, ought to be
reasonable 143, 144, 145, 146
G.
Grants ancient, not to be drawn in question 6 Grants of the Kings, when void,
and e contra 91, 92 What shall be a good Grant to elect Burgesses to Parliament
126
H.
Heresy, what, how, and by whom punishable 58, 59, 60 Hand, when the right
hand shall be cut off, and for what 74, 75 Habeas Corpus 89, 90 Haeretico
comburendo, the Writ therein lies 98
I.
Impropriations not examinable, and why 4, 5 Confirmed by time, though
defective 5, 6 Impositions, when they may be laid by the King 32, 33, 34
Justices of Peace, when they may award Process of Outlawry 107, 108 Their
Power, as to making Warrants 136, 137, 138
L.
Libells, what shall be judged a Libell, and how, and where to be punished 35,
35 Law of England to be expounded by the Judges of it, and none other 147 Lease
for Lives, when determinable 216
M.
Marriages, Priests Marriages, not void 9 Marches, Courts there when erected,
and why, as also the power of Lords President there 51, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58
Manslaughter, what so adjudged 92, 93 Modus Decimandi what, where suable 155,
156, 157, 158, 159, 160. 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, ad 193 Mean profits,
when to be answered to the King 196
N.
Nobility, Privilege thereof, what 100, 101, 102
O.
Oath, Ex Officio, in what cases the Ordinary may examine Ex Officio upon Oath
25, 26, 27, 28 Office, where traversable 106, 107 Offices, new where, and upon
what cause they may be erected 121, 122, 123 Office found where void, and why
195, 196, 197. 222 Where an Estoppell 210, 211
P.
Procedendo in Loquela not allowable 4 Pardons, what offenses the King may
pardon 28, 29 Praemunire, where it lies, and where not, and against whom 37, 38,
39, 40, 41, 42. 98, 99 Prohibitions in what cases grantable, and against whom,
and by what Courts 43, 44, 45, 46. 52. 60, 61, 62, 63. 66, 67. 80, 81. 89. 90.
150, 151, 152, 153 Piracy, who shall have Pirates goods 77 Proclamations, what
may be prohibited thereby, and the validity thereof 78, 79, 80 Priests may not
be arrested in Holy Church, etc. 104, 105 Perjury, where punishable 106
Poynings Law, how it shall be expounded 114, 115, 116, 117 Portion, what shall
be said a sufficient Child's Portion 117 Palatine County, its Jurisdiction 119
Parliament, Forms and Orders of Parliament 119, 120 Prohibition, where it lies,
and for what, and in what not 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160. 172, 173, 174, 175,
176. 181 ad 193 Primer seisin, where the King shall have it 198, 199 Privilege
of Parliament to be determined by the Court of Parliament 212, 213 Process,
not to be made out of the Star-Chamben, neither for damages nor costs 213
Parish Clerk, who shall choose 219, 220
R.
Recognizances when forfeited, and for what 1, 2, 3 Rent, when determinable by
the Lessors death, and e contra 35, 36 Robbery, where the Hundred may be sued
64, 65 Return, when insufficient, and e contra 135, 136 Returnum Album 222
S.
Stannaries, the Kings Prerogative therein 9, 10, 11 Saltpeter, the Kings
Prerogative therein in several points 12, 13, 14 Simony, what it is, and the
penalty thereof 78 Statute, what Officers shall be within the Stat. 5 E. 6. 16.
for avoiding corruption 82, 83 What is an offense within 11 H. 4. 9. 102, 103
Slander fined in the Star Chamber, and why 108 Seat in the Church, right
thereto 109, 110 Scandalum Magnatum what, and how punishable 138, 139 Sewers,
the Commissiones therein, their power, and how ancient 179, 180
T.
Tail, Tenant in Tail may forfeit his Estate, and when, and for what 6, 7
Treason, what shall so be accounted, and e contra 14, 15, 16 Accessory in
Treason, who 86 Tenure, what shall be said a Tenure in Capite, etc. 140, 141,
142 Tithes subtracted, where to be sued for 165, 166, 167 Tithes to be paid,
and for what, and the neglect thereof how punishable 193, 194 Timber Trees,
Oaks and Ash, who may cut, and e contra 208, 209. 216, 217
V.
Vows, of what validity in Common Law 99
W.
Women, Maids, etc. to take and marry against their Wills, is Felony 18, 19.
104 Wales, Justices there not to be constituted by Commission 50, 51 Witnesses,
Testis singularis not allowable 68 Parties to be no witnesses 72 Widow, when,
and how her election shall determine 117 Winding-sheets, felony to steal them
118 Wills and Testaments, fees for writing thereof, and extortion therein, how
punishable 177, 202 Ward, who shall be a ward to the King, 203, 204, 205 Words,
action for words, where it lies, 207, 208. 221
The End.

