Charles ye. 2d. was proclaimed King of great Britain France and Ireland at
Worcester. 23d Aug: 1651.



Boscobel: OR, THE HISTORY OF HIS Sacred Majesty's Most miraculous Preservation
After the Battle of WORCESTER, 3. Sept. 1651.

JOEL. 1. 2. Hear this ye Old men, and give ear all ye Inhabitants of the Land:
Has this been in your days, or in the days of your Fathers?

LONDON: Printed for Henry Seile, Stationer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, 1660.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
SIR,
AMong the many Addresses, which every day offers Your Sacred Majesty, This
humbly hopes Your particular gracious Acceptance; since it has no other
ambition, then faithfully to represent to Your Majesty, and, by Your Royal
permission, to all the world, the History of those miraculous Providence that
preserved You in the Battle of Worcester, concealed You in the Wilderness at
Boscobel, and led You on Your way toward a Land, where You might safely expect
the returning favors of Heaven; which now, after so long a trial, have
graciously heard our Prayers, and abundantly crowned Your Patience.

And, as in the conduct of a great part of this greatest Affair, it pleased God
(the more to endear his mercies) to make choice of many very little, though fit
Instruments: So has my weakness, by this happy President, been encouraged, to
hope it not unsuitable for me to relate, what the wisest King thought proper
for them to act; wherein yet I humbly beg Your Majesty's pardon, being
conscious to my self of my utter incapacity to express, either Your
unparalled Valor in the day of Contending, or (which is a virtue far less
usual for Kings) Your strong and even Mind in the time of Your Sufferings.

From which sublime Endowments of Your most Heroic Majesty I derive these
comforts to my self, That whoever undertakes to reach at Your Perfections, must
fall short as well as I, though not so much: And while I depend on Your Royal
Clemency more than others, I am more obliged to be

Your Majesty's Most Loyal Subject, AND Most Humble Servant, Tho. Blount.

TO THE READER.
BEhold, I present you with an History of Wonders; wonders so rare and great,
that, as no former Age can parallel, succeeding Times will scarce believe them.

Expect here to read the highest Tyranny and Rebellion that was ever acted by
Subjects, and the greatest hardships and persecutions that ever were suffered
by a King; yet did His Patience exceed His sorrows) and His virtue at last
became victorious.

Some particulars, I confess, are so superlatively extraordinary, that I easily
should fear, they would scarce gain belief, even from my modern Reader, had I
not this strong Argument to secure me, That no ingenuous person will think me
so frontless, as knowingly to write an untruth in an History, where His Sacred
Majesty (my dread Sovereign and the best of Kings) bears the principal part,
and all the other persons concerned in the same action (except the Earl of
Darby and Lord Wilmot) still alive, ready to pour out shame and confusion on
so impudent a Forgery.

But I am so far from that foul crime of publishing what is false, that I can
safely say, I know not one line unauthentick; such has been my care to be sure
of the truth, that I have diligently collected the particulars from most of
their mouths, who were the very Actors themselves in this Scene of Miracles.

To every individual person (as far as my industry could arrive to know) I have
given the due of his merit, be it for Valor, Fidelity, or whatever other
quality, that any way had the honor to relate to His Majesty's service.

And though the whole Complex may want elegance and politeness of style (which
the Nature of such Relations does not properly challenge) yet it cannot want
Truth, the chief ingredient for such Undertakings. In which assurance I am not
afraid to venture my self in your hands.

Read on and wonder.
Charles. II.



THE HISTORY OF HIS SACRED MAJESTY'S Most miraculous preservation AFTER THE
Battle of WORCESTER, etc.
IT was in June in the year 1650. That CHARLES the Second, undoubted heir of
CHARLES the First, of Glorious Memory, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, (After his Royal Father had been Barbarously murdered, and Himself
Banished his own Dominions, by his own rebellious Subjects) took Shipping at
Scheevling in Holland, and, having escaped great dangers at Sea, arrived soon
after at Spey in the North of Scotland.

On the first of January following, His Majesty was Crowned at Scoon, and an
Army raised in that Kingdom, to invade this; in hope to recover His Regalities
here, then most unjustly detained from him, by some Members of the Long
Parliament, and Oliver Cromwell their General; Who soon after most traitorously
assumed the Title of Protector of the new minted Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland.

The first of August 1651. His Majesty with His Army began His March into
England, and on the fifth of the same Month, at His Royal Camp at Woodhouse
near the Border, published His Gracious Declaration of General Pardon and
Oblivion, to all His loving Subjects of the Kingdom of England and Dominion of
Wales, that would desist from assisting the Usurped Authority of the pretended
Commonwealth of England, and return to their obedience. Except only Oliver
Cromwell, Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw, John Cook, and all others, who did
actually sit and vote in the murder of His Royal Father.

His Majesty, after the publication of this gracious Offer, marched his Army
into Lancashire, where He received some considerable Supplies from the Earl of
Derby (that Loyal subject,) and at Warrington Bridge met with the first
opposition made by the Rebels in England, but His Majesty's presence soon put
them to flight.

In this interim His Majesty had sent a Copy of His Declaration, enclosed in a
gracious Letter to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, which, by
order of the Usurpers then sitting at Westminster, was (on the 26. of August)
publicly burnt at the Old Exchange by the Hangman; and their Declaration
Proclaimed there and at Westminster, by beat of Drum and sound of Trumpet; by
which His Sacred Majesty, (to whom they could afford no better title then
Charles Stuart,) His Abettors, Agents and Accomplices, were Declared Traitors,
Rebels and public Enemies. -- Impudence, and Treason beyond Example!

After a tedious March, His Majesty with His Army arrived at Worcester on the
22. of August, (being near three hundred miles from S. Johnstons in Scotland,)
having left the Earl of Darby in Lancashire, as well to settle that and the
adjacent Counties in a liam Penderel, the housekeeper and his wife, who, to
preserve so eminent a person, adventured to receive my Lord, and kept him in
safety till Sunday night following, when (according to my Lords desire of going
to Worcester,) he conveyed him to Mr. Humphry Elliots house at Gataker Park, (a
true hearted Royalist,) which was about nine miles on the way from Boscobel
thither. Mr. Elliot did not only freely entertain the Earl, but lent him ten
pounds, and conducted him and his company safe to Worcester.

The next day after His Majesty arrival at Worcester, being Saturday the 23. of
August, He was Proclaimed King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, by Mr.
Thomas Lisens Mayor, and Mr. James Bridges Sheriff of that Loyal City, with
great acclamations.

On the same day His Majesty's sent abroad a Declaration, Given at His City of
Worcester, summoning, upon their Allegiance, All the neighboring Nobility,
Gentry and others, from sixteen to sixty, to appear in their persons and with
Horse and Arms at Pitchcroft on the Tuesday following, where His Majesty would
be present.

Upon Sunday 24. August. Mr. Crosby (an eminent Divine of that City,) preached
before His Majesty in the Cathedral Church; And in his Prayer styled His
Majesty Supreme head over all persons in his Dominions: At which some of the
Scots took exception, and Mr. Crosby was afterward admonished to forbear such
expressions.

Tuesday the 26. of August was a Rendevouz in Pitchcroft near the City, of such
Loyal Subjects of that and the adjacent Counties as would come in to His
Majesty's aid; Here appeared Francis Lord Talbot (now Earl of Shrewsbury) with
about sixty horse; Mr. Mervin Touchet, Sir John Packington, Sir Walter Blount,
Sir Ralph Clare, Mr. Ralph Sheldon of Beoly, Mr. John Washburn of Witchingford,
with forty horse, Mr. Thomas Hornyold of Blackmore park, with forty horse, Mr.
Tho. Acton, Mr. Rob. Blount of Kenswick, Mr. Rob Wigmore of Lucton, Mr. Francis
Knotsford, Mr. Peter Blount and diverse others. Notwithstanding which access,
the number of His Majesty's Army both English and Scots, was conceived not to
exceed 12000. men, (viz.) ten thousand Scots and about 2000. English, and those
too not excellently Armed, nor plentifully stored with Ammunition.

Mean time Cromwell (that grand Patron of Sectaries) had amassed together a
numerous Body of Rebels, commanded by himself in chief, and by the Lord Gray of
Groby, Fleetwood and Lambert under him, consisting of above thirty thousand
Men, (being generally the Scum and Froth of the whole Kingdom;) One part of
which were Sectaries, who through a Fanatique zeal, were become Devotes to this
great Idol; The other part seduced persons, who either by force or fear were
unfortunately made Actors or participants in this so horrible and fatal a
Tragedy.

Thus then began the Pickeerings to the grand Engagement. Major General Massey
with a commanded party, being sent by His Majesty to secure the Bridge and
Pass at Upton upon Severn, 7. miles below Worcester. On Thursday the 28. of
August, Lambert with a far greater number of Rebels attaq'd him, and atter some
dispute gained the Pass, the river being then fordable. Here the Major General
behaved himself very gallantly, received a Shot in the hand from some
Musketeers the Enemy had placed in the Church, and retreated in good order to
Worcester.

During this Encounter, Cromwell himself, (whose Head-quarter was the night
before at Pershore,) advanced to Stoughton within 4. miles of the City on the
Southside, and that Evening a Party of his horse faced it.

The next day ( August the 29.) the Sultan appeared with a great body of horse
and foot on Redhil within a mile of Worcester, where he made a Bonne- mine, but
attempted nothing; And that night his Headquarters were at Judge Berkleys
house at Speachley.

Saturday (August 30.) It was resolved by His Majesty, a Council of War, to
give the Enemy a Camisado, by beating up his Quarters that night with 1500.
select horse and foot, commanded by Major General Middleton, and Sir William
Keyth; All of them wearing their Shirts over their Armor for distinction; which
accordingly was attempted, and might in all probability have been successful,
had not the design been most traitorously discovered to the Rebels by one
Guyes, a Tailor in the Town, who was hanged afterward as the just reward of
his treachery: In this Action Major Knox was slain and some few taken Prisoners.

A considerable party of the Rebels commanded by Col. Lambert, Col. Ingoldsby,
(not yet a convert) and Col. Gibbons being got over the Severn at Upton,
marched the next day to Powick Town, where they made an Halt; for
Powick-bridge, lying upon the river Team (between Powick Town and Worcester,)
was guarded by a Brigade of His Majesty's horse and foot, commanded by Major
General Robert Montgomery, and Col. George Keyth.

The fatal 3. of September being come, His Majesty this morning holds a Council
of War upon the top of the Colledge-churchsteeple, the better to discover the
Enemies posture; Here His Majesty observed some firing at Powick, and Cromwell
making a bridge of boats over Severn under Bunshill, a mile below the City
toward Team mouth; His Majesty presently goes down, commands all to their
Arms, and marches in person to Powick bridge to give orders, as well for
maintaining that bridge, as for opposing the making the other of boats, and
hasted back to his Army in the City.

Soon after His Majesty was gone from Powick bridge, the Enemy assaulted it
furiously, which was well defended by Montgomery, till himself was dangerously
wounded, and his Ammunition spent, so that he was forced to make a disorderly
retreat into Worcester; And Col. Keyth was taken Prisoner at the Bridge.

At the same time Cromwell had with much celerity finished his bridge of boats
and plancks over the main river, without any considerable opposition, whereby
he might communicate with those of his party at Powick bridge, and was the
first Man that led the rest over, and then went back himself and raised a
Battery of great guns against the Fort-royal on the Southside the City.

His Majesty being returned from Poick bridge, marched, with the Duke of
Buckingham and some of His Cavalry, through the City, and out at Sudbury gate
by the Fort-royal, where the Rebels great shot came frequently near His Sacred
Person.

By this time Cromwell was got to an advantageous Post at Perry wood within a
mile of the City, swelling with pride and confident in the numbers of his men;
but Duke Hamilton (formerly Lord Lanerick,) with his own Troop and some
High-landers, Sir Alexander Forbus with his Regiment of Foot, and diverse
English Lords and Gentlemen volunteers, by His Majesty's command and
encouragement, engaged him, and did great execution upon his best men, forced
the great Sultan (as the Rhodians in like case did the Turk) to retreat with
his Janissaries, and were once Masters of his great Guns.

Here His Majesty gave an incomparable Example of valor to the rest, by
charging in Person, which the High-landers especially imitated in a great
measure, fighting with the but-ends of their muskets, when their Ammunition was
spent; but new Supplies of Rebels being continually poured upon them, and the
Scotch Horse not coming up in due time from the Town to His Majesty's relief,
His Army was forced to retreat in at Sudbury gate in much disorder.

In this Action Duke Hamilton (who fought valiantly) was mortally wounded, of
which he dyed within few days; Sir John Douglas also received his deaths wound,
and Sir Alexander Forbus was Shot through both the calves of his legs, lay in
the wood all night, and was brought a prisoner to Worcester the next day.

The Rebels in this Encounter had great advantage as well in their numbers, as
by fighting both with horse and foot, against His Majesty's foot only, the
greatest part of His horse being wedged up in the Town; and when the foot were
defeated, a part of His Majesty's horse afterward fought against both the
Enemies horse and foot, upon great disadvantage.

At Sudbury gate a Cart laden with Ammunition was overthrown, and lay cross
the passage of the gate, so that His Majesty could not ride into the Town, but
was forced to dismount and come in on foot.

In the Friars street, His Majesty put off his Armor, (which was heavy and
troublesome to him,) and took a fresh horse, and then perceiving many of His
Foot-souldiers begin to throw down their Arms and decline fighting; His Majesty
rod up and down among them, sometimes with his hat in his hand, entreating them
to stand to their Arm's and fight like Men, other whiles encouraging them; but
seeing himself not able to prevail, said, I had rather you would shoot me, then
keep me alive to see the sad consequences of this fatal day: Such was the
magnaminity of this Prophetique King.

During this hot Engagement at Perry-wood and Red-hil, the Rebels on the other
side the Water possessed themselves of S. John's, and those of His Majesty's
Army that were there, without any great resistance laid down their Arms and
submitted to mercy.

When some of the Enemy were entered, and entering the Town both at the Key,
Castle hill) and Sudbury gate, without any Conditions The Earl of Cleveland,
Sir James Hamilton, Col, William Carlis (then Major to the Lord Talbot) Capt.
Tho. Hornyold, Capt. Tho. Giffard, and Capt. Richard Kemble, (Captain
Lieutenant to the Lord Talbot) rallied what force they could (though
inconsiderable to the Rebels numbers,) and Charged the Enemy very gallantly at
Sudbury gate and in the Street or that name: Here Sir James and Capt. Kemble
were desperately wounded, and others slain; yet this Action did much secure His
Majesty's march out at S. Martins gate, who had otherwise been in danger of
being taken in the Town.

About the same time Colonel Drummond with a Party of Scots maintained the
Castle hill with much resolution, till such time as Conditions were agreed on
for Quarter; So that the Rebels, having at last subdued all their opponents,
fell to Plundring the City unmercifully, few or none of the Citizens escaping,
but such as were Sectaries and of their party.

When His Majesty saw no hope of Rallying His thus discomfited foot, He marched
out of Worcester at S. Martins gate, about six of the Clock in the evening with
his main Body of horse, as then commanded by General David Lesley, but were now
in some confusion.

The Foot consisting most of Scots were almost all either slain or taken, and
such of them (who in the Battle escaped death,) lived longer to dye for the
most part more miserably; many of them being afterward knocked of the head by
Country people, some bought and sold like slaves for a small price, others went
begging up and down, till Charity failing them, their necessities brought upon
them diseases, and diseases death.

Before His Majesty was come to Barbon's bridge, about half a mile out of
Worcester, He made several Stands, faced about and desired the Duke of
Buckingham, Lord Wilmet, and other of His Commanders, that they might rally and
try the fortune of War once more. But at the Bridge a serious Consultation was
held, and then perceiving many of the Troopers to throw off their Arms and
shift for themselves, they were all of opinion, the day was irrecoverably lost,
and that their only remaining work was to save His Majesty from those ravenous
Wolves and Regicides; Whereupon His Majesty, by advise of His Council resolved
to march for Scotland.

Immediately after this Result, the Duke asked the Lord Talbot, If he could
direct the way Northwards, His Lordship answered, that he had one Walker in his
Troop (former Scoutmaster to Col, Sands) that knew the way well; Who was
accordingly called to be the Guide, and performed that duty for some miles; but
being come to Kinver heath, not far from Kederminster, and daylight being
gone, Walker was at a puzzle in the way.

Here His Majesty made a Stand, and consulted with the Duke, Earl of Derby,
Lord Wilmot, etc. whether He might march at least to take some hours rest; The
Earl of Derby told His Majesty, that in His flight from Wiggan to Worcester, he
had met with a perfect honest man, and a great convenience of concealment at
Boscobelhouse (before mentioned,) but withal acquainted the King, it was a
Recusants house. And it was suggested, that those people (being accustomed to
persecution and searches,) were most like to have the readiest means and safest
contrivances to preserve Him; His Majesty therefore resolved to go thither.

The Lord Talbot being made acquainted with His Majesty's resolution, and
finding Walker dubious of the way, called for Mr. Charles Giffard, (a faithful
Subject, and of the noble Family of Chillington) to conduct His Majesty toward
Boscobel, which office Mr. Giffard willingly undertook, having one Yates a
servant with him, very expert in the ways of that Country; and being come
near Sturbridge, it was under consideration whether His Majesty should march
through that Town or no, and resolved in the affirmative, and that all about
His Person should speak French, to prevent any discovery of His Majesty's
presence.

Mean time Lesley, with the Scottish Horse, had, in the close of the Evening,
taken the more direct way Northward by Newport, His Majesty being left only
attended by the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Derby, Earl of Lauderdail, Lord
Talbot, Lord Wilmot Colonel Thomas Blague, Colonel Edward Roscarrock, Mr.
Marmaduke Darcy, Mr. Richard Lane, Mr. William Armorer, (since Knighted) Mr.
Hugh May, Mr. Charle Giffard, Mr. Peter Street, and some others, in all about
sixty Horse.

At a house about a mile beyond Sturbridge, His Majesty drank and eat a crust
of bread, the house affording no better provision; and as His Majesty rode on,
he discoursed with Col Roscarrock touching Boscobel-house, and the security
which the Earl of Darby and he found at that place.

Upon further consideration by His Majesty and Council, and to the end the
Company might not know whither His Majesty directly intended, Mr. Giffard was
required to conduct His Majesty to some house near Boscobel, the better to
blind the design of going thither: Mr. Giffard proposed Whiteladies (another
Seat of the Giffards) lying about half a mile beyond Boscobel, and 26. miles
from Worcester, and still reteins its ancient name of Whiteladies, from its
having formerly been a Monastery of Cistertian Nuns, whose habit was of that
color.

His Majesty and his Retinue (being safely conducted to Whiteladies by Mr.
Giffard) alighted, now, as they hoped out of danger of any present surprise by
pursuit; George Pendrel (who was a servant in the house) opened the Doors, and
after His Majesty and the Lords were entered the House, His Majestes Horse was
brought into the Hall, and by this time it was about break of day on Thursday
morning: Here every one was in a sad consult how to escape the fury of
bloodthirsty Enemies, but the greatest solicitude was to save the King, who
was both hungry and tired with this long and hasty March.

Col. Roscarrock presently caused Barthol. Martin (a boy in the House) to be
sent to Boscobel for William Penderel, and Mr. Charles Giffard sent also for
Richard Penderel, who lived near hand at Hobbal Grange, they both came
forthwith to Whiteladies, and were brought into the Parlour to the Earl of
Derby, who immediately took them into the inner Parlour, where the King was,
and told William Penderel in particular, This is the King, (pointing at His
Majesty) thou must have a care of Him, and preserve Him as thou did me; to
which commands William yielded ready obedience, and Mr. Giffard and also much
conjure Richard to have an especial care of his Charge.

Whilst William and Richard were thus sent for, His Majesty had been advised to
rub his hands on the back of the Chimney, and with them his face, in order to a
disguise, and some person had cut off: his Locks of hair His Majesty, having
put off his blue Ribband, Buff-coat, and other Princely ornaments, put on a
noggen course shirt of Edward Martins, who lived in the House, and Richard
Penderels green Suit, and Leather Doublet, but had not time to be so exactly
disguised as he was afterward; for both William and Richard Penderel did
advertise the company to make haste away, in regard there was a Troop of Rebels
commanded by Colonel Ashenhurst, quartered at Cotsal, but three miles distant;
some of which Troop came to the House within half an hour after the Company
were gone.

Richard Penderel conducted the King out at a back door, unknown to most of the
Company, (except some of the Lords and Colonel Roscarrock, who waited on His
Majesty into the backside, and there with sad hearts took leave of him) and
carried him into an adjacent wood belonging to Boscobel, called Spring Coppice,
about half a mile from Whiteladies; William, Humphry and George scouting
abroad, and bringing what news they could learn to His Majesty in the wood, as
occasion required.

His Majesty being thus, as they hoped, in a way of security, the Duke, Earl of
Derby, Earl of Lauderdail, Lord Talbot and the rest (having for their guide Mr.
Charles Giffard, and being then not above 40. horse, of which number His
Majesty's pad-nag was one, rode by Mr. Richard Lane, one of the Groom's of His
Majesty's bedchamber) marched from Whiteladies Northward by the way of
Newport, in hope to overtake or meet General Lesley with the main Body of
Scotch horse.

As soon as they were got into the Road, the Lord Leviston (who commanded His
Majesty's life guard) overtook them, pursued by a party of Rebels, the Lords
with their Followers faced about and repeld them; but when they came a little
beyond Newport, some of Lilburn's men met them in the Front, other Rebels from
Worcester pursued them in the Rear, themselves and horses being sufficiently
tired, the Earl of Derby, Earl of Lauderdail, Mr. Charles Giffard and some
others, were taken and carried prisoners, first to Whitchurch, and from thence
to an Inn in Bunbury, where Mr. Giffard found means to make an escape; but the
noble Earl of Derby was carried to Westchester, and there tried by a pretended
Court Martial, held the first of October 1651. by virtue of a Commission from
Cromwell, grounded on an execrable Rump-Act, of the 12. of August then last
past, the very title whereof cannot be mentioned without horror, but it
pretended most traitorously to prohibit correspondence with CHARLES STUART
(their lawful Sovereign) under penalty of high Treason, loss of life and estate
-- Prodigious Rebels!

In this black Tribunal there sat, as Judges, these persons, and under these
titles: Col. Humphry Mackworth (who was placed in the Sella Curulis) President.
Major General Mitton. Col. Robert Duckenfield. Col. Henry Bradshaw. Col. Thomas
Croxton. Col. George Twisleton. Lieu. Col. Henry Birkinhead. Lieu. Col. Simon
Finch. Lieu. Col. Alex. Newton. Capt. James Stepford. Capt. Samuel Smith. Capt.
John Downs. Capt. Vincent Corbet. Capt. John Delves. Capt. John Griffith.
Capt. Tho. Portington. Capt. Edward Alcock. Capt. Ralph Pownall. Capt. Rich.
Grantham. Capt. Edw. Stelfax.


This was the Authority, and some of these the persons that condemned this
noble Earl to death, notwithstanding his just Plea, That he had Quarter given
him by one Captain Edge, who took him Prisoner. But this could not obtain
Justice; nor any Intercession, mercy; So that on the 15. of October, He was
executed at Boulton in Lancashire, in a most barbarous and inhumane manner.

The Earl of Lauderdail with diverse others were carried prisoners to Windsor
castle, where they continued many years.

Whilst the Rebels were plundring these noble persons, the Duke, with the Lord
Leviston, Col. Blague, Mr. Marmaduke Darcy, and Mr. Hugh May, forsook the road,
and betook themselves to a by-way and got into Chessardine woods, not far from
N^wport, where they received some refreshment at a little obscure house, and
afterward met with two honest: Laborers in an adjoining wood, to whom they
commmunicated the exigent and distress which the fortune of war had reduced
them to, and finding them like to prove faithful, the Duke thought fit to
imitate his Royal Master, quitted his horse, delivered his George (which was
given him by the Queen of England) to Mr. May (who preserved it through all
difficulties, and after restored it to his Grace in Holland) and changed habit
with one of the Workmen; and in this disguise was conveyed by one Nich. Mathews
a Carpenter, to the house of Mr. Hawley an hearty Cavalier at Bilstrop in
Nottingamshire, from thence to the Lady Villiers house at Brooksby in
Leicestershire, and, after many hardships and encounters, his Grace got secure
to London, and from thence to His Majesty in France.

At the same time the Lord Leviston, Col. Blague, Mr. Darcy, and Mr. May, all
quitted their horses, severally shifted for themselves, and most of them,
through various dangers and sufferings, contrived their escapes; In particular
Mr. May lay 21. days in a hay-mow belonging to one Bold an honest husband man,
who lived near Chessardine; Bold having all that time Rebel-souldiers quartered
in his house, yet faild not to give a constant relief to his more welcome Guest,
and when the Coast was clear of Soldiers, Mr. May came to London on foot in a
disguise.

The Lord Talbot (seeing no hope of rallying,) hasted toward his Fathers house
at Longford near Newport, where being arrived, he conveyed his horse into a
neighbors barn, but was immediately pursued by the Rebels, who found the horse
sadled, and by that concluded my Lord to be not far off, so that they searched
Longford house narrowly, and some of them continued in it four or five days;
during all which time my Lord was in a close place in one of the outhouses,
almost stifled for want of air, and had infallibly perished for want of food,
had he not been once relieved in the dead of night, and with much difficulty by
a servant; yet his Lordship thought it a great providence, even by these
hardships, to escape the fury of such enemies, who sought the destruction of
the Nobility, as well as of their King.

In this interim the valiant Earl of Cleveland, (who being above 60. years of
age, had marched 21. days together upon a trotting horse) had also made his
escape from Worcester when all the fighting work was over, and was got to
Woodcot in Shropshire, whither he was pursued, and taken at one Mris.
Broughtons house.

The Scotch Cavalry (having no place to retreat unto nearer then Scotland,)
were soon after totally dispersed, and most of them taken by the Rebels and
Country people in Cheshire, Lancashire, and parts adjacent.

Thus was this Royal Army totally subdued, thus dispersed; and if in this so
important affair any of the Scottish Commanders were treacherous at Worcester,
(as some suspected,) they have a great Account to make for the many years
miseries that ensued thereby to both Nations, under the tyrannical government
of Cromwell

But to return to the duty of my attendance on His Sacred Majesty in Spring
Coppice; By that time Richard Penderel had conveyed Him into the obscurest part
of it, it was about sunrising on thursday morning, and the heavens wept
bitterly at these calamities; insomuch as the thickest tree in the wood was not
able to keep His Majesty dry, nor was there any thing for Him to sit on;
Wherefore Richard went to Francis Yates house, (a trusty neighbor, who married
his wifes sister,) where he borrowed a blanket, which he folded and laid on the
ground for his Majesty to sit on.

At the same time Richard spoke to the goodwife Yates, to provide some
victuals, and bring it into the wood at a place he appointed her, she presently
made ready a mess of milk and some butter and eggs, and brought them to His
Majesty in the wood; Who being a little surpised to see the woman (no good
concealer of a secret,) said cheerfully to her; good woman, Can you be
faithful to a distressed Cavalier? She answered, Yes Sir, I will dye rather
then discover you; with which Answer His Majesty was well satisfied.

The Lord Wilmot in the interim took John Penderel for his guide, but knew not
determinately whither to go, purposing at first to have marched Northwards,
but as they passed by Brewood Forge, the forgemen made after them, till being
told by one Richard Dutton, that it was Col. Crompton whom they pursued, the
Vulcans happily, upon that mistake, quitted the chase.

Soon after they narrowly escaped a party of Rebels as they passed by
Coven-brook; so that seeing danger on every side, and John meeting with William
Walker (a trusty neighbor,) committed my Lord, to his care and council, who
for present conveyed them into a dry marl-pit (where they staid a while,) and
afterward to one Mr. Huntbaches house at Brinsford, and put their horses into
John Evans barn, whilst John Penderel goes to Wolverhampton to see what
convenience he could find for my Lords coming thither, but met with none, the
Town being full of Soldiers.

Yet John leaves no means unessayed, hastens to Northcot, (an adjacent village)
and there, whilst he was talking with Goodwife Underhill (a neighbor,) in the
instant Mr. John Huddleston (a sojourner at Mr. Thomas Whitgreaves of Moseley,
and of John's acquaintance) was accidentally passing by, to whom John (well
assured of his integrity,) presently addresses himself and his business,
relates to him the sad news of the defeat of His Majesty's Army at Worcester,
and discovers in what straits and confusion he had left His Majesty and His
followers at Whiteladies, and in particular that he had brought thence a person
of Quality, (for John then knew not who my Lord was) to Huntbaches house, who,
without present relief, would be in great danger of being taken.

Mr. Huddleston goes home forthwith, takes John with him and acquaints Mr.
Whitgreave with the business, who freely resolved to venture all, rather then
such a person should miscarry.

Hereupon Mr. Whitgreave repaires to Huntbaches house, speaks with my Lord, and
gives direction how he should be privately conveyed into His house at Moseley
about ten of the clock at night; and, though it so fell out that the directions
were not punctually observed, yet my Lord and his Man were at last brought into
the house, where Mr. Whitgreave, (after some refreshment given them) conveys
them into a secret place, which my Lord admiring for its excellent contrivance,
and solicitous for His Majesty's safety, said, I would give a world my friend
(meaning the King) were here; and then deposited in Mr. Whitgreaves custody a
little bag of Jewels, which my Lord received again at his departure.

As soon as it was day Mr. Whitgreave sent William Walker with my Lords horses
to his neighbor Col. John Lane of Bentley near Walsal, South-east from Moseley
about four miles, (whom Mr. Whitgreave knew to be a right honest Gentleman, and
ready to contribute any assistance to so charitable a work) and wished Walker
to acquaint the Colonel, that they were the Horses of some eminent person about
the King, whom he could better secure than his horses: The Col. willingly
receives the horses, and sends word to Mr. Whitgreave to meet him that night in
a Close not far from Moseley, in order to the tender of farther service to the
owner of the horses, whose name neither the Colonel nor Mr. Whitgreave then
knew.

On Thursday night, when it grew dark, His Majesty resolved to go from those
parts into Wales, and to take Richard Penderel with him for his guide; but,
before they began their journey, His Majesty went into Richards house at Hobbal
Grange, where the old Goodwife Penderel had not only the honor to see His
Majesty, but to see Him attended by her son Richard: Here His Majesty had time
and means better to complete His disguise; His name was agreed to be Will.
Jones, and His arms a wood Bill: In this posture about nine a Clock at night
(after some refreshment taken in the house) His Majesty, with His trusty
servant Richard, began their journey on foot, resolving to go that night to
Madeley in Shropshire, about five miles from Whiteladies, and within a mile of
the River Severn, over which their way lay for Wales; in this Village lived
one Mr. VVoolf, an honest Gentleman of Richards aquaintance.

His Majesty had not been long gone, but the Lord VVilmot sent John Penderel
from Mr. Whitegreaves to Whiteladies, to know in what security the King was,
John returned and acquainted my Lord that His Majesty was marched from thence;
Hereupon my Lord began to consider which way himself should remove with safety.

Col. Lane, having secured my Lords horses, and being come to Moseley according
to appointment on Friday night, was brought up to my Lord by Mr. Whitgreave,
and (after mutual salutation) acquainted him, that his sister Mrs. Jane Lane
had by accident procured a Pass from some Commander of the Rebels, for her self
and a man to go to Bristol to see her sister, then near her time of lying in;
and freely offered, if His Lordship thought fit, he might make use of it, which
my Lord seemed inclinable to accept; and on Saturday night was conducted by
Col. Lanes man (himself not being well) to the Col. house at Bentley, His
Lordship then and not before discovering his Name to Mr. Whitgreave, and giving
him many thanks for so great a kindness in so imminent a danger.

Before His Majesty came to Madeley, He met with an ilfavoured encounter at
Evelin Mill being about 2. miles from thence; The Miller (it seems) was an
honest-man, but His Majesty and Richard knew it not, and had then in his house
some considerable persons of His Majesty's Army, who took shelter there in
their flight from Worcester, and had not been long in the Mill, so that the
Miller was upon his watch, and Richard, unhappily permitting a gate to clap,
through which they passed, gave occasion to the Miller to come out of the Mill
and boldly ask who is there? Richard, thinking the Miller had pursued them,
quitted the usual way in some have, and led His Majesty over a little brook,
which they were forced to wade through, and which contributed much toward the
surbating and galling His Majesty's Feet. Here His Majesty (as he afterward
pleasantly observed) was in some danger of losing his Guide, but that the
rusling of Richards calves-skin breeches was the best direction His Majesty had
to follow him in that dark night.

His Majesty arrived at Madeley about Midnight, Richard goes to Mr, Woolfs
house, where they were all in bed, knocks them up and acquaints Mr. Woolfs
Daughter, (who came to the door) that the King was there, who presently
received him into the house, where His Majesty refreshed himself for some time;
but, understanding that the Rebels kept several Guards upon Seavern, and it
being feared that some of their party (of which many frequently passed through
the Town,) might quarter at the house (as had often happened,) it was apprehended
unsafe for His Majesty to lodge in the house (which afforded no secret place
for concealment,) but rather to retire into a barn near adjoining, as less
liable to the danger of a surprise, whither His Majesty went accordingly, and
continued there all the day following, His servant Richard attending him.

During His Majesty's stay in the Barn, Mr. Woolf had often conference with him
about His intended journey, and in order thereto took care by a trusty servant
(sent abroad for that purpose,) to inform himfelf more particularly of those
guards upon Seavern, and had certain word brought him, that not only the
bridges were secured, but all the Passage-boats seized on; Insomuch as he
conceived it very hazardous for His Majesty to prosecute His design for Wales,
but rather to go to Boscobel-house, being the most retired place for
concealment in all the Country, and to stay there till an oppotunity of a
further safe conveyance could be found out; which advice His Majesty inclined
to approve: And thereupon resolved for Boscobel the night following; in the
mean time His hands not appearing sufficiently discolored, suitable to His
other disguise, Mris. Woolf provided Walnut-tree leaves, as the readiest
expedient for that purpose.

The day being over, His Majesty adventured to come again into the house, where
having for some time refreshed himself, and being furnished with conveniecies
for His Journey, (which was conceived to be safer on root than by horse) He
with his faithful guide Richard about eleven of the clock at night, set forth
toward Boscobel.

About three of the clock on Saturday morning, being come near the house,
Richard left His Majesty in the wood, whilst he went in to see it no Soldiers
were there or other danger; Where he found Col. William Carlis, (who had seen,
not the last man born, but the last man killed, at Worcester, and) who, having
with much difficulty, made his escape from thence; was got into his own
neighbor-hood, and, for some time concealing himself in Bescebel wood, was come
that morning to the house to get some relief of William Penderel, his old
acquaintance.

Richard having acquainred the Col. that the King was in the wood, the Col.
with William and Richard go presently thither to give their attendance, where
they found His Majesty sitting on the root of a tree, who was glad to see the
Col. and came with them into the house, and did there eat bread and cheese
heartily, and (as an Extraordinary) William Penderels wife made His Majesty a
Posset, of thin milk and small beer, and got ready some warm water to wash His
feet, not only extreme dirty, but much galled with travail.

The Col. Pulled off His Majesty's shoos, which were full of gravel, and
stockens which were very wet, and there being no other shoos in the house that
would fit His Majesty, the good wife put some hot embers in those to dry them,
whilst His Majesty's feet were washing and his stockens shifted.

Being thus a little refreshed, the Col. Persuaded His Majesty to go back into
the wood, (supposing it safer then the house,) where the Colonel made choice of
a thick leafed Oak, into which William and Richard helped both the King and the
Col. and brought them such provision as they could get, with a cushion for His
Majesty to sit on; In this Oak they continued most part of that day, and the
Col. humbly desired His Majesty (who had taken little or no rest the two
preceding nights,) to seat himself as easily as he could in the tree, and rest
his head on the Colonels lap, who was watchful that His Majesty might not
fall; and in this posture His Majesty slumbred away some part of the day, and
bore all these hardships and afflictions with incomparable Patience.

In the Evening they returned to the house, where William Penderel acquainted
His Majesty with the secret place, wherein the Earl of Derby had been secured,
which His Majesty liked so well, that He resolved, whilst He staid there, to
trust only to that, and go no more into the Royal Oak, as from hence it must
be called, where he could not so much as sit at ease.

1 Boscobel House. 2 White Ladies. 3 Boscobel garden. 4 The Arbor, and Mount in
the Garden wherein his Matie. sat. 5 The back door through which his Maty.
passed to go to the Oak. 6 Boscobel Wood. 7 A Stone Table in the Wood. 8 The
Royal Oak, in which his Maty. and Col: Carlos sat. 9 Spring Coppice. 10 His
Mty. and Rich: Penderel under a Tree there. 11 His Matys. Troop marching from
White-Ladies. 12 The Plain between Boscobel Wood, and Spring-Coppice.




His Majesty now, esteeming himself in some better security, permitted William
Penderel to shave Him, and cut the hair of his head, as short at top as the
Scissers would do it, but leaving some about the ears, according to the Country
mode; Col. Carlis attending, told His Majesty, Will was but a mean Barber; To
which His Majesty answered, He had never been shaved by any Barber before: The
King bade William burn the Hair which he cut off, but Will. was only
disobedient in that, for he kept a good part of it, wherewith he has since
pleasur'd some persons of Honor, and is kept as a civil Relic.

Humphry Penderel was this Saturday designed to go to shefnal, to pay some
taxes to one Captain Broadway; At whose house he met with a Colonel of the
Rebels, who was newly come from Worcester in pursuit of the King, and who being
inform^d the King had been at Whiteladies, and that Humphry was a near Neighbor
to the place, examined him strictly, and laid before him as well the penalty for
concealing the King, which was death without mercy; as the reward for
discovering him, which should be one thousand pounds certain pay, but neither
fear of punishment nor hope of reward, was able to tempt Humphry into any
disloyalty; He pleaded ignorance and was dismissed; And on Saturday night
related to His Majesty and the loial Colonel at Boscobel, what had passed
betwixt him and the Rebel Colonel at Shefual.

This night the Good wife (whom His Majesty was pleased to call My dame Joan)
provided some chickens for His Majesty's supper, (a dainty He had not lately
been acquainted with,) and a little Pallet was put into the secret place for
His Majesty to rest in; some of the brothers being continually upon duty,
watching the Avenues of the House and the road way, to prevent the danger of a
surprise.

After supper Col. Carlis ask^d His Majesty what meat he would please to have
provided for the Morrow, being Sunday, His Majesty desired some mutton, if it
might be had; But it was thought dangerous for William to go to any market to
buy it, since his Neighbors all knew he did not use to buy such for his own
diet, and so it might beget a suspicion of his having strangers at his house;
But the Col. found another expedient to satisfy His Majesty's desires; Early on
Sunday morning he repairs to Mr. William Stauntons sheep-coat, who rented some
of Boscobel grounds, here he chose one of the best sheep, sticks him with his
dagger, then sends Will. for the Mutton, who brings him home on his back.

On Sunday morning ( Sept. the seventh) His Majesty got up early (his dormitory
being none of the best, nor his bed the easiest,) and near the secret place
where the lay, had the convenience of a Gallery to walk in, where he was
observed to spend some time in his Devotions, and where He had the advantage of
a window, which surveid the Road from Tongue to Brewood; Soon after His Majesty
coming down into the Parlor, his nose fell a bleeding, which put his poor
faithful servants into a great fright, but His Majesty was pleased soon to
remove it, by telling them, It often did so.

As soon as the Mutton was cold, William cut it up and brought a leg of it into
the Parlor, His Majesty called for a knife and a trencher, and cut some of it
into Collops and pricked them with the knif's point, then called for a
drying pan and butter, and fried the Collops himself, of which he ate heartily,
Col. Carlis the while being but Under-Cook, (and that honor enough too,) made
the fire and turned the Collops in the Pan.

When the Colonel afterward attended His Majesty in France, His Majesty
calling to remembrance this passage, among others, was pleased merrily to
propose it, as a problematical Question, whether Himself or the Col. were the
Master-Cook at Boscobel; and the supremacy was of right adjudg'd to His Majesty.

All this while the other brothers of the Penderels were in their several
stations, either scouting abroad to learn Intelligence, or upon some other
service; but it so pleased God, that, though the Soldiers had some Intelligence
that His Majesty had been at Whiteladies, and none that he was gone thence, yet
this House (which proved a happy sanctuary for His Majesty in this sad
Exigent,) has not at all been searched during His Majesty's abode there, though
that had several times, this perhaps the rather escaping, because the Neighbors
could truly inform none but poor Servants to be here.

His Majesty, finding himself in a hopeful security, spent some part of this
Lord's Day in a pretty Arbor in Boscobel garden, which grew upon a Mount, and
wherein there was a Stone Table and Seats about it. In this place He passed
away some time in reading, and commended the place for its retiredness.

His Majesty, understanding by John Penderel, that the Lord Wilmot was at Mr.
Whitgreaves, (for John knew not of his remove to Bentley,) was desirous to let
my Lord know wh^re he was, and in what security.

To this end John Penderel was sent on Sunday morning to Moseley; But John,
finding my Lord removed thence, was much troubled, and then acquainted Mr.
Whitgreave and Mr. Huddleston, that His Majesty was re^urn'd to Boscobel, and
the disaccommodation He had there; whereupon they both resolve to go with John
to Bentley, where having gained him an access to my Lord, His Lordship designed
to attend the King that night at Moseley, and desired Mr. Whitgreave to meet
his Lordship at a place appointed about 12. of the clock, And Mr. Huddleston to
nominate a place where he would attend His Majesty about one of the clock, the
same night.

Upon this Intelligence my Lord made stay of Mrs. Jane Lanes Journey to
Bristoll, till His Majesty's pleasure were known.

John returned to Boscobel in the Afternoon with intimation of this designed
meeting with my Lord at Moseley that night, and the place which was appointed
by Mr. Huddleston, where His Majesty should be expected. But His Majesty,
having not recovered his late foot-journey to Madeley, was not able without a
horse, to perform this to Moseley, which was about five miles distant from
Boscobel, and near the mid from thence to Bentley.

It was therefore concluded that His Majesty should ride upon Humphry Penderels
Mill-horse (for Humphry was the Miller of whiteladies Mill,) The horse was
taken up from Grass, and accoutr'd not with rich trappings or furniture,
befitting so great a King, but with a pitiful old Saddle and a worse bridle.

When His Majesty was ready to take horse, Col. Carlis humbly took leave of
Him, being so well known in the Country, that his attendance upon His Majesty
would in all probability have proved rather a disservice then otherwise,
however his hearty prayers were not wanting for His Majesty's preservation.

Thus then His Majesty was mounted, and thus he rode toward Moseley, attended
by all the honest brothers, William, John, Richard, Humphry, and George
Penderel, and Francis Yates, each of these took a Bill or pike-staff on his
back, and some of them had pistols in their pockets, two marched before, one on
each side His Majesty's horse, and two came behind a loof off; their design
being this, that in case they should have been questioned or encountr'd but by
five or six troopers or such like sma l party, they would have showed their
valor in defending, as well as they had done their fidelity in otherwise
serving His Majesty: And though it was near Midnight, yet they conducted His
Majesty through by-ways, for better Security.

After some experience had of the horse, His Majesty complained, It was the
Heaviest Dull Jade he ever rode on, to which ( Humphry the Owner of him)
Answered (beyond the usual notion of a Miller,) My Liege! Can you blame the
horse to go heavily, when he has the weight of three Kingdoms on his back?

When His Majesty came to Penford Mill, within two Miles of Mr. Whitgreaves
house, His Guides desired Him to alight and go on foot the rest of the way,
for more security, the Foot way being the more private and the nearer, and at
last they arrived at the place appointed by Mr. Huddleston, (which was a little
grove of trees in a Close of Mr. Whitgreaves called the Pit-leasow,) in order to
His Majesty's being privately conveyed into Mr. Whitgreaves house; William,
Humphry, and George, returned with the horse, the other three attended His
Majesty to the House; but His Majesty, being gone a little way, had forgot (it
seems) to bid Farewell to William and the rest, who were going back, so He called
to them and said, My troubles make me forget my self, I thank you all, and gave
them His hand to kiss.

The Lord Wilmot, in pursuance of his own appointment; came to the meeting
place at his hour, where Mr. Whitgreave received him and conveyed him to his old
chamber, but hearing nothing of the King at his prefixed time, gave occasion to
suspect some misfortune might have befaln him, though the night was very dark
and rainy, which might possibly be the occasion of so long stay; Mr. Whitgreave
therefore leaves my Lord in his chamber, and goes to Pit-leasow, where Mr.
Huddleston attended His Majesty's coming, and about two hours after the time
appointed His Majesty came, whom Mr. Whitgreave and Mr. Huddleston, conveyed,
with much satisfaction into the house to my Lord, who expected him with great
solicitude, and presently kneeld down and embraced His Majesty's knees, who
kissed my Lord on the cheek, and asked him earnestly, what is become of
Buckingham, Cleveland, and others? To which my Lord could give little
satisfaction, but hoped they were safe.

My Lord (addressing himself to Mr. Whitgreave and Mr. Huddleston,) said,
though I have concealed my friends name all this while, now I must tell you,
this is my Master, your Master, and the Master of us all; not knowing that they
understood it was the King; Whereupon His Majesty was pleased to give his hand
to Mr. Whitgreave and Mr. Huddleston to kiss, and told them he had received
such an Account from my Lord Wilmot of their fidelity, that he should never
forget it; and presently asked Mr. Whitgreave, where is your secret place?
which being showed His Majesty, He was pleased therewith, and returning into my
Lords chamber, sat down on the bedside, where his Nose fell a bleeding; and
then pulled out of his pocket a handkercher, suitable to the rest of his apparel,
both course and dirty.

His Majesty's Attire, as was before observed in part, was then a
leather-doublet, a pair of green breeches and a Jump-coat (as the Country
call's it) of the same green, a pair of his own stockens with the tops cut off,
because embroidered, and a pair of stirrup stockens, which were lent him at
Madeley, a pair of old shoos, cut and slashed to give ease to his feet, an old
gray, greazy hat without a lyning, a noggen shirt, of the coursest linen, His
face and hands made of a reechy complexion, by the help of the Walnut-tree
leaves.

Mr. Huddleston, observing the coursness of His Majesty's shirt to disease him
much and hinder His rest, asked my Lord, if the King would be pleased to change
His shirt, which His Majesty condescended unto, and presently put off his
course shirt and put on a flexen one of Mr. Huddleston's, who pulled off His
Majesty's shoos and stockens, and put him on fresh stockens, and dried His
Feet, where he found some body had innocently but indiscreetly put white paper,
which, with going on foot from the place where His Majesty alighted to the
house, was rolled between his stockens and his skin, and served to increase
rather then assuage the soarness of his feet.

Mr. Whitgreave had by this time brought up some biscuit and a bottle of sack,
His Majesty ate of the one, and drank a good glass of the other; and, being
thus refreshed, was pleased to say cheerfully, I am now ready for another
March; And if it shall please God once more to place me in the head of but
eight or ten thousand good Men, of one mind, and resolved to fight, I shall not
doubt to drive these Rogues out of my Kingdoms.

It was now break of the day on Monday morning the eighth of September, and His
Majesty was desirous to take some rest: In order whereto a Palet was carried
into one of the secret places, where His Majesty lay down, but rested not so
well as His Host desired, for the place was close and inconvenient, and they
durst not adventure to put Him into any bed in an open Chamber.

After some rest taken in the hole, His Majesty got up, and was pleased to take
notice of, and salute Mr. Whitgreaves Mother, and (having His place of retreat
still ready) sat between whiles in a Closet over the Porch, where He might see
those that passed the road by the house.

Before the Lord Wilmot betook himself to his Dormitory, he conferred with Mr.
VVhitgreave, and advised, that himself or Mr. Huddleston would be always
vigilant about the house, and give notice if any Soldiers came, and (says
this noble Lord) If it should so fall out that the Rebels have intelligence of
your harboring any of the Kings Party, and should therefore put you to any
torture for confession, be sure you discover me first, which may happily in such
case satisfy them, and preserve the King. This was the expression and care of
a loyal Subject, worthy eternal memory.

On Monday His Majesty and my Lord resolved to dispatch John Penderel to Col.
Lane at Bentley, with direction for the Colonel to send my Lords horses for him
that night about midnight, and to expect him at the usual place: My Lord
accordingly goes to Bentley again that night, to make way for His Majesty's
reception there, in order to a resolution taken up by His Majesty to go
Westward, under the protection of Mrs. Jane Lanes Pass; it being most probable,
that the Rebels wholly pursued His Majesty Northwards, and would not at all
suspect Him gone into the West.

This Monday afternoon Mr. Whitgreave had notice that some Soldiers were in
the neighborhood intending to apprehend him, upon information that he had been
at Worcester Fight: The King was then lain down upon Mr. Huddlestons bed, but
Mr. Whitgreave presently secures his Royal Guest in the secret place, and my
Lord also, leaves open all the Chamber doors, and goes boldly down to the
Soldiers, assuring them (as his Neighbors also testified) that he had not
been from home in a fortnight then last past; with which asseveration the
Soldiers were satisfied, and came not up stairs at all.

In this interval the Rebels had taken a Cornet in Cheshire, who came in His
Majesty's Troop to Whiteladies, and, either by menaces or some other way, had
extorted this confession from him concerning the King, (Whom these Bloud-hounds
sought with all possible diligence) that he came in company with His Majesty to
Whiteladies, where the Rebels conceived He might still be; whereupon they
posted thither without ever drawing bit, almost killed their horses, and
brought the fainthearted Prisoner with them.

Being come to Whiteladies on Tuesday, they call for Mr. George Giffard, who
lived in an appartiment of the House, present a Pistol to his breast, and bad
him confess where the King was, or he should presently dye; Mr. Giffard was
too loyal, and too much a Gentleman to be frighted into any infidelity,
resolutely denies the knowing any more, but that diverse Cavaliers came thither
on Wednesday night, are up their provision and departed, and that he was as
ignorant who they were as whence they came, or whither they went, and begged, if
he must dye, that they would first give him leave to say a few prayers: One of
these Villains answered, If you can tell us no news of the King, you shall say
no prayers: But his discreet answer did somewhat assuage the fury of their
Leader, yet they searched every corner of the house, broak down much of the
Wainscoat, and at last beat their Intelligencer severely for making them lose
their labors.

During this Tuesday, in my Lord Wilmots absence, His Majesty was for the most
part attended by Mr. Huddleston, Mr. VVhitgreave being much abroad in the
neighborhood, and Mrs. VVhitgreave below stairs, both inquisitive after news,
and the motions of the Soldiery, in order to the preservation of their Royal
Guest; the old Gentlewoman was this day told by a Country man, who came to her
house, that he heard the King, upon his retreat, had beaten His Enemies at
VVarrington bridge, and that there were three Kings come in to his assistance;
which story she related to His Majesty for divertisement, Who smiling,
answered, Surely they are the three Kings of Colein come down from heaven, for
I can imagine none else.

His Majesty out of the Closet window, espied two Soldiers, who passed by the
gate in the Road, and told Mr. Huddleston, he knew one of them to be a
Highlander and of his own Regiment; who little thought his King and Colonel was
so near.

And His Majesty for entertainment of the time was pleased to discourse with
Mr. Huddleston the particulers of the Battle of Worcester (the same in
substance with what is before related.) And by some words which His Majesty let
fall, it might easily be collected that His Councils had been too often sooner
discovered to the Rebels, than executed by His loyal Subjects.

Mr. Huddleston had under his charge young Sir John Preston, Mr. Thomas Palyn
and Mr. Francis Reynolds, and on this Tuesday in the morning (the better to
conceal His Majesty's being in the house, and excuse his own more than usual
long stay above stairs) pretended himself to be indisposed and afraid of the
soldiers, and therefore set his scholars at several Garret windows, that
surveyed the roades, to watch and give notice when they saw any Troopers
coming; This service the youths performed very diligently all day, and at
night, when they were at Supper, Sir John called upon his Companions, and said
(more truly then he imagined,) Come Lads, Let us eat lustly, for we have been
upon the lifeguard to day.

On Tuesday night between twelve and one of the clock, The Lord Wilmot sent
Col. Lane to attend His Majesty to Bentley, Mr. Whitgreave meets the Colonel at
the place appointed, and brings him to the Corner of his Orchard, Where the
Colonel thought fit to stay, whilst Mr. Whitgreave goes in and acquaints the
King that he was come: Whereupon His Majesty presently took his leave of Mris.
Whitgreave, saluted her and gave her many thanks for his entertainment, but was
pleased to be more particular with Mr. Whitgreave and Mr. Huddleston, not only
by giving them thanks, but by telling them, he was very sensible of the dangers
they might incur by entertaining Him, if it should chance to be discovered;
Therefore His Majesty advised them to be very careful of themselves, and gave
them direction to repair to a Merchant in London, who should have order to
furnish them with moneys and means of conveiance beyond sea, if they thought
fit. However His Majesty concluded, that if it should please God ever to
restore him to the Government of His Dominions, He should not be unmindful of
their civilities and fidelity to Him. Thus grateful was this Excellent King,
for even that which was every good subjects duty, and thus sollicitous (in the
midst of His own dangers) for their Security.

After His Majesty had vouchsafed these gracious expressions to Mr. Whitgreave
and Mr. Huddleston, they told His Majesty, All the service they could now do
Him, was to pray heartily to Almighty God for His safety and preservation, and
then kneeling down, His Majesty gave them His hand to kiss, and so went down
stairs with them into the Orchard, where Mr. Whitgreave both humbly and
faithfully delivered his great Charge into Col. Lanes hands, telling the
Colonel who the person was he there presented to him.

The night was both dark and cold, and His Majesty's clothing thin, therefore
Mr. Huddleston humbly offered His Majesty a Cloak, which He was pleased to
accept and wore to Bentley, from whence Mr. Huddleston afterward received it.

As soon as Mr. Whitgreave and Mr. Huddleston heard His Majesty was not only
got safe to Bentley, but marched securely from thence, they began to reflect
upon His advice, and, lest any discovery should be made of what had been acted
at Moseley, they both absented themselves from home; The one went to London, the
other to a friends house in Warwickshire, where they lived privately til such
time as they heard His Majesty was safely arrived in France, and that no part
of the aforesaid transactions at Moseley had been discovered to the Rebels, and
then returned home.

This Mr. Whitgreave is descended of the ancient family of the Whitgreaves of
Burton in the County of Stafford, and was first a Cornet, afterward Lieutenant
to Capt Tho. Giffard, in the first War for His late Majesty.

Mr. John Huddleston is a younger brother of the renowned Family of the house
of Hutton-John in the County of Cumberland, and was a Gentleman volunteir in
His late Majesty's service, first under Sir John Preston the Elder, till Sir
John was rendered unserviceable by the desperate wounds he received, and after
under Colonel Ralph Pudsey at Newark.

His Majesty, being safely conveyed to Bentley by Col. Lane, staid there but a
short time, took the opportunity of Mris. Janes Pass, and rode before her to
Bristow, the Lord Wilmot attending, for the most part at a distance. In all
which Journey Mris. Lane performed the part of a most faithful and prudent
Servant to His Majesty, showing her observance, when any opportunity would
allow it, and at other times acting her part in the disguise with much
discretion.

But His Majesty's particular Gists to Bristow and to the houses of several
loyal subjects, both in Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Hampshire and so to
Brighempston in Sussex, where He, about the end of October 1651. took shipping,
and landed securely at Deip in France, and the several accidents, hardships and
encounters, in all that Journey, can now be exactly related by none but His
Majesty himself; since the much lamented death of that faithful Subject and
excellent Soldier the Lord Wilmot, who was created Earl of Rochester, as a
part of that recompense His Majesty thought due to so great a fidelity.

The very next day after His Majesty was gone from Boscobel, being Monday the
8. of September, two parties of Rebels came thither, the one being part of the
County Troop, who searched the house with some civility; The other, Capt.
Broadwayes men, these searched severely, eat up their little Store of
provision, plundered the house of what was portable, and one of them presented
a pistol to William Penderel, and much frighted My dame Joan; yet both Parties
returned, as empty as they came, of that intelligence they so greedily sought
after.

This danger being over, honest William began to think of making satisfaction
for the fat Mutton, and accordingly tendered Mr. Staunton its worth in money;
but Staunton, understanding the Sheep was killed for the relief of some honest
Cavaliers, who had been sheltered at Boscobel refused to take the money, but
wished, much good it might do them.

These Penderels were of honest Parentage, but mean degree, six brothers born
at Hobbal Grange in the Parish of Tongue, and County of Salop William, John,
Richard, Humphry, Thomas and George; John, Thomas and George were Soldiers in
the first War for His late Majesty, Thomas was slain at Stow fight, William, as
you have heard, was a servant at Boscobel, Humphry a Miller, and Richard rented
part of Hobbal Grange.

His Majesty had not been long gone from Boscobel, but Col. Carlis sent William
Penderel to Mr. Humphry Ironmonger, his old friend, at Wolverhampton, who not
only procured him a Pass from some of the Rebel Commanders in a disguised name
to go to London, but furnished him with money for his journey, by means
whereof he got safe thither, and from thence into Holland, where he brought the
first happy news of His Majesty's safety to His Royal sister, the Princess of
Orange.

This Col. William Carlis was born at Bromhall in Staffordshire, within two
miles of Boscobel, of good Parentage, is a Person of approved valor, and was
engaged all along in the first war for His late Majesty of happy memory; and
since His Death has been no less active for His Majesty that now is; for which
and his particular service and fidelity before mentioned, His Majesty has been
pleased by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England to give him, by the
name of William CARLOS (which in Spanish signifies Charles) this very honorable
Coat of Arms, in perpepetuam rei memoriam, as it is expressed in the Letters
Patents.

SUBDITUS FIDELIS REGIS* and REGNI SALUS

He bears upon an Oak proper, in a Field Or, a Fesse Gules, charged with 3
Regal Crowns of ye second; by the name of Carlos. And for his Creast a Civic
Crown, or Oaken Garland, with a Sword and Scepter* crossed through it
Saltierwise. Henry Seile excudit. Rob: Vaughan sculp:



The Oak is now properly called The Royal Oak of Boscobel, nor will it lose
that name whilst it continues a Tree: And since His Majesty's happy
Restoration, that these mysteries have been revealed, hundreds of people for
many miles round, have flocked to see the famous BOSCOBEL, which (as you have
heard) had once the honor to be the Palace of His Sacred Majesty but chiefly
to behold the Royal Oak, which has been deprived of all its young Boughs by
the visiters of it, who keep them in memory of His Majesty's happy preservation.

This Boscobel-house has yet been a third time fortunate; for after Sir George
Booths Forces were routed in Cheshire, in August 1659. the Lord Bruerton, who
was engaged with him, took sanctuary there for some time, and was preserved.

When His Majesty was thus happily conveyed away by Col. Lane and his Sister,
the Rebels had an intimation that some of the brothers were instrumental in His
Majesty's preservation; so that besides the temptations Humphry overcame at
Shefnal, William Penderel was twice questioned at Shrewsbury on the same
account by Capt. Fox and one LLuellin a Sequestrator, and Richard was much
threatened by a peevish Neighbor at Whiteladies; but neither threats nor
temptations were able to batter the Fort of their Loyalties.

After the King had entered into the Kingdom, Dan. 11. 9.
and returned to his own land, the 5. Brothers attended Him at White Hall, on
Wednesday the 13. of June 1660. when His Majesty was pleased to own their
faithful service, and graciously dismissed them with a Princely Reward.

And soon after Mr. Huddleston and Mr. Whitgreave made their humble Addresses
to His Majesty, from whom they likewise received a gracious acknowledgment of
their service and fidelity to Him at Moseley; and this in so high a degree of
gratitude, and with such a condescending frame of spirit, not at all puffed up
with prosperity, as cannot be paralleled in the best of Kings.

Here let us all with glad and thankful hearts humbly contemplate the admirable
Providence of Almighty God, who contrived such wonderful ways, and made use of
such mean Instruments for preservation of so great a Person: Let us delight to
reflect minutely on every particular, and especially on such as most approach
to Miracle; let us sum up the number of those, who were privy to this first
part of His Majesty's disguise and concealment; Mr. Giffard, the five
Penderels, their Mother and three of their Wives, Col. Carlos, Francis Yates
and his Wife, some of the Inhabitants of Whiteladies, Mr. Woolf, his Wife,
Daughter and Maid, Mr. Whitgreave and his Mother, Mr. Huddleston, Col. Lane and
his Sister; and then consider whether it were not indeed a Miracle, that so
many men, and (which is far more) so many women should faithfully conceal so
important and unusual a Secret; and this notwithstanding the temptations and
promises of reward on the one hand, the danger and menaces of punishment on the
other.

To which I shall add but this one circumstance, that it was concealed by
persons, for the most part, of that Religion, which has long suffered under an
imputation (laid on them by some mistaken Zelots) of disloyalty to their
Sovereign.

And now, on my bended knees, let me joyfully congratulate His restored
Majesty, and humbly offer Him this short and hearty wish, O KING, Dan. 3. 10.
LIVE FOR EVER. And not content with my own inconsiderable Prayers, with all my
Soul I beg the universal assistance of others, earnestly inviting all the
Nation, even all the three Nations, to sing

Te Deum Laudamus.
2 Samuel 19. 14. And he bowed the hearts of all the people, as the heart of one
man; So that they sent this word unto the King, Return thou and all thy
Servants. FINIS.

