ESSAYS On Several SUBJECTS.

Written By Sir Tho. Pope Blount.

Conamur Tenues Grandia.

Hor. Lib. 1. Ode. 6. LONDON, Printed for Richard Bently, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden. MDCXCII.

The PREFACE.
Reader,
IT IS as impossible for an Author to please all Men's fancies, as it is for a
Cook to gratify every Man's palate. For the Minds of Men are of different
Frames and Tempers, and therefore those Notions that are pleasing to one Man,
do often prove nauseaus to another. This then is the reason, that Authors are
either d^orn'd, or approved, not according to their own merits, or demerits,
but even as the Reader stands inclined, who generally frames his Judgment from
his own settled Humor, or Opinion; And as the Book agrees, or disagrees with
that, so is the Author to receive his Fate. And thus is verified that known
saying, Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum Recipientis.

What kind of Reception this little Treatise may find in the World, I neither
know, nor value: I writ it in my idle hours, for my own Entertainment: And
therefore if it relishes not thy Gusto, the only way to be even with me, is for
thee to turn Author, and then (possibly) I may have occasion to return the
Compliment. The Age we now live in is both Critical, and Censorious; and
therefore if there be any part of a Book, which (either through the unhappy
style of the Author, or the ill nature of the Reader) seems to admit of a
double Construction, the Author may assure himself it shall be taken in the
worst; upon which Consideration, I think it proper to acquaint thee, That
whatsoever Opinion the Clergy may please to have of this Book, or its Author, I
unfeignedly declare my self to be a true Honourer of them, I mean, of such of
them, as live up to the Honor of that Holy Profession, and for those that do
not, I as little Court their Favor, as I value their Censure.

THE CONTENTS.
ESSAY I. THat INTEREST Governs the World: And that Popery is nothing but
Priestcraft, or an Invention of the Priests to get Money. Page 1 ESSAY II. The
great Mischief and Prejudice of LEARNING. And that a Wise Man ought to be
preferred before a Man of LEARNING. p. 33 ESSAY III. Of Education, and Custom;
The great Influence it has upon most Men. But that a good Education is not
always Effectual. p. 62 ESSAY IV. Of the Ancients: And the Respect that is due
unto them: That we should not too much enslave our selves to their Opinions. p.
77 ESSAY V. Whether the Men of this present Age are any way inferior to those
of former Ages, either in respect of Virtue, Learning, or long Life. p. 89
ESSAY VI. Of Passion: And whether the Passions are an Advantage, or
Disadvantage to Men. p. 141 ESSAY VII. The Variety of Opinions: Whence it
proceeds: The uncertainty of Humane Knowledge. p. 155
ESSAY I.
That INTEREST governs the World: And that Popery is nothing but Priestcraft,
or an Invention of the Priests to get Money.

INTEREST and Profit are the great Diana of this World. These, says an
Ingenious Author, like God, sit at the top of Jacob 's Ladder, and all our
Actions are but Steps and Rounds to go up to them. To this Shrine the greatest
part of Mankind are ready to offer Incense, and with this Golden Hook even the
wisest and best of Men are apt to be caught. INTEREST is of that Magnetic
quality, that our affections are almost irresistably attracted by it: It is the
Pole to which we turn, and we commonly frame our Judgments according to its
direction. Men generally look more after the Dowry than the Beauty of Truth,
its correspondency to their Interests, than its evidence to their
understandings. An useful Error has often found free admission, when important
Truths, but contrary to Men's Preconceptions or Interests, have been forbidden
entrance. Temporal Expectations bring in whole droves to the Mahumetan Faith;
and we too well know the same holds thousands in the Romish. An Advantageous
cause never wanted Proselytes. The Eagles will be where the Carcass is: And
that shall have the faith o^ most, which is best able to pay them for it. In all
Ages of the World INTEREST governed Mankind; and therefore we see the wisest
Law^^^^^ (...) built upon this founda^^^^^ ^aking it the Interest of the
Community to put their Laws in Ex^^^^^n; hence Plutarch reported So^^^ to have
said, That he had so (...) his Laws, that the Citizens were sensible, it was
more their Interest to observe them, than to Violate them. Almighty God, when
he first gave Laws to his own People the Jews, was pleased to consider them as
a Worldly, Covetous sort of People; and therefore to make their Obedience the
more easy, he gives them a Constitution agreeable to their Genius, promising
them all sorts of Temporal Blessings, such as possession of the Land, freedom
from Bondage, etc. He very well knew, that Worldly Interest would go a great
deal further than the pure, intrinsic worth of Virtue and Goodness; and
therefore that the surest way to enforce his Laws, was by striking upon their
Affections. Thus is God fain to deal with Men, just as the Husbandman in the
Gospel did; by proffering his Penny, before he can prevail with them to work in
his Vineyard. Christ observed, That the Multitudes thronged after him more for
the Loaves and Fishes, than for his Doctrine; intimating that few loved him
Gratis, but to make advantage by him: And this the Devil knew too well, when he
charged Job with it, saying, Does Job serve God for naught? In a word, Gain and
Advantage is that which every Man aims at; Be the business never so bad, you
may have it done for Money; and be it never so good, you cannot have it done
without. Let us but cast our Eyes upon those two Religions, the Old Heathenish,
and the Romish, and we shall soon see their Respective Priests offering Incense
to the Unrighteous Mammon. No sooner was that, which was called by the name of
Religion, planted among the Heathen, but immediately a Pert, forward sort of
Men, I mean their Priests, stood up, and insinuated to the People the absolute
Necessity of Sacrifices; and that these Sacrifices could never be acceptable to
the Gods, unless they were offered up by incorrupt, Sanctified Hands, meaning
their own. How beneficial these Sacrifices were to the Heathen Priests, you may
easily imagine; Since (according to the old Proverb) It Is an ill Cook that
cannot lick his own Fingers. And unless their Priests had found advantage by it,
certainly they would never have enjoined the People such an unaccountable way
of worship. For what a strange, and uncouth Belief was it, to think that the
most proper way to atone and pacify their Offended Gods, was by Slaying and
Sacrificing Innocent Creatures? Thus in the first ages of the World did Men
suffer themselves to be gulled and choused by the Artifice of their Crafty and
Ambitious Priests. But before I proceed, I must here (in my own defense) make a
short Digression; by desiring the Reader to observe, that the Sacrifices I
mention, are the Heathen Sacrifices; And therefore if any one shall be so
disingenuous, as to say that by an Innuendo I mean the Jewish Sacrifices; I
have this to say in answer to such, That their want of Charity in judging that
to be my meaning, which I never intended, is (I am sure) a much greater Crime,
than any thing I have offered in the said Discourse. But since I have this
Opportunity, I will now declare my thoughts as to the Jewish Sacrifices; This
therefore I take to be the true and only reason why Almighty God commanded his
People the Jews the use of Sacrifices; not because he himself had any delight
in them; but because the Jews had been used to this kind of Worship, while they
were in Egypt; which had made a deep root in their minds; and that they were
such an obstinate sort of People, that if they had not been complied with in
this point of Sacrifices, (which was a Religion somewhat agreeable to their
Idolatrous temper,) they could never have been brought off from their Idolatry,
and Heathenish Religion: And therefore Almighty God allowed the Jews the use of
Sacrifices, as a thing rather agreeable to their Genius and Complexion, than
any way suitable to his own pure, Divine Nature. He did not prescribe these
things because they were best, (says the Reverend Dr. Tillotson,) but because
the Temper of that People would then admit of nothing better. But I beg pardon
for this Digression, and do now proceed. Was it not also from the same root, I
mean, the Covetous temper of the Heathen Priests, from whence sprung up the
first Idolatry that ever was in the World? Those crafty, Covetous Priests knew
well enough, that the celebrating many Gods, and the introducing several
Worships of them, would turn much more to their profit and advantage, than the
single Worship of the Supreme God: And therefore rather than want Gods, they
took care to Coin a sufficient number of them; there being no less (according
to Varro) than thirty thousand Heathen Deities. And that the Priests (let them
pretend to what they would) consulted not herein the good of the People, so
much, as their own particular Interests, does most manifestly appear; by the
choice they made of their Gods; most of which (we know) were renowned for
nothing so much as for their Vices: Mars a bloody God; Bacchus a drunken God;
Mercury a cheating God; and so proportionably in the several kinds all the
rest; Nay, even their great capital God, Jupiter, was guilty of almost all the
Capital Vices. And therefore no wonder, we find such gross and extravagant
things in the old Heathenish Religion, when the very Gods, whom they
Worshipped, gave such Encouragement thereunto by their lewd Example: And where
the Gods are naught, who can expect the Religion should be good; for it is the
nature of all Religions, to incline Men to imitate him whom they worship.
Another Artifice whereby the Heathen Priests used to make themselves esteemed
and valued, was that Invention of theirs, the setting up of Oracles. It Is hard
to say, who were guilty of the greater folly, the Ignorant Heathen, who
believed those Predictions to come from Heaven; or those Superstitious
Christians, who thought they came from the Devil; since they were both under a
gross mistake. For certainly to any Man, who is unbiased in opinion, and who
dares suffer himself to think beyond the narrow Rules of his Education, they
cannot appear to be any thing but the mere juggling and Imposture of the
Heathen Priests; who upon all occasions were ready to flatter the Prince, and
to insinuate to the People the absolute necessity of complying with the
Ambitious Designs of their present Rulers. Hence then, whenever there was any
extraordinary occasion for making use of the People, as in time of War, it was
always contrived that the Oracle should be Consulted, which never failed to
Pronounce in favor of the Present Government, And therefore, no wonder the
Priests were such Favorites at Court, since they were so useful to the Prince
in the managing and steering of the common People. Thus it plainly appears,
That Interest was the Principle of those Heathen Priests. Let us now see,
whether, when Popery came upon the Stage, the World was any thing mended; or
whether the Popish Priests were Men more abstracted from Worldly Interest, or
no. In after times, when Rome Pagan became Rome Christian, then sprung there up
a new Set of Men, who for Craft and Subtilty did many degrees outgo their
Predecessors, the Heathen Priests; These appeared but mere Bunglers, compared
to this new Brood, whose very Religion was nothing else but Sacerdotal
Interest. For whoever examines the whole Fabric of Popery, shall find that the
Cornerstone of that Building is Interest: And were is not for the Profitable
part, I question not but the Foolish part of Popery would soon be laughed out of
doors. But since the true nature of Things is best to be learnt in their Minute
Parts, we will lay aside Generals, and descend to Particulars: To begin
therefore with the very Original of Popery, which you will find to be thus. As
on the one hand it must be confessed, that the Primitive Christians, who were
generally Subjects of the Roman Empire, had a very great deference and respect
for the Bishops of Rome, because that was the Imperial City; so on the other
hand, Church History plainly shows, That, notwithstanding this great deference,
the Bishops of Rome had no Authority or Jurisdiction out of their own Province,
that is, beyond the Suburbicary Region of Italy, till after the Division of the
Roman Empire into Eastern and Western. It was not long after that Division, and
chiefly upon the weakness of the Western Empire, that that Power, which we now
call the Papacy, grew up. As the Empire decayed, so by degrees this increased
and gathered Strength; the design being at first, not to set up a new Religion,
but a new Monarchy in the place of the old then expiring. Thus while the Roman
Empire was gasping for Life, did the Bishops of Rome force it to make what Will
and Testament they pleased. Being thus Established, and making Rome, whose name
was still Venerable, the Seat of their Dominion, they soon obtained a Supremacy
over the Western World. In this manner, and with these Steps did the Papacy
first advance it self; their Designs being apparently Secular, tending not to
the Salvation of Men's Souls, but the Support of their own grandeur. And
therefore these Spiritual Machiavillians, according to the old Policy, are for
preserving their Empire after the same way and manner as it was at first
acquired. No wonder then that the chief Topic of Popery, is Argumentum ab
Utili; which of all Arguments carries the greatest force in the Church of Rome:
And this will more plainly appear, if we do but draw up the Curtain, and
present you with Popery in its full light. It Is scarce within the reach of
Arithmetic, what vast, prodigious Sums these several Doctrines [the Popes
Supremacy, Purgatory, Indulgences, Auricular Confession, and the Celibacy of
the Clergy] bring in to the Church; And therefore as one wittily expresses it,
They must maintain them, because they are maintained by them.

1. As to the Pope's Supremacy. How slight a Foundation this Doctrine has, I
think to any rational Man will soon appear; for supposing St. Peter was Bishop
of Rome, (though the Learned Dr. Barrow, and many others are of opinion he
never was there,) and that as Metropolitan thereof he had the precedence of the
rest of the Apostles; what then? Could hence a sufficient Power be devolved on
his Successor, to raise a real Monarchy, and to claim an absolute Jurisdiction
over the whole World, with a Power to dispose of Crowns and Kingdoms? This is
certainly a Non Sequitur. Nor was St. Peter ever vested with any such
Privileges as these, nor did his Successors for many Ages ever Challenge them;
And at last the only title the Pope had to them, was Usurpation. But how
unreasonable soever this Doctrine may appear to those who get not by it, his
Holiness has reason to keep it up, since it serves to the filling his Cossers;
And if he should once part with it, he at the same time Lops off the best
Branch of his Revenue.

2. As to Purgatory. This Doctrine was never so much as thought of till St.
Austin's time, who both Said it, and Unsaid it, and at last left it doubtful;
Nor did it come into any sort of Credit till about two hundred Years after, in
the time of Pope Gregory the first. The Papists themselves are so divided as to
all the points and Circumstances of this Doctrine, that possibly it will not a
little entertain the Reader, to see the foolish variety of Opinions relating to
this Doctrine. First as to the place, where they suppose this Imaginary Goal to
be; Eckius will have it to be in the bottom of the Sea; Others will have it
either in Mount Aetna, or Vesuvius; But Bernard de Bustis places it in an Hill
in Ireland. Next, as to the Torments; Sir Thomas More will have them to be only
by Fire; but Fisher, by Fire and Water; Lorichius neither by Fire, nor by
Water, but by the violent Convulsions of Hope and Fear. Then, as to the
Executioners, or Tormenters; They do as little agree about them; for Bishop
Fisher will have them to be the Holy Angels; but Sir Thomas More to be the very
Devils. Then, as to the Sins to be there Expiated; Some will have them to be
the Venial only; but others say the Mortal too. And for the time of the Souls
continuance in that State; Dennis the Carthusian extends it to the end of the
World; whereas Dominicus a Seto limits it to ten Years; and others make it
depend on the number of Masses, and Offices, that shall be said or done on
their behalf. Lastly, as to the extremity of the pains; Aquinas makes them as
violent as those of Hell; but the Rhemists, in their Annotations upon
Revelations the 14th, Verse the 13th, say, That the Souls there are in a very
fine condition: And Durandus, de Offic. Mortuor. Cap. VII. between these
extremes, gives them some Intermission from those terrible pains, upon Sundays,
and Holy Days. So foolishly extravagant are these several fancies and conceits
of Purgatory, that it may not be altogether impertinent to enquire into the
Original and Source of this Doctrine. And this will presently appear to any one
who is in the least versed in the Heathen Poets and Philosophers. These were
the first Hatchers of this Notion, and from thence was it first derived. Homer,
in the 2d. Book of his Odyss. entertains us with long Stories of Ulysses's
descent into Hell, the Dialogues of Ghosts, the Punishment of departed Souls,
and the Sacrifices to be offered to relieve them; And herein is he imitated by
Virgil, who, in the Sixth of his Aeneids, brings in Anchises discoursing at the
same rate. Nor were their Philosophers free from these sort of Dreams; witness
Plato, who, in his Book de Anima, broaches the like Doctrine; And Cicero, in
Scipio's Dream, harps upon the same string. Hence Bellarmin, urging several
reasons for this Doctrine of Purgatory, his third is taken from the common
opinion of all Nations, Hebrews, Mahumetans, and Gentiles, both Philosophers
and Poets. But to conclude this point, as ridiculous as this Doctrine of
Purgatory is, there is not any one Opinion in the Church of Rome, that the
Romanists are more zealous in the asserting; Nor is it to be wondered that they
are so, since herein they act upon Demetrius's Principle, Because thereby they
have their gain; And therefore well may they be allowed to be angry, and
displeased at all those, who speak and write against it; for by that means
their Craft is in danger to be set at naught. There being no Opinion in their
Church, which brings in a better and more constant Revenue, by Masses, Dirges,
Requiems, Trentals, and Anniversaries, besides Casualties and Deodands, by
dying Persons, or their Friends, in hopes of a speedier release out of the
pains of Purgatory. So that if this Opinion were once out of Countenance in the
World, they would then lose one of the best Arts they have of upholding the
Grandeur of their Church. And it is very remarkable, That the fear of losing
this Income, was one main Impediment to restrain the Pope from yielding to a
Reformation.

3. As to Indulgences and Pardons. In the Primitive times, when the Christians
had committed any heinous offense, as for example, either in denying their
Faith, or Sacrificing to Idols, for fear of Persecution; the Parties offending
were enjoined some severe and long Penance: And the rigor of this, the
Bishops, or Pastors, in their respective Congregations, had power, (if they saw
Cause) to mitigate at their discretion; which Mitigation, or Relaxation of
Punishment, was called an Indulgence, or sometimes a Pardon. And this was
derived from St. Paul, who released the Incestuous Corinthian from the bond of
Excommunication, upon his Humiliation, and serious Repentance. This manner of
Indulgence was Ancient, and of long Continuance in the Primitive Church. The
first account we have of perverting this Custom, and the prostituting it to
Secularends, was in the time of Pope Gregory the first, about the Year 600. And
ever since that time, it is scarce credible what an immense Sum this Doctrine
has brought in to the Church. And certainly, of all the Arts that the Church
of Rome has for the raising of Money, this is the cleverest and neatest
Contrivance; and therefore one wittily calls these Indulgences, Emulgences; and
even by the Romanists themselves they are called, in their truest
Signification, The Treasury of the Church. The Pope is the sole Dispenser and
Disposer of these Indulgences; and therefore whenever he has occasion, or a
Mind to fill his Treasury, all that he needs to do, is, upon pretense of War
against the Infidels or Heretics, to send out, and proclaim Marts, and Sales
for these Indulgences, upon condition that those, who would disburse any Sums
of Money (which is all to be laid out (as he pretends) upon the said occasion,)
should have Pardons and Indulgences for numbers of Years proportionable to the
Sums they could, or would deposite; Nam aliter non absolvebantur, nisi
tribuerent secundum Posse suam, and facultatem suum; For otherwise they could
not be absolved, except they did disburse as much as their abilities would
afford, as Henr. de Knighton, an English Historian in Richard the Second's
time, honestly and plainly tells us; And then as for the Poor and Indigent,
truly they deserve our pity, when the Taxa Cameroe Apostolicoe deals thus
plainly with them, Nota diligenter quod hujusmodi Gratioe non conceduntur
Pauperibus; QUIA non habent, ergo non possunt Consolari; Note diligently, That
such graces are not granted to the Poor; Because they have not wherewithal,
they cannot be comforted. A very sad Case indeed! Thus, though our Savior
tells us, how, hard it is for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven;
yet by the Religion of Popery the difficulty lies wholly on the Poor Man's
side; and the only Sin capable of Damning a Rich Man, is that of Covetousness;
for let him but see his Holiness well, and he may then safely sing a Requiem to
his Soul.

4. As to Auricular Confession. The necessity of this Doctrine was unknown to
the Fathers of the Primitive Church. Nay, about a Thousand Years after Christ,
it was held disputable in the Roman Church. And though the Practice of it was
imposed by Pope Innocent, in his Council of Lateran; yet even then it remained
disputable as to the Doctrine, till the Council of Trent gave it the Sanction
of Divine Faith. At first it was voluntary, and only used in Case of a troubled
Conscience, or a strong Temptation: But it is now made necessary at stated
times, in all probability to make the Priest Master of every Man's Secrets.
This is the main Curb of the Laity, whereby the Clergy hold them in awe; for by
this means they have an Intelligencer in the breast of every Great Man of their
Communion; Which is a thing of that vast Consequence, that if ever they part
with it, then farewell Popery*

5. As to the Celibacy of the Clergy. That this Custom was derived from the
Heathens, will plainly appear; Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, That the Ancient
Heretics took occasion to condemn Marriage from the Precepts and Practices of
Pagan Philosophers. And St. Hierom says, that the Athenian Hierophanta's to
this day, by supping the Broth of Hemlock, make themselves Chaste (being
forbidden Marriage,) before they were admitted into Sacred Orders, or advanced
to Prelatical Dignity. And Alexander ab Alexandro informs us, That the Priests
of Cybele did castrate themselves, that they might be Chaste. And he further
adds in the same place, That those who performed their greatest Solemnities (or
their Chief Priests) that they might continue in Chaste Religion, and escape the
Contagion of Women, did emasculate themselves with certain Herbs. And Euripides
testifies, That in Crete those whom they called the Prophets of Jupiter, do
not only abstain from Flesh, but also from all savoury Meat. And the like did
the Indian Magi, who were advanced to the Priesthood of the Sun: And among the
Assyrians, the Priests of Diana Ecbatana lived in perpetual Virginity. To add
more Testimonies is needless, since the Romanists are themselves so far from
denying it, that several of them, as Pope Syricius, Medina, and others, urge it
as an unanswerable Argument against the Marriage of Priests. But
notwithstanding the great care the Heathen Priests took as to their Chastity,
yet we find it signified but little; And therefore Arnobius describing the
single life of Priests amongst the Heathen, says, Where are Whoredoms more
frequently committed than by Priests, even in their Temples, nay before the
very Altars? And in the Conclusion he tells us, That their Lust was more
frequently discharged in Chancels, than Brothel-Houses. But having showed this
to be a Custom derived from the Heathens, and the effect it had; let us (now)
see, whether the Primitive Christians had any such usage; and when, and by what
means, it was at first introduced, and the Use that has since been made of it.
That there was no such Usage in the Primitive Church, is most certain, for St.
Ambrose in his Comment on 2 Cor. 11. testifies, that all the Apostles, except
St. John and St. Paul, had Wives. And also Eusebius, Ruffinus, and Socrates,
Ecclesiastical Writers of great Note, do all testify of several very Religious
Bishops, who had Children by their lawful Wives, after they were Bishops. And
the Greek Church even to this day observes it for a Custom, not to admit any
into Holy Orders, unless they were Married; as judging them then more stayed,
and less subject to Temptations. The first account we meet with of prohibiting
Wives to the Clergy, was not long before the Nicene Council: A foolish Opinion
had then seized the Heads of some of the Leading Men of the Church, That no
Married Man was fit to officiate at the Altar; Whereupon the Question came to
be started in the Council of Nice; Of which matter the Ecclesiastical Historian
Socrates, Lib. 1. Cap. XI. gives us this account, (...) etc. It pleased some of
the Bishops to bring in a new Law into the Church, That those who were
dedicated to the Holy Ministry, viz. Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, should not
sleep any longer with their Wives. But this at first was most strenuously
opposed, and particularly by one Paphnutius* an Egyptian Bishop, who had
formerly one of his Eyes plucked out for the Testimony of the Blessed Jesus. Nor
did this Doctrine advance it self into a Decree, till above fifty Years after,
at which time Siricius Bishop of Rome first ordained it; though for many
hundred Years after it was not much observed, till Gregory the Seventh,
commonly called Hildebrand, began to put it in Execution; by excommunicating
all such Married Priests, as would not immediately quit their Wives, and take
the Oath of Continency. And this has been strictly observed ever since; The
Council of Trent having denounced an Anathema against all those who shall say,
That Clerks in Holy Orders may contract Matrimony; And that such a contract is
valid, notwithstanding the Laws and Constitutions of the Church. But how little
this Romish Celibacy signified amongst their Priests, as to the keeping them
Chaste, even their own Historians can best inform us. Matthew Paris tells us,
The Pope thought it almost a Miracle to hear a Candidate for a Bishopric
attested to be a pure Virgin; Alvarus Pelagius, a Portugal Bishop, in the 14th
Century, in his known Book De Planctu Ecclesiae, amongst other crying Sins of
the Roman Clergy of his days, Laments in an especial manner their Incontinency,
wishing that the Spaniards and Regricolae especially, had never promised
Continency: The Children of the Clergy being, in those Countries, says he, more
numerous than those of the Laity; and what is more detestable, for several
Years together, from their Concubines beds they go straight to the Altar. And
in another place, the very same Author complains of their debauching the Women,
who came to Confession. Alfonsus a Castro tells us, That if they should attempt
to conceal the Incontinency of the Clergy, their own Children would proclaim
it. Johannes Aventinus affirms, that the Salacity of the Priests was so famous,
that it was grown into a Proverb. Robert Holkot, who lived in the fourteenth
Century, a Dominican by Profession, and born at Northampton, styles the Priests
of his days, Priests of Priapus and Baalpheor. Johannes Gerson, speaking of the
Incontinency of the Priests, says, That it was so rooted and Epidemical an
Evil, that as things stood under the reign of Celibacy, if Priests were not
allowed the use of common Women they would (in several places) fall upon the
Wives and Daughters of their Parishioners. Nay, even Albertus Pighius and
Dominicus Soto, as stout Assertors as they were of the Celibacy, yet were so
ingenuous as to confess the leudness it Occasions. Thus could I, from several
other instances of the like Nature, drawn from their own Historians, dilate
upon this Subject; As also, by adding the remarkable Instances of the great
Incontinency, or the unchaste Celibate of several of their Popes themselves; as
of Paul the Second, Sixtus the Fourth, Innocent the Eighth, Alexander the
Sixth, Julius the Second, Leo the Tenth, Paul the Third, Julius the Third, etc.
But I forbear this, since raking of Dunghills is an Employment more fit for a
Scavenger than a Gentleman. That so great Wickedness should ever be Practiced
amongst such as serve at the Altar, is indeed a thing much to be lamented; but
that ever any Christian Church should allow and approve of such Practices, is
matter of Astonishment; And yet that the Church of Rome does so, is most clear,
and manifest. Hence we find it was one of the German Grievances, That such
Priests as were disposed to live Chastely, and abhorred this Sin of Uncleanness,
were compelled to take Dispensations to keep Concubines. Nicolaus de Clemangis
also makes the same sort of complaint; What a strange thing is it, says he,
That in several Dioceses now a days the Rectors of Parishes bargain with their
Bishops for License to keep Concubines? That Great Angelical Doctor of the
Church of Rome, Thomas Aquinas (whether from his own Complexion, or no, I know
not) seems to be so great a favourer of this Vice, that he argues for it in a
pretty odd sort of a Manner, in his 4th Book De Regimine Principum; Id facit in
Mundo Meretrix etc. A Whore in the World, says he, is as the Pump in a Ship,
or a Privy in a Palace: Take these away, and all will be filled with stench and
annoyance. Most Incomparable Divinity! Sure if this Rule be true, no place for
sweetness can compare with Rome, where, by the best Computation, are reckoned
three Thousand Licensed Harlots, which pay an Annual Tribute to his Holiness.
But to return to my Subject. Since it plainly appears, that this Doctrine of
the Celibacy was never used, nor practiced amongst the Christians of the
Primitive Church, how came then this Innovation to be introduced into the
Church of Rome? Cui bono, for what end and purpose has it so many Ages been so
very zealously asserted? In promptu causa est, the reason is very obvious, and
a Man with half an Eye may see the Policy of it. This Doctrine then is
maintained by the Policy of the Court of Rome, on purpose to make advantage of
the Clergy, both while they live, and when they dye. Hence their great
Espencoeus cries out shame of that execrable Custom of indulging Concubinage to
Professors of Chastity, at a set annual rate; assuring us, That amongst the
vast numbers of Delinquents in this kind, few, or none, suffer any other
Punishment than that of the Pocket. But besides this, it is of great advantage
to his Holiness, to disengage the Clergy from all Civil Interests, and thus to
make them wholly depend upon the Court of Rome; which is a thing could never be
effected, so long as the Clergy gave hostages of their sidelity to the Civil
Government, by the Interests of their Families and Children. And therefore this
Invention was cunningly enough contrived; That as the old Roman Soldiers were
forbidden Marriage while they received pay, lest their Domestic Interests
should abate their courage; So the Celibacy of the Clergy was strictly
enjoined, to make them more true and hearty to the Interests of the Court of
Rome. And the vast advantages that accrue to his Holiness by this one Doctrine
of the Celibacy of the Clergy, is scarce to be computed; since now the Church
is the general Heir to all the Clergy.

Thus have I run over those five several Gainful Doctrines in the Church of
Rome; whereby it is most manifest, That, let them pretend what they will,
Grandeur and Secular Interest is all they aim at; And therefore let us no
longer wonder at this Priestcraft of theirs, but rather conclude with that
Ingenious Cardinal, who, when the People flockt about him, gave them his
Benediction in these words, SI DECIPI VULT POPULUS, DECIPIATUR.

ESSAY II.
The great mischief and prejudice of LEARNING. And that a Wise Man ought to be
preferred before a Man of LEARNING.

LEARNING does but serve to fill us full of Artificial Errors. That which we so
much admire under the name of LEARNING, is only the knowing the fancies of
particular Men, Deliri veteris Meditontes somnia vana, in effect but like
Gossipping Women telling one another their Dreams. The Romans were so far from
esteeming Learning, as an essential part of Wisdom, that with them the word
Scholar was seldom used but by way of reproach. A Learned Man may not
improperly be compared to Aesop's Crow, decked with the Feathers that he had
stolen from other Birds. He makes (indeed) a great show in the World, but he
may thank others who are at the charge of it. In a word, There is not a simpler
Animal, and a more superfluous Member of a State, than a mere Scholar; He is --
Telluris inutile Pondus. And were I to give a description of a Pedant newly
arrived from the University, I could not do it more to the life, than in the
words of Horace;

Cum septem Studiis annos dedit, insenuitque
Libris and curis, Statua taciturnius exit,
Plerumque and Populum risu quatit --
No wonder then, that the Italians, in their Farces, always bring in a Pedant
for the Fool of the Play. That Learning is no way serviceable to the life of
Man, even daily experience sufficiently shows; for how many are there in the
World, of high and low condition, that live pleasantly and happily, who never
trouble themselves with Learning* Neither is it serviceable to Things Natural,
which an ignorant Sot may as well perform, as he that is vested with the
greatest Learning; Nature is a sufficient Mistress for that. Nor does it
conduce to Honesty, and to make us better; Paucis est opus literis ad bonam
Mentem, little Learning is requisite for a good Mind: Nay, some are of opinion,
it rather hinders it; And that where Learning and Knowledge go in the Front,
Pride and Ambition always follow in the Rear. Hence it is observed, That Rome
for the first five hundred Years, when it Flourished in Virtue and Valor, was
without Knowledge; And so soon as Learning came amongst them, they then began
to degenerate, and to run into Factions. The best Established Government that
ever was, and from whence have sprung the greatest Personages in the World, I
mean the Lacedemonian, made no Profession of Learning; And yet it was the
School of Virtue and Wisdom, and was ever Victorious over Athens, the most
Learned City of the World, the School of all Science, the Habitation of the
Muses, and the Storehouse of Philosophers. Learning then serves for nothing,
but to invent Niceties and Subtilties, artificial cunning Devices, and
whatsoever is an Enemy to Virtue and Innocence. Atheism, Errors, Sects, and all
the troubles of the World, have risen from the Men of Knowledge and Learning.
If we search into the Morals of the most Learned amongst the Heathens, I mean
their Philosophers, we shall find but little agreement betwixt their Practices
and their Doctrines; And that the one did generally run counter to the other.
Plutarch tells us, That not only Socrates and Plato, but also that the rest of
the Philosophers, notwithstanding their outward show and ostentation of some
Virtues, were generally as intemperate, incontinent, and wicked, as any common
or ordinary Slave. But of all other profane Authors, Lucian paints them in the
most lively Colors. For in his Dialogues he brings in Menippus speaking of
the Philosophers thus; Because I was (says he) uncertain what Course of Life
to hold, I thought good to go to the Philosophers, and to take their advice,
that they might direct me therein; not considering, that, as the Proverb says,
I cast my self out of the Drying Pan into the Fire; for I found amongst them
all things more uncertain than amongst any sort of Men, insomuch that the Life
of the veriest Idiot, seemed unto me more happy than theirs. For when I beheld
their Lives, I perceived they were clean Contrary to their own Precepts and
Doctrine; those who taught that Money and Riches were to be contemned, did gape
after nothing more than Gain, lending to Usury, teaching for Hire, and doing
all for Money; Those who in words seemed most to contemn Glory, referred the
whole Course of their Lives thereto; And to conclude, Those who openly spoke
most against Voluptuousness and Pleasure, secretly sought and embraced nothing
else. Thus (we see) the Practices of Men do not always hold an equal pace to
their Theory -- Video meliora, probque, Deteriora sequor. We naturally know
what is Good, but naturally pursue what is Evil. Probitas laudatur, at Alget --
All men are so just to Virtue as to commend her, but few are so just to
themselves as to Practice her. But to return to my Subject. If we look back
into the first Ages of the Church, we shall find that Philosophy was the chief
Seminary of the main Errors broached in those times. And this (no doubt)
Tertullian was highly sensible of, which made him style the Philosophers, the
Patriarchs of Heretics: And Cornelius Agrippa says, That nothing more
adulterates Divinity than Philosophy, forasmuch as all Heresy whatsoever has
had its first rise out of the Fountain of Philosophy. The Primitive Fathers of
the Church, were wont to apply themselves with great diligence to the study of
Heathen Philosophy, on purpose to enable them to fight the Heathens with their
own Weapons, and to Baffle them with their own Arguments. Hence they chiefly
consulted the Philosophy of Aristotle and Plato; but chiefly Plato's; Because
that seemed to speak plainer about the Divine Nature; and also, because the
sweetness, and powerfulness of Plato's Writings, taught them at the same time
the Art of Speaking, and the Strength of Reasoning. Having thus provided
themselves against their Adversaries, they easily got the Victory over them:
For though the Heathens, for so many hundred Years, had very zealously asserted
the truth of their several Religions; yet now their Philosophers were so
baffled by these Christian Doctors, that they had nothing to say; and at last
were so ingenious, as to confess the ridiculousness of their Religions, and to
own the purity, and reasonableness of the Christian Worship. And now, after so
good a Beginning, who could expect so unhappy a Conclusion? For it so fell out,
That the Christians having had such good success against the Religions of the
Heathens, by their own Weapons; instead of laying them down when they had done,
unfortunately fell to manage them one against another. So many subtle brains
having been set on work, and heated against a Foreign Enemy; when that was
over, and they had nothing else to do, (like an Army that returns Victorious,
and is not presently disbanded) they began to spoil and quarrel amongst
themselves. Hence that Religion, which at first appeared so innocent and
peaceable, and fitted for the benefit of Humane Society, was miserably divided
into a thousand intricate Questions, which neither advance true Piety, nor good
Manners. And from hence sprung up the first Heresies in the Church. And thus we
see how little Religion is promoted, or advantaged by any assistance of Humane
Learning, which the Apostle sufficiently inclucates, when he so wisely advises
us, To avoid all vain Philosophy. And as Learning is of little use in making
Men truly Religious; so it likewise signifies but little in making us either
good Subjects, or great Politicians: Licinius, and Valentinian, Emperors of
Rome, were wont to say, That their State had no Poison more dangerous, than
that of Learning. Lycurgus also seemed to be of the same opinion, when he
Established Ignorance in his Republic. Most Men do attribute the greatness of
the Grand Seignior's, and the Duke of Muscovy's Power over their Subjects, to
this one single piece of Policy, viz. their suppressing of Literature. And do
we not see here in England, That in time of Popery, when that little stock of
Learning that was amongst us, was cloistered up in Monasteries and Abbeys, the
ignorant Common People patiently crouch'd, and readily bore whatsoever burden
was put upon them. But as soon as ever Learning peept abroad in the World, and
began to diffuse it self amongst the Vulgar; they then began to expostulate
with their Superiors, and immediately threw off that Yoke, which formerly they
and their Forefathers had so long lain under. And indeed, upon this
consideration it is, that Princes take so much care to keep their Subjects in
Ignorance, by suppressing all such Books, as lay open and prostitute the Arcana
Imperii to the Knowledge of the Vulgar. For Books give Men new Hints and
Notions, and those Notions do often put Men upon such Actions, as are not
always agreeable to the Interests of Princes. Hence that Subtle, and Crafty
Prince, King James, (I mean the First, not the Second) would often say, That of
all sorts of Subjects the Thinking Man made the worst. And even by daily
Experience we find it confirmed, that the High-flown Arbitrary Men (commonly
the Darlings of Tyrants) are not Men of the deepest Thoughts, nor of the
greatest Foresight and Consideration; since if they were; they might easily
discover, That the absolute Power of the Prince, cannot be made up of any other
Ingredient, than the Slavery of the Subject. But even in some tempers there is
such a Natural love to Servitude and Vassallage, that they think no pleasure
comparable to the hugging of their Chain; And with the Slavish French Man,
their greatest Glory is, Notre Roy est Absolu, the Grammatical Construction
whereof is, We are Slaves. But that ever any, who call themselves Englishmen,
should sink into such a meanness of Spirit, so degenerating from the Virtues of
their Ancestors, (many of whom lost their Lives in the generous Asserting of
the English Liberties) is that, which as our Forefathers could never have
dreamt of, so, for the Honor of the present Age, I hope, Posterity will never
Remember. But Monsters are the Product of every Age; And there is no Climate
without some Insects. Though Liberty be the Mistress of all Generous Souls, and
is that alone which gives a Relish to Humane Life; yet I say, there has been
lately found amongst us a sort of Animals, who have been as Industrious in
giving up, as ever our Noble Progenitors were in Establishing our Liberties.
But whatsoever Charms, these the more Gross, and Earthly part of Mankind, may
think there is in such a Lazy, Slavish Subjection, yet to Men of more refined
Intellectuals, and whose Veins run with a Nobler sort of Blood, all that the
World can give without Liberty has no taste. It must be confessed, That in the
two last Reigns, this Precious Jewel of Liberty has been little valued;
Nothing has been sold so Cheap by unthinking Men; But alas that does no more
lessen the real value of it, than the ignorance of the Foolish Indians, did
that of their Gold, which at first they Exchanged for the most inconsiderable
Bawbles. It Is the happiness of our Constitution, That King and People are both
Bounded; And Cursed be the Man, who shall go about to remove either of these
Landmarks: The Crown has Prerogative enough to protect our Liberties; And the
People have so much Liberty as is necessary to make them useful to the Crown:
So that the King's Prerogative, and the Subjects Liberty, do naturally tend to
the preserving of one another. It was the Observation of that Learned Attorney
General, Sir Francis Bacon, That whilst the Prerogative runs within its Ancient
and Proper Banks, the main Channel thereof is so much the Stronger, for
Over-flows evermore hurt the River. Certainly it was no ill saying of Pliny the
Younger, to the Emperor Trajan, Foelicitatis est posse quantum velis,
Magnitudinis velle quantum possis, It is an happiness for your Majesty to be
able to do what you will, But your Greatness consists in doing what you justly
may. And Comines (that honest French Statesman) notes, That it is more
Honorable for a King to say, J'ay des Subjects si bons and Loyaux, etc. My
Subjects are so good and Loyal as to deny me nothing, than to say, I take what
I please, and I will keep it. And those Courtiers (adds he) that Preach any
other Doctrine, do not a little mistake the Interest of their Masters, and are
so far from exalting their Grandeur and Prerogative, that they make them indeed
no Kings. For as Bracton says, Non est Rex ubi dominatur Voluntas, It is not a
King where Will and Pleasure bears sway; but rather some Cyclopick Monster,
which eats and drinks the Flesh and Blood of Mankind. Nay, even King James the
first (that high Asserter of Prerogative) in his Speech in the Star Chamber,
Anno 1609. says, That no sooner does a King give over Governing according to
Law, but he Ceases to be a King, and degenerates into a Tyrant. And the Lord
Chancellor Bacon tells us, That the People of this Kingdom love the Laws
thereof, and nothing will oblige them more, than a Confidence of the Free
Enjoying them. What the Nobles of this Land upon an occasion once said, NOLUMUS
LEGES ANGLIAE MUTARI, We will not have the Laws of England altered, is
imprinted upon the Hearts of all English Men, who take themselves to have as
good a Title to their Laws, as to the Common Air they breath in. And therefore
Sir Walter Raleigh (a man of no Vulgar Observations) tells us a great Thing,
and in no wise to be slighted, That the Kings of England have evermore
sustained more loss by one Rebellion, than by a hundred years Observance of
MAGNA CHARTA. It Is observed of the Camel, that it lies quietly down till it
has its full Load, and then rises up, but the English Mobile is a kind of
Beast, which rises up soonest when it is over-loaden; And therefore (to
conclude this Point) as an English Monarch may (so long as he observes the
Laws) be the happiest Prince in the World; So if he will turn Phaeton, and
drive furiously, he will in the end find himself a King not of Men, but of
Devils. But to proceed. That Men of Learning are not always the greatest
Politicians, even the Experience of all Ages does sufficiently show. That great
and Learned Antiquary, Mr. Seldom, informs us, That when Constantine became
Christian, He had so great an Affection for the Clergy, that he put great part
of the Civil Government into their hands: But after 3 or 4 years Experience, he
was very sensible how fatal this Error had like to have been; Whereupon he took
new Measures; and in the Posts of these unhappy Politicians, he was fain to put
in a Set of Laymen, who having truer and better Notions of Government, soon
corrected, and amended their Errors and Mistakes. That the Clergy of England
have since the Reformation been much abridg'd of their former Power, is what I
think every Man will grant. And therefore that such of them as love to be Great
and Powerful, have still a hankering after that old Constitution, I for my part
cannot so much admire. But how comes it, that the Clergy are not now allowed to
have as great Power, as in times of Popery? The Reason is very apparent;
Because we found by Experience, That when they were vested with such great
Power, no sort of Men ever carried it more Arbitrarily, and Tyranically, nor
(indeed) committed greater Solecisms in Politics than they did: And therefore
the History of those times does sufficiently warn us against running into the
same Error. When men act out of their own Sphere, who can expect any good will
come of it? And therefore we find it seldom happens, That the Statesmen are
more fortunate in meddling with Religion, than the Churchmen with State
affairs; Each mars all with tampering out of their Provinces. Christ's Kingdom
is not of this World; Nor ought the Divines (...), to meddle in this Political
Province; And when they do, no sort of Men prove so unfortunate. Let us hear
what the ingenious Andrew Marvel, says as to this Point. Whether it be, that
the Clergy are not so well fitted by Education, as others for Political
Affairs, I know not; though I should rather think (said he) they have advantage
above others, and if they would but keep to their Bibles, might make the best
Ministers of State in the World; Yet it is generally observed, that things
miscarry under their Government. If there be any Counsel more precipitate, more
violent, more rigorous, more extreme than other, that is theirs. Truly I think,
the reason God does not Bless them in Affairs of State, is because he never
intended them for that Employment. Or i^ Government, and the Preaching of the
Gospel, may well concur in the same Person, God therefore frustrates him,
because, though knowing better, he seeks and manages his Greatness by the
lesser and meaner Maxims. Upon these therefore, and such like Considerations,
the wise Venetians have so slight an Opinion of the Politics of their
Churchmen, that whenever any thing that is of a considerable nature, occurs to
be debated in the Senate, before any Suffrage passes, they cause Proclamation
to be made, for all Priests to depart; and the proper Officer, with a loud and
audible Voice, pronounces these words, Fuora I Preti, Out Priests. And it is
further remarkable, That he who in this Commonwealth is called the Divine of
the State (an Ecclesiastical Person to be advised with in matters of Religion)
is commonly chosen such a One, as is reputed the least addicted to Bigottry.
That no sort of Men have proved more fatal in their Counsels to Princes, than
the Political Divines, is a truth too much confirmed by Experience to be
denied. That which these Men chiefly aim at, is to render themselves acceptable
at Court; as knowing* that the best Preferments come from thence; And therefore
if they can but sooth and please the Prince, they value not whether their
Doctrine be true, or false. Hence then their chief business is to give a
helping hand toward making the Prince Arbitrary: And their way to do this, is
by entitling him to all those Regalia's or Prerogatives, that the Kings of
Juda, or Israel, ever enjoyed or usurped; as if the Judicials of Moses were
calculated for all Seasons, and all Meridians. And thus arose that Doctrine,
That Monarchy is Jure Divino. But this way of proceeding is no new Invention,
for we find it very usual amongst the Ancient Heathens, whenever they had a
mind to obtrude any odd Belief upon the Common People, they presently trumpt up
a Jus Divinum; and after this manner we see both their Laws and Religions were
established. Thus Solon's Laws were said to come from Minerva; Lycurgus derived
his Laws from Jupiter; Numa Pompilius, the first Founder of the Roman Rites and
Ceremonies, declared he received them from the Goddess Aegeria; and Mahomet
pretended his Religion was imparted to him, by the Angel Gabriel. There is not
any thing whatsoever, that derives so great an Authority amongst Men, as the
opinion of Divine Favor, or Heavenly Designation: And therefore St. Austine,
speaking of that Custom amongst the Heathen, of deriving the Pedigree of their
Heroes from the Gods, says, That he looked upon it to be of great use; in as
much as it made valiant Men, fancying themselves to be Heaven-born, upon the
confidence thereof, to undertake high attempts the more boldly, intend them the
more earnestly, and accomplish them the more successfully. And Ludovicus Vives
says. That another great advantage which accrued to the Heroes by this Belief,
was the readiness which hereupon they found in the common People to submit to
whatsoever they commanded, as thinking their very Commands to be Sacred, and
Divine. This therefore made Scipio, that he cultivated and improved that
opinion of the People, viz. That he was begot by some God; and Alexander in
Lucian tells us, That it furthered him in many great designs, to be accounted
the Son of Jupiter Hammon; for hereby he was feared, and none durst oppose him,
whom they held to be a God. Thus we see, that that piece of Policy, which many
of our Court-Flatterers in the late Reigns have been so fond of, viz. Their
asserting Monarchy to be Jure Divino, is but borrowed from this old Heathen
Custom; the Original design whereof was, first to flatter the Prince, by making
him believe his Power was absolute, and his Will was uncontrolable; and then to
impose upon the People, by making them believe, That a Prince (though a Tyrant,
and the very worst of Men) was not to be opposed or resisted. But from what I
have now said, let no Man think I am an Enemy to Monarchy; for I do most
Solemnly, and Unfeignedly declare, That of all sorts of Governments, Monarchy
is the most agreeable to my Genius; and that of Monarchies, the pure and unmixt
would please me best (it being that by which the Almighty governs the Universe)
could Humane Nature be long trusted with it; and could we be as certain, that
his Vicegerent on Earth would as easily imitate those Divine Attributes of
Wisdom and Goodness, as they are prone to lay claim to his other Attribute of
Power and Greatness. But alas, Kings are but Men; they are not exempted from
Error; They have their Vices and Infirmities, their Sallies and Enormites, like
the rest of Mankind: And indeed, considering the unhappiness of their
Education, and their being continually surrounded with Sycophants and
Flatterers, it is a wonder they prove at the common rate of other Men. Hence
therefore that great Man of Wisdom and Experience, Philip de Comines tells us,
That a Virtuous Prince is worthy of more than ordinary applause. Thus (as a
late ingenious Author observes) the fault is not in the Government as Absolute,
but in Humane Nature, which is not often found sufficient, at least for above
one or two Successions, to support and manage so unlimited a Power in one
single Person, as it ought to be. And now, to return to my Subject. Since
Learning therefore is a thing of so little value, and use to Mankind, as we
have made it appear to be: how vain are those, who extol it to such a degree,
as to make it the Standard both of Happiness and Wisdom; by concluding, that no
Man can be either Happy, or Wise without it: Though the Scripture tells us,
That he who increases in Knowledge, increases in Sorrow; and daily Experience
shows us, That folly and Learning do often Cohabit in the same Person. The
ingenious Montaigne, enquiring into the reason, why Men of Learning do
generally seem to be more uncouth in their Discourse, as also more unfit for
business than other Men, says, I cannot conceive the true Cause hereof, unless
it be, that as Plants are choakt by overmuch Moisture, and Lamps are stifled
with too much Oil; So are the Actions of the mind overwhelmed by
over-abundance of matter and Study: And in a diversity of Things, as in a mist,
the Mind is apt to lose it self. Thus we see that Learning is so far from
contributing to Wisdom, that if it be not well managed, it really hinders us in
the pursuit of it. And a great part of that which we call Learning, is like
Cobwebs, which though they seem fine and artificial, are of no manner of use.
For what is a Man the wiser for knowing the Genitive Case in Jupiter? Or
whether we should write Faelix, or Felix; or what are we the better for knowing
how many knots there were in Hercules's Club; or whether Penelope was honest or
no? And yet as ridiculous as these things are, Many of those Men, whom the
World has called Learned, have trifled away their time in these, and such like
Enquiries. In a word, it is not the knowing much, but the knowing what is
useful, makes a Man a Wise Man. And therefore if a Man have all other Points of
Knowledge and Learning, yet if he wants that one of Sibi Sapere, all his other
Knowledge is but Impertinence, and a gaudy sort of Ignorance. There are indeed
some Men, who are arrived to a sort of Lip-Wisdom, as I may so call it; who
have a knack of talking like Wise Men: By their Discourse you would judge of
them, as the Ancient Heathens did of their Heroes, That they were sprung from
the Gods; But if you search into their Actions, you would rather think them
akin to the Horse or Mule which have no understanding. Odi Homines iganavos
opera, Philosophos sententia, was the saying of a Great Man; I hate Men that
Act like Fools, but speak like Philosophers. He who speaks, but does not Act
like a Wise Man, is at best but like a Tinkling Cymbal, which makes only a
pleasant noise. Certainly of all parts of Wisdom, the Practick is the best. To
conclude then, It is not a Man's cloistering himself up in his Study, nor his
continual Poring upon Books, that makes him a Wise Man: No; this property is to
be acquired only by Meditation and Converse. For Reading may very properly be
compared to Eating, and Meditating to Digesting; as therefore to one huor
Eating, we allow many hours for Digesting; So to one hours Reading we should
assign a sufficient time for Meditating, and Digesting what we have read. Or
else, as the one by breeding ill humors, and obstructing the passages, impairs
the Health of the Body; So will the other be of no less prejudice to the
understanding, by occasioning Diseases to the mind. Thus do many Men, through
their not observing this Rule, instead of improving, really impair themselves
by their Studies. For by overmuch Reading they clog and oppress their Minds,
and so digest nothing. They stuff themselves so full of other Men's Notions,
that there is no room for their Faculties to display themselves. Whereas the
Man of Thought and Meditation, moves in a larger Sphere; He does not thus
pinion his Fancy, but puts it upon the Wing, which seldom returns home without
some noble Quarry. And did Men but know, how much the pleasure of Thinking
transcends all other pleasures, they would certainly put a greater value upon
it. For nothing is comparable to the pleasure of an active, and a prevailing
Thought: a Thought prevailing over the difficulty and obscurity of the Object,
and refreshing the Soul with new Discoveries, and Images of things, and thereby
extending the bounds of Apprehension, and (as it were) enlarging the
Territories of Reason. But the Learned Man that daily plods on in his Reading,
and that never makes use of this thinking Faculty, by reflecting upon what he
has read, quite loses this Intellectual Enjoyments; Nor is he sensible of
that Suavissima Vita, as the Poet calls it, of Descending into himself, and
being daily sensible of his own Improvement: But like the Carriers Horse, he
still keeps the old Track; and his Learning (to continue the Simile) like the
Pack is but a Burden to the Beast that carries it. But now, after all that
has been said against Learning, thus much I must own, and acknowledge, That
Learning when it meets with an ingenuous temper, and is joined to a pregnancy
of mind, is then of excellent use and Advantage: For there is no Man but will
speak the better, where he knows what others have said upon the same subject.
And sometimes the Consciousness of his inward knowledge, gives a graceful
Confidence to his outward behavior. But on the other hand, if Learning happens
to be in the possession of a Fool, it is then but a Bawble, and, like Dr.
Donne's Sun-Dial in the Grave, a trifle, and of no use.

ESSAY III.
Of Education, and Custom; The great Influence it has upon most Men. But that
a good Education is not always Effectual.

WE suck in the first Rudiments as we do the common Air [facili haustu] as the
Lord Bacon expresses it, without Discrimination or Election, of which indeed
our tender, and unexercised Minds are not capable. And, I confess, it is
necessary we should do so; nor were there any hurt in this innocent easiness,
did not most Men all their Lives worship the first thing they saw in the
Morning of their Days, and ever after obstinately adhere to those unexamined
Receptions. But this is the mischief, when we are Children we are apt to
believe every thing; and when we are grown Men, we seldom examine Things, but
settle in their first Impressions, without giving our selves the trouble to
consider, and review them. And these prejudices, by Custom and long
Acquaintance with our Souls, get a mighty Interest, and shut them up against
every thing that is different from those Images of Education.

Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem
Testa diu --
said the Heathen Poet; the first seasoning Principles and Prejudices, which we
receive in our Youth, stick closely to us for a long time after. The Wise
Philosopher tells us, That the Soul of Man is Rasa Tabula, like a white Sheet
of Paper, out of which therefore it must be more than common Art, that can so
clear take out the first Writing, as to super-induce a new Copy fair and
legible. This is the true reason why any Person finds it so difficult to quit
those Notions of Religion, which have been established in his mind from his
early Infancy. There is a mavelous agreement, and natural kindness to those
Opinions, which we suck in with our Milk; They are like Foster-Brothers, to
whom it has been observed, There is as strong an Inclination as to the Natural;
we play and converse with them from our Cradles, and as soon as we can go
alone, we take them by the hand; we sleep with them in our bosoms, and contract
an insensible Friendship with them, a pleasing Familiarity, which takes off all
Deformities; we love them, and we like them, and their very Blackness is a
Beauty, as it is with the African Nations, to whom even that which we judge
Deformity, appears more lovely than the most delicate European Beauty. Thus it
was truly said of Philo, That every Man's own Religion seemed to him the best,
because he judges of it not by reason, but by affection; like those
Philosophers, of whom Cicero spoke, who liked no Discipline but their own.
Hence we find and, that the best account many can give of their Faith, is, that
they were bred in it; And the most are driven to their Religion by Custom and
Education, as the Indians are to Baptism, that is, like a Drove of Cattle to
the Water. Thus do we judge all things by our anticipations, and condemn, or
applaud them, as they differ, or agree, with our first opinions. It Is on this
account that almost every Country censures the Laws, Customs, and Doctrines of
every other, as absurd, and unreasonable, and are confirmed in their own
follies beyond possibility of Conviction. In a word, there is nothing so
absurd, to which Education cannot form our tender Youth; It can turn us into
shapes more Monstrous than those of Africa. For in our Childhood, we are like
the melted Wax to the prepared Seal, capable of any Impression from the
documents of our Teachers. The Half Moon, or Cross, are indifferent to us; and
with the same ease can we write on this Rasa Tabula, Turk or Christian. Hence
therefore it is, That we find no Religion so irrational, but can boast of its
Martyrs; Nor no Opinion so silly and ridiculous, but has had some Philosopher
or other to support and defend it. And because there is not any thing more
strange, than the great diversity of Laws and Customs in the World; I shall not
here think it impertinent to transcribe some of those which are most
remarkable; as for Instance, To account it a most pious and Religious Act, to
kill their Parents, when they come to such an Age; and then to eat them: In one
and the same Nation Virgins go with their Privy Parts uncovered, and married
Women carefully cover and conceal them: Where Children are excluded and
Brothers and Nephews only inherit: Where Chastity, in unmarried Women, is in no
esteem; for such may prostitute themselves to as many as they please, and being
got with Child, may lawfully take Physic to make themselves miscarry; but
Married Women keep themselves Chaste and Faithful to their Husbands. Where the
Custom was, that every Bride should be prostitute to all Comers the first
Night, and she who had entertained most, was most honored: Where they have no
Marriages, and therefore Children only own their Mothers, not being able to
guess at their Fathers: Where Bawdy Houses of Young Men are kept for the
Pleasure of Women, as there are of Women for the Necessities of Men: Where the
servile condition of Women is looked upon with such contempt, that they kill
all the Native Women, and buy Wives of their Neighbors to supply their use:
Where they boil the bodies of their Dead, and afterward pound them to a pulpe,
which they mix with their Wine, and drink it: Where the greatest Oath they
take, is to Swear by the Name of some Dead Person of Reputation, laying their
handup on his Tomb: Where the ordinary way of Salutation is, by putting a
finger down to the Earth, and then pointing it up toward Heaven: Where it is
the Fashion to turn their backs upon him they salute, and never look upon the
Man they intend to honor: Where, whenever the King spits, the greatest Ladies
of his Court put out their hands to receive it: And where also the most eminent
Persons about him stoop to take up his Ordure in a Linen Cloth. Thus have I
Collected, and Copied out several of those Customs, which to me seem the most
extravagant, and uncouth; whereby it plainly appears, that there is no Opinion
or Imagination so idle or ridiculous, which is not established by Laws and
Customs, in some place or other. Thus, in a word, do we see the mighty power of
Custom and Education; which is so great, that the rankest follies are counted
Sacred, if Customary: And the Fashion is always handsome and agreeable, though
never so uncouth, or ridiculous to an indifferent Beholder. In short, we are
civil or uncivil, good or bad, foolish or wise, or any thing else according to
Custom, which Erasmus calls the Monosyllable Tyrant, because it is formed Mos in
Latin; though Pinder styles her the Queen and Empress of the World. Seneca
says, That we govern our selves not by Reason, but by Custom, accounting that
most honest, which is most practiced; and Error serves us for a Law, when it
is become public. Custom we know is of so great account among Phisicians, that
according to the great Hippocrates, there is no one thing ought more to be
regarded: Nay, says he, whatsoever a Man is used to (although it be bad) is less
harmful than what we are not accustomed to, although in it self it be better.
And among the Lawyers we see, there is nothing more esteemed of than Custom:
Prescription is always counted the best Title; and the Common Law, which is
nothing but several Customs established by time and experience, has always the
preference of Statute Law, and is esteemed the Nobler part. Again, Custom
governs our very Affections; and we love rather by Custom, than by Reason Hence
Mothers more tenderly effect their Children with whom they commonly converse,
more than Fathers do; and Nurses more than some Mothers. Custom has likewise
such a Power over the Imagination, that when we are asleep, we often dream of
those things, which our minds most run upon when we are awake. And what a
mighty Influence has it upon the outward Senses? which may be perceived in
those Persons, who (after they have been for some time kept in a dark place)
come into a full and open light; not being able to bear that luminous Body,
which by its glaring seems to dazzle and offend their sight. And hence it is,
That those who live near the Cataracts of Nile, as also those several Tradesmen
whose noise displeases us so much, and who dwell in Mills and Forges, Custom
has made it so familiar to them, that they are no ways disturbed with this
constant clattering, but rest and sleep as quietly with noise, as others do
without it. Thus does Custom sufficiently show its own Force and Power, which
is stronger than Nature, inasmuch as it both alters and destroys Nature, and is
so poweful that it cannot be destroyed but by it self. To conclude then, the
Power of Custom is much greater than most men imagine; and therefore it is,
that through mistake we often call that the Law of Nature, which really is but
the effect of Custom. That affection, which we say every Man naturally bears to
his own Country, whence comes it? Is it not from Custom? I know indeed, some
tell us, that this love to our Native Soil, is by the instinct of Nature, as
Beasts love their Dens, and Birds their Nests. But I rather think it is from
civil institution, as being accustomed to the same Laws, the same Ceremonies,
the same Temples, the same Markets, and the same Tribunals. No wonder then,
that the Generality of Mankind is so influenced by Custom, since that Idea
which most Men have of Truth and Reason, is no other, than what Custom
dispenses to them. And hence it is, that we often are so strangely deluded,
and imposed upon. For Custom, says Montaigne, veils from us the true aspect of
things. Miracles appear to be so, according to our ignorance of Nature, and not
according to the essence of Nature. The continually being accustomed to any
thing, blinds the eye of our Judgment. Hence therefore it is, That as the
Greeks and Romans formerly called all Barbarians, who followed not their Laws
and Fashions; so we still keep up the same humor, by judging all those who
differ from us in their Customs and Usages, to be at least Ridiculous, if not
Barbarous. Though (after all) the Barbarians are no more a wonder to us, than
we are to them; nor (it may be) with any more reason. Those Americans, who kill
their old decrepit Parents, instead of believing themselves Parricides, call us
Cruel for letting ours continue so long in the Miseries of old Age: And as for
that Practice of theirs (which to us seems so unnatural) of eating their own
Parents, they think they do thereby give them the most noble sort of Sepulture,
by burying them in their own Bodies, in a manner reviving them again, and
regenerating them by a kind of Transmutation into their Living Flesh, by the
means of Digestion and Nourishment. And to say the Truth, there are many Laws
and Customs, which seem at the first view to be savage, inhumane, and contrary
to all Reason, which if they were without Passion, and soberly considered,
though they were not found to be altogether just and good, yet at least they
might be plausibly defended by some kind of Reason. A wise Man therefore ought
to suspend his Judgment, and not to be over-forward in Censuring and
Condemning the Practices and Customs of other Nations: which sort of narrowness
I find many are subject to, and with the Hermit, are apt to think the Sun
Shines no where, but in their Cell; and that all the World is darkness but
themselves. But this certainly is to measure Truth by a wrong Standard, and to
Circumscribe her by too narrow a Scantling. But to proced, Since Custom has so
great a sway in all our Actions, we may well look upon it, as another Nature;
nay, sometimes we see it Conquers Nature; Thus by Custom did Mithridates render
Poison so familiar to himself, that it lost its noxious Quality; and we find
whole Nations in India, that live upon Toads, Lizards, and Spiders. Custom then
is no slight thing; it is that which ought in the first place to be regarded,
since it exercises so absolute dominion over us. Plato reproving a Boy for
playing at some Childish Game, Thou reprovest me (says the Boy) for a very
little thing: Custom (replied Plato) is no little Thing. And (says Montaigne)
He was in the right; for I find our greatest Vices derive their first
Propensity from our most tender Infancy* and that our Princpal Education
depends upon the Nurse. And therefore since Education carries so great force
and Authority along with it, how much does it behove such Parents, who have any
regard to Virtue and Wisdom, to give their Children a virtuous and sober
Education? though (indeed) this does not always prove successful. For Nero,
notwithstanding his two excellent Tutors, Seneca and Burrhas, received but
little Improvement. Cicero's Son to the stupidity of his Nature, added
Drunkenness, and returned from Athens and Cratippus as great a Blockhead as he
went. Marcus Aurelius provided fourteen of the most approved Masters to Educate
Commodus, yet could not rectify his froward and Barbarous humor. Thus, as Sir
Henry Wotton observes, There is in some Tempers such a natural Barrenness, that
like the Sands of Arabia they are never to be cultivated, or improved. And
according to the old proverb, Ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius -- There are
some ^rab-Stocks of such a nature, that all the Ingrafting in the World can
never correct or amend. But these Monsters of Nature are not often to be met
with: For we usually observe, that the Culture of the mind, as of the Earth,
does deliver it from the Barrenness of its Nature; And that the toughest, and
most unbended Natures by early and prudent Discipline, may be much corrected
and improved.

ESSAY IV.
Of the Ancients: And the Respect that is due unto them: That we should not too
much enslave our selves to their Opinions.

AS we should not be so fondly conceited of our selves, and the extraordinary
Abilities of the Present Age, as to think every thing that is Ancient to be
obsolete; or, as if it must needs be with Opinions, as it is with Clothes,
where the newest is for the most part best; so neither should we be so
Superstitiously devoted to Antiquity, as to take every thing for Canonical,
which drops from the Pen of a Father, or was approved by the consent of the
Ancients. Antiquity is ever venerable, and justly challenges Honor, and
Reverence; but yet there is difference between Reverence, and Superstition; We
may assent unto them as Ancients, but not as Oracles; They may have our minds
easy and inclinable, but there is no reason they should have them Captivated
and Fettered to their Opinions. As I will not distrust all which without
manifest Proof they deliver, where I cannot convince them of Error; so likewise
will I suspend my Belief upon probability of their Mistakes; and Where I find
reason to dissent, I will rather respect Truth than Authority. As there may be
Friendship, so there may be Honor, with diversity of Opinions; nor are we
bound therefore to defy Men, because we reverence them We wrong our Ancestors
more by admiring than opposing them in their Errors; and our opinion of them
is very dishonorable, if we think they had rather have us followers, of them,
than of Truth. The greatest respect we can show the Ancients, is by following
their Example: which was not Supinely and Superstitiously to sit down in fond
admiration of the Learning of those that were before them; but to examine their
Writings, to avoid their Mistakes, and to use their Discoveries, in order to
the further Improvement of Knowledge: This they did; and never any Man took a
greater Liberty in censuring and reproving the supposed Errors and Mistakes of
the Elder Philosophers, than Aristotle himself; And therefore I do not see any
reason, why he should be allowed greater privilege, than what he himself
thought good to allow to those before him. Veritas nec mea est, nec illius, aut
ullius, says Saint Austine, No man can say I am infallible; for as we are men,
so we are subject to Error. As for the Truth of Things, Time makes no
Alteration; Things are still the same they are, let the time be past, present,
or to come. Those things which we Reverence for Antiquity, what were they at
their first Birth? Were they false? Time cannot make them true: Were they true?
Time cannot make them more true. The Circumstance therefore of Time, in respect
of Truth and Error, is merely impertinent. For as Antiquity cannot privilege
an Error, so Novelty cannot prejudice Truth. I know in all Ages there have been
those, who with a great deal of Zeal and Elegance have declaimed against New
Things, setting forth the great danger of Alteration and Novelty. But let us
not be frightn'd with Shadows: If to be the Author of New Things, be a Crime;
how will the first Civilizers of Men, and Makers of Laws, and Founders of
Governments escape? Whatever now delights us in the Works of Nature, that
excels the rudeness of the first Creation, is New. Whatever we see in Cities,
or Houses, above the first Wildness of Fields, and Meanness of Cottages, and
Nakedness of Men, had its time, when this imputation of Novelty might as well
have been laid to its charge. It is not therefore an Offense, to introduce New
Things, unless that which is introduced prove pernicious in it self; or cannot
be brought in, without the extirpation of others, that are better. If Novelty
should always be rejected, neither would Arts have arrived to that perfection,
wherein now we enjoy them, nor could we ever hope for any future Reformation:
though all Truth be in it self Eternal; yet in respect of Men's Opinions, there
is scarce any so Ancient, but had a beginning, and was once counted a Novelty;
and if for this reason it had been condemned as an Error, what a general
darkness and ignorance would then have been in the World, in Comparison of that
Light which now abounds. The great Architect of the World has been observed
not to throw down all Gifts and Knowledge to Mankind confusedly at once, but in
a regular Parsimonious method, to disperse them by certain degrees, periods,
and progress of time, leaving Man to make industrious researches and
investigations after Truth; He left the World to the Disputations of Men, as
the wisest of Men says, who in acquisition of Natural Truths went from the
Hysope to the Cedar; One day certifieth another, and one Age rectifieth
another, and the Morrow has more Experience than the preceding day. Those
times which we term Vulgarly the Old World, was indeed the Youth of it, and
though if respect be had to the particular and personal Acts of Generation, and
to the relation of Father and Son, they who fore lived and preceeded us may be
called our Ancestors, yet if you go to the Age of the World in general, and to
the true length and longaevity of Things, we are more properly The Ancients,
and the present Age is the greatest Antiquity: Hence, as the Lord Bacon
observes, we generally have a wrong notion of Antiquity; For (says he) to speak
truly, Antiquitas Seculi, Juventus Mundi; That which we commonly call
Antiquity, is but the Nonage of the World: And in this respect the younger
Brother may be termed more Ancient than his Elder, because the World was older
when he entered into it. The admiring of former Ages, was a Vanity that
possessed all times as well as ours; and the Golden Age was never the present.
They who went before us, have not prevented us, but have opened a door, that we
may enter into the Recesses of Truth: He that comes last has certainly the
best advantage in the Inquiry. Our Ancesters have done wisely and well in their
Generations, but they have not done all; much work still remains behind, and he
that lives a thousand Ages hence, shall not have reason to complain, that there
are no hidden Truths fit for him to enquire after. There are more Worlds to
conquer: Every day brings a new Light, and by a wise and careful Labor we may
improve what our Forefathers spied, when they peept through the Crevices. If
the latter Ages could be abstracted from the mixtures of Interest, and the
Engagement of their Party, they are in many things better able to teach the
People, than the Ancients. There is certainly a truer, and more certain
Knowledge of Things now than formerly: But that which spoils all is, Men are
grown a great deal more cunning, and few there are, who take any other aim,
than that of Interest; So that hence it is, that many times it proves safer to
rely on the Authority of former Ages, though more ignorant, than of latter
Ages, which though more knowing, yet more dangerous to follow, in respect of
that Design and Artifice, which now a days Men use, on purpose to promote their
own private Interest. In short, it behooves every one in the search of Truth,
always to preserve a Philosophical liberty: Not to be so enslaved to the
Opinion of any Man, as to think whatever he says to be infallible. We must
labor to find out what things are in themselves by our own Experience, and a
through examination of their Natures, not what another says of them. Non tam
authoritas in disputando, quam rationis moment a quoerenda sunt, said Cicero; A
Man ought not so much to regard the Person who speaks, as the Thing that is
spoken. But it is the unhappy humor of too many Men, jurare in verba Magistri,
servilely to tie themselves to the Authority of particular Men, and to see with
other Men's Spectacles: The greatest part of the World being rather led with the
Names of their Masters, and with the Reverend respect they bear their Persons
or Memories, than with the Soundness and Truth of the Things they teach. Men
first take up a Confidence of the Learning or Sanctity of a Person, and then
all his Notions are received implicitly, and are strictly embraced, without
the least examination: And this Admiration of Men's Persons, has in all Ages
been of huge mischief, and very pernicious; It has nursed up private fancies
into Solemn public Errors, and given an unhappy Perpetuity to many Heterodox
Opinions, which would else have expired with their first Defenders. Men do not
any where more easily err, than where they follow a Guide, whom they presume
they may safely trust. Belief, without evidence of Reason, must be only there
absolute, where the Authority is unquestionable; and where it is impossible to
err, there only it is impious to distrust. As for Men's Assertions, Quibus
possibile est subesse falsum, what one said of Friendship, Sic ama tanquam
osurus, Love with that Wisdom, as to remember you may be provoked to the
Contrary, is more warrantable and advantageous in Knowledge, Sic creed tanquam
dissensurus, so to believe, as to be ready, when Cause requires, to dissent. It
is a too much straitning of a Man's own understanding, to enthral it unto any;
And besides, there is not any thing which has bred more distempers in the Body
of Learning, than Factions and Sidings; when as Seneca said of Cato, That he
would rather esteem Drunkenness a Virtue, than Cato Vicious. To conclude, There
is no one thing has more stunted the growth of Learning, than a stiff adhering
to the dictates of the Ancients; For he who makes Plato or Aristotle the
Standard of Humane Knowledge, cannot possibly transcend the Learning of Plato
or Aristotle* the utmost he can do, he may come up to that height, but (like
water) he can never rise higher than the Source. Now if we enquire the reason
why the Mathematics, and Mechanic Arts, have so much got the start in growth
of other Sciences; this may very well be thought to be one considerable cause
of it, That their Progress has not been retarded by this Reverential owe of
former Discoveries; Herein Men have acted freely, without laying any restraint
upon themselves, or Embargo upon their Intellectuals: No man ever thought it an
Heresy to out-limn Apelles, or to out-work the Obelisks: It was never imputed
to Galilaeus as a Crime, That he saw further than the Ancients, and that he
chose rather to believe his own Eyes, than either Aristotle or Ptolomy. Those
famous Optic Glasses, which are now so serviceable to us, are not a jot the
less valued, because they were not used by the Ancients; nor do we give the
less credit to their Informations, because they were hid from Ages. The Polar
Virtue of the Loadstone, was unknown to the Ancients; this was reserved for
latter days; and yet no Man is so silly, to think the vast advantages, which
accrue to Mankind by that noble Invention, are (therefore) the less to be
esteemed. And had the Author of that Invention (one Flavius Goia, a
Neapolitane, who lived about three hundred years ago) been of this narrow
Principle, That we are not to transcend the Bounds of the Ancients; we must
then (for want of this Discovery) have committed our selves to the sole conduct
of the Stars; and (as the Ancients did) must we always have been creeping near
the Shore: Then the fourth part of the Earth had been yet unknown, and
Hercules's Pillars had still been the World's Neultra: Seneca's Prophecy had
been an unfulfilled Prediction, and one moiety of our Globes an empty
Hemisphere.

ESSAY V.
Whether the Men of this present Age are any way inferior to those of former
Ages, either in respect of Virtue, Learning, or long Life.

THat the World does daily decline, is an Opinion so Universally believed, that
whoever goes about to defend the Contrary, presently shall be thought to
maintain a Paradox. But that thing called Universality, is so slight an
Evidence of Truth, that even Truth it self is ashamed of it; For what is
Universality but a quainter word to signify the Multitude: Now Humane
Authority at the strongest is but weak, but the Multitude is the weakest part
of Humane Authority: It is the great Patron of Error, the most easily abused,
and the most hardly disabus'd. The beginning of Error may be, and generally is,
from Private Persons, but the maintainer and Continuer of Error is the
Multitude. To infer the truth of a Religion, from the Number of its Professors,
is falsely to conclude the fineness of the Cloth from the largeness of the
Measure. How vain and Ridiculous then is it in the Papists, who think this
argument of Universality, so invincible a Proof of the truth of their Religion.
If Multitude be an Argument that Men are in the right, in vain then has the
Scripture said, Thou shall not follow a Multitude to do evil: For if this
Argument signify any thing, the greater Number can never be in the wrong.
Indeed could wishing do any good, I could wish well to this kind of Proof; Sed
nunquam it a been erit rebus humani^, ut plures sint meliores, It will never go
so well with Mankind, that the Most shall be the Best. In short, the best that
can be said of Argument and Reason drawn from Universality and Multitude, is
this, such Reason may perhaps serve well to excuse an Error, but it can never
serve to warrant a Truth. Notwithstanding therefore, that the opinion of the
World's constant Declining is so firmly radicated in the minds of most Men, yet
this is no sufficient reason, why we should acquiesce in such a belief; Nor can
any thing be more unphilosophical, than an Implicit Faith in this matter. And
therefore we shall now presume to enter upon the Subject. There are two
extremes common amongst Men: the one proper to young Men, who always value
themselves above their Predecessors, and like Rehoboam, think their own little
finger stronger than the whole Body of their Fathers; the other peculiar to Old
Men, who always extol the time past above the present. To speak impartially,
Old Men, says Dr. Brown, from whom we should expect the greatest Example of
Wisdom, do most exceed in this point of folly; Commending the days of their
Youth, which they scarce remember, at least well understood not; extolling
those times, which in their younger Years they heard their Fathers condemn, and
condemning those times, which the Gray Heads of their Posterity shall commend.
And that Old Men always were of this temper, we may understand from Horace, who
makes the same Complaint of them. Now, the reason why Old Men are so much out
of humor with the present times, I take to be this; They being for the most
part much altered from what they were in their Youth, as to their temper and
Complexion, and being full of sad Melancholy thoughts, this makes them think
the World is changed, whereas in truth the Change is in themselves. It fares
with them in this Case, as with those whose Mouth is out of taste, or whose Eyes
are bloodshot, or are troubled with the Jaundise, the one imagining all things
bitter or sour, which they taste, and the other red or yellow which they see.

Virg. Aen. 3. Terraeque Urbesque recedunt.

Themselves being launched out into the Deep, the Trees and Houses seem to go
backward, whereas really the Motion is in themselves, the Houses and Trees
still standing where they were. Seneca tells us a pleasant Story of Harpaste
his Wife's Fool, who being all of a sudden struck blind, would by no means be
persuaded of her own blindness, but still cried out how dark the Room was
grown. Such for the most part is the Case of Old Men, who, by reason of the
Infirmities of their Bodies and Minds, no longer finding the same gust and
pleasure in the delights of the World, that they found in their Youth, lay the
fault upon the World, instead of imputing the same to themselves, as they ought
to do. For God creates not Souls now with (...) advantages than formerly; He is
(...) liberal of his Favors to us of this Generation, as ever he was to any
before us; And Nature being still as wise and powerful as heretofore, and the
Universal Causes the same, their Operations must be likewise as perfect, and
their Effects as excellent in these days, as they have been in any. Let not Men
therefore deceive themselves, and think that we live in the Dregs of Time, and
what mighty advantages the Ancients (as they call them) had over us; for if
Antiquity be to have the preference, the advantage will then be of our side:
For Antiquity consists in the old Age of the World, not in the youth of it.
It Is we are the Fathers, and of more Authority than former Ages; because we
have the Advantage of more time than they had, and Truth (we say) is the
Daughter of Time. And besides, our Minds are so far from being impaired, that
they improve more and more in acuteness; and being of the same Nature with
those of the Ancients, have such an advantage beyond them, as a Pigmy has upon
the Shoulders of a Giant; from whence he beholds not only as much, but more
than his Supporter does. But since the Question now to be handled, is rather of
Fact than of Right, the best way of discussing it, will be by comparing the
past Ages with the present, and that in these three Respects, of Virtue,
Learning, and long Life.

1. First then, if we survey the Vices of former Times, they will certainly
appear more Barbarous and Epidemical, than such as now Reign in the World. Even
to this day, do we not esteem it an unparalleled piece of wickedness, That no
stranger could enter Sodom, without being defiled by the Lust of the more than
brutish Citizens? A Crime so foul, that nothing but Fire and Brimstone could
purge the stench of it from the World. After this, among the Egyptians was
that of the Strawless Tax. The Graecians under their wisest Lawgivers approved
of Theft, if it were committed with Art and Cunning. And Drunkenness was so
usual a Vice among them, that from thence Pergraecari, signifies to be mad with
Drink. The Romans had two Rules of Drinking, which they commonly observed; The
one was, to Drink down the Evening Star, and Drink up the Morning Star, ad
Diurnam stellam matutinam potantes, says Plautus; The other commonly practiced
among them, was the Drinking so many Healths, as there were Letters in their
Mistresses Name, according to that of Martial:

Naevia sex Cyathis, septem Justina bibatur,
Quinque Lycas, Lyde quatuor, Ida tribus.
Nor were their very Women free from this excess; Nay, Seneca assures us, that
even in Drinking, they sometimes out-did the Men. But to proceed. Have we any
so vain as Xerxes, that would think to whip the Sea into Calmness? or so
Prodigal as was Alexander, who, according to Plutarch, spent twelve Millions of
Talents upon Hephoestion's Funeral? Such a prodigious Sum, that many question
whether at that time the Revenue of the whole World would amount to it. Or,
what Prince is there in these days so prosusely extravagant, as Heliogabalus,
the Emperor, who was possessed rather with a Madness, than excess of
Prodigality; he filled his Fish Ponds with Rose Water; he supplied his Lamps
with the precious Balsam, that distills from the Trees in Arabia; he wore upon
his Shoos Pearls and Precious Stones engraven by the hands of the most skilful
Artists; his Dining Room was strewn with Saffron, and his Portico's with the
dust of Gold: And he was never known to put on any Garment a second time,
whether it was of the richest Silk, or woven with Gold. Then as for the Cruelty
of former Ages, we shall find it many degrees to transcend any thing that is
done in these days; even amongst the Jews, who by their Religion pretended to
more preciseness, what more common amongst them, than Incest, Fratricide,
Parricide, Sawing Men to Death, and the most Barbarous sorts of Cruelties,
oftentimes committed only for the diversion, and entertainment of Princes? What
Action did ever carry in it so much of Inhumanity, as that of the thirty
Athenian Tyrants, who caused the Daughters of some of the Slain Citizens to
dance, in the Blood of their own Parents, who had newly been Murdered by them?
Lucius Florus tells us, that the German Women, in their Wars with the Romans,
would very commonly take their Naked Sprawling Infants, and throw them in the
face of those they fought with; thinking that so Inhumane a Spectacle might
daunt the Roman Courage. Was there ever since then, any thing like the Ten
Persecutions? What but Nero's Luxury, could ever compare with Nero's Cruelty?
And yet Domitian, in one particular, outwent him; for he took delight in seeing
those Torments executed, which Nero but commanded. What shall I now say of
Servius Galba, who, when he was in Spain, having assembled together the
Inhabitants of three Cities, to consult (as he pretended) about their common
safety, at one stroke cut off seven thousand of them, among whom were the very
Flower of their Youth? I might also tell you of Licinius Lucullus, who,
contrary to express Articles, put to the Sword twenty thousand of the Caucaei,
after they had surrendered: And of Octavianus Augustus, who, after the taking
of Perusia, at one Sacrifice offered up the lives of three hundred of the
Principal Citizens at the Altar of his Uncle Julius: And of Antoninus
Caracalla, who being incensed against the Citizens of Alexandria upon the
account of some jests they had made of him, entered into the City in a peaceable
manner, and summoning before him all the Youth, he surrounded them with his
Soldiers, who, upon the Signal given, fell immediately upon them and slew
every Mothers Son of them; and afterward using the like Cruelty upon the rest
of the Inhabitants, he utterly destroyed that most Spacious, and Populous City
of Alexandria. Thus could I easily give many more instances, to show the
wickedness of former Ages, not only in respect of their Barbarous Cruelties,
but of their other Vices; but I forbear this, since I very well know, that the
Character of those Times cannot be better described, than is already by the
Apostles, in their several Epistles: For what a Monstrous Catalogue of Sins do
we meet with in the first Chapter to the Romans; Sins of so deep a dye, and of
so horrid a nature, and such an Inventory of all sorts of Wickedness, That one
might very well imagine the Apostle had been rather describing some Vision of
Hell, than the Seat of the Roman Empire. To conclude then this Point, let us
not imagine that ever any Age was, or will be free from Vice and Enormities;
while Humane Nature continues, there will be Frailties: Vitia erunt donec
Homines erunt, says Tacitus, Vice has always had a being in the World, and
will continue as long as Men are upon Earth. How unreasonable is it, to think
that Man can be better out of Paradise, than he was in it? Nemo sine Crimine,
The best of Men have their Imperfections. We are no Angels upon Earth, but are
always transported with some Infirmity or other; and 'twill be so, while these
frail, fluxible humors reign within us. This as I conceive is that Black Bean,
which the Turkish Alchoran speaks of, when they feign, That Mahomet being
asleep among the Mountains of the Moon, two Angels descended, and ripping open
his Breast, they took his Heart, and washed it in Snow, and afterward pulled
out a Black Bean, which was the portion of the Devil, and so replaced the
Heart. All things here below run in a kind of Circle; And as in Arts and
Sciences, so likewise in the Manners of Men there is a Vicissitude and
Revolution. Virtue and Vice have no settled Habitation; every Climate has had
its turn: Sometimes one Country carries it for Virtue and Learning, and
sometimes another. Athens, which was formerly the only place for Learning and
Civility, is now quite overrun with Barbarism and Ignorance. Every Nation has
its Achme, or highest pitch of Elevation; And when once the spoke of the Wheel
is uppermost, it soon whurries to the bottom. As a Kingdom rises in Empire, so
it enlarges both in Virtue and Vice; and when it declines, so the Declension of
these is proportionable. And though as to particular Kingdoms, one time may be
either better or worse than another; yet take the World in Gross, and lump it
together, we shall find that Humane Nature is much at the same Standard, as it
was formerly; And as we commonly observe of the Sea, That as it gets in one
place, it loses in another; so every Age may make the same Observation of the
Virtues and Vices of Mankind.

2. The next thing to be considered, is, whether former Ages excelled the
Present in respect of Learning. Of all the Ancients there were none more
esteemed for Learning than the Egyptians: The old Egyptian Learning was so
Famous, that the Spirit of God, sets forth the Eminency of Moses's Knowledge by
his skill in it, and the Matchlessness of Solomon's Wisdom by its exceeding it;
And therefore we may very well conclude, that the Egyptian Learning in those
days, was conversant about more generous and more useful Notices, than
afterward; such as Geometry, Astronomy, Policy, Physic, and other such like
Arts, which either were perfective of their Rational Faculties, or did Minister
to the Uses and Necessities of Nature: as is generally reported by all Ancient
Historians. But had the old Primitive Learning of Egypt been the same it was
in latter Ages, it had been as great a disparagement to Moses, as it is now
justly reputed a Commendation, That he was accomplished in all the Egyptian
Learning, and had amounted only to this, That he was a vain trifling,
Superstitious Fellow. And what the Egyptian Priest objected to the Greeks, That
they were always Children, might be more truly applied to themselves, if it be
the property of Children to value trifles. What Childish Fooleries their
Hieroglyphics were, Learned Men now prove from the lost labor, and fruitless
industry of Kircher's Oedipus Aegyptiacus. Certainly, if they had designed to
abuse and debauch this humor, they could scarce have contrived more fond and
extravagant Emblems; and indeed their Courseness, and unlikeness to the things
they should resemble, sufficiently discover them to have been but the rude
Essays of a Barbarous and undisciplined Fancy. These Hieroglyphics, says the
Learned Bishop Wilkins, seem to be but a slight, imperfect Invention, suitable
to those first and ruder Ages; much of the same Nature with that Mexican way of
Writing by Picture, which was a mere shift they were put to, for want of the
Knowledge of Letters. And it seems to me questionable, says the same Author,
whether the Egyptians did not at first use their Hieroglyphics upon the same
account, namely, for want of Letters. It is scarce credible what a mighty noise
this Hieroglyphick way of Philosophizing has made, though there is so little
of substance in it, and how exceedingly it took in the Infancy of the World; as
it is the property of Children, to be taken more with sensible Forms, Shadows,
or Pictures, which please the Fancy, than with solid Reason. Indeed, to a Man
that considers it, nothing could ever seem more preposterous to the design of
Learning, than these Hieroglyphics, or Mystical Representations, which were
unavoidably clogged with two Inconveniences, very unsuitable to the
propagation of Knowledge, which were Obscurity and Ambiguity: For it not only
cost them a great deal of Time to gather up such Symbolical Things, which might
represent their Conceptions; but when they had pitched upon them, they were
liable to a great variety of Interpretations, as is evident in all those
remainders of them, preserved by the Industry of some Ancient Writers. I cannot
therefore imagine any rational Man could think that Study worth his pains,
which at the highest can amount but to a Conjecture; and when it is come to
that with a great deal of pains, it is nothing but some ordinary and trivial
Observation. Certainly (says the Learned Stilling fleet) this kind of Learning
deserves the highest form among the DIFFICILES NUGAE, and all these
Hieroglyphics put together, will make but one good one, and that should be for
LABOR LOST. I might here (if it were not too great a Digression) show how very
Pernicious the use of these Hieroglyphics were to the Vulgar, who seeing the
Attributes of God represented under the shapes of Animals and Plants, took
occasion to adore those Corporeal Things, and so became the most Superstitious
of all Nations, going so far as to deifie Garlic, Onions, Rats, and Toads. But
to proceed: The truth of it is, the Egyptians seem to have had only Knowledge
enough, to know that their Neighbors had none at all, and cunning enough to
pretend an inspection into strange and abstruse Mysteries; knowing that others
by reason of their Ignorance could not control them, and by reason of their
Credulity would be very apt to credit them; And thence they continually abused
the Credulous Grecians with Tales and Fables. The Learned Stilling fleet tells
us, There want not grounds of Suspicion, that the old Egyptian Learning was not
of that Elevation, which the present distance of our Age makes us apt to think
it was. And the Learned Conringius, in his Book de Hermetica Medicina, has
endeavored to show the great desects there were in it. Nor can it, I think, be
denied, says Stillingfleet, but according to the reports we have now
concerning the old Egyptian Learning, some parts of it were frivolous, others
obscure, a great deal Magical, and the rest short of that Improvement, which
the accession of the parts and industry of after Ages gave unto it. It were
easy to show, how much even those parts of Learning, wherein the Egyptians
and the other Ancients did most excel, have been improved in these latter Ages;
But this Task having been performed by abler Pens, I shall only touch upon
three Things, so very useful to Mankind, viz. Anatomy, Geography, and
Navigation; to show what a mighty improvement they have received in this last
Age. First then, as for Anatomy; This Art, was doubtless in very little use
among the Ancients. I know indeed, there are some who tell us, that the
Egyptians were very accurate in the Knowledge of Anatomy; but when I consider
how excessively curious and Ceremonious, or rather Superstitious they were in
preserving their Bodies entire and unputrified, I cannot but conceive their
opening them was rather for the Embowelling, than the Anatomizing of them. As
for the Grecians, this Art could not well be in practice among them, because
their usual Custom was to Burn their dead Bodies, as we find it attested by
Homer, Herodotus, Thucydides, and Plutarch; and besides, had Anatomy been in
use among the Grecians, there is no dispute but the works of Hipocrates, yet
extant, would have discovered it, which we do not find in any place they do:
Nay, so far from that, that Hippocrates himself going one time to visit
Democritas, he happened to find him busy in Dissecting several Beasts, who
asking him what he meant by his being so employed, Democritus (by way of
Apology) makes him this reply, Haec Animalia quae vides propterea seco, non Dei
opera perosus, sed fellis bilisque naturam disquirens. Now, if he apprehended
that the Dissecting of Beasts might be looked upon as an hating of Gods works,
he might much more have feared that censure, had he cut up the Bodies of Men.
Nor does it appear by any thing extant in the Writings of Galen, that that
other Father of Phisicians, ever made any Anatomy of Humane Bodies. Nor was
this Art practiced among the Romans, nor indeed could it be, forasmuch as they
held it unlawful, Aspicere humana exta, (as Pliny in his Preface to his 28 Book
tells us) to look upon the Entrals of Men's Bodies, And Dion in his 55th Book
says, That it was allowed to Tiberius to touch the Body of Augustus, Quod nefas
alias erat, which otherwise had been unlawful. And that the Primitive
Christians favored not the Practice of Anatomy, will plainly appear from
Tertullian, who in the 4th Chapter of his Book de Anima, speaking of one
Herophilus, doubts whether to call him Medicum or Lanium, a Physician or a
Butcher, Qui Hominem odiit, ut nosset, says he, Who hated Man, that he might
know him: And St Augustine in his 22th Book de Crv. Dei. Cap. 24. runs much
upon the same strain. And among others we find Pope Boniface the 8th such a
professed Enemy to this art of dissecting Humane Bodies, that he threatens
immediately his Thunderbolt of Excommunication to all such as should do any
thing of this nature. Thus we see how very shie and unacquainted the Ancients
were with this most excellent Art, which certainly is one of the most useful in
humane Life, as tending most to the Eviscerating, and disclosing the secrets of
Nature. But now in these latter Ages, we have taken off this thick Veil of
Superstition, and there is scarce any Man, who has not a desire to know, How
curiously and wonderfully he is made. Hence then Anatomy has of late been a
free and general Practice; and particularly in this Age it has received
wonderful Improvements. For proof whereof I need not take much pains, since
there is no Man that has the least insight into Physic, but knows how much
the Learned Dr. Harvey in that excellent Treatise of his, De Generatione
Animalium, has transeended all that went before him, in that full and
satisfactory account he there presents the World with, concerning the
Constitution, Structurer, and Nutrition of Humane Bodies: What a mighty name
has he justly got in the Orbis Literarius, by that wonderful and surprising
discovery of the Circulation of the Blood; a Doctrine so Universally embraced,
and so unquestionably true, that a Physician would be thought a Heretic primae
Classis, who should in the least dispute it? How much is the whole College of
Physicians indebted to the memory of the Famous Dr. Glisson, for giving them a
more true and perfect account of the Nature of Sanguification, Bilification,
Separation of Urine, and other Humors from the Mass of Blood, than ever the
World was formerly acquainted with? And does not the Incomparable Dr. Willis
deserve to be reckoned among the Benefactors of Mankind, for those great
Discoveries he has made of Nutrition, Generation, and Separation of the Succus
Nervosus, and Animal Spirits, with their praeternatural affections? How
glimmering a light, and how imperfect a notion had the Ancients of the nature
of the Saliva, and other Juices that are conveyed into the Mouth, together with
their Passages; until our Learned and Famous Countryman, Dr* Wharton, and of
late the Learned Steno so happily disclosed those Secrets of Nature? Did any of
the Ancients ever imagine, that the Lungs consisted only of Vessels and
Bladders? That the Liver, Spleen, and Reins were Conglomerate Glandules; and
yet that these are so, that expert Anatomist, and great Naturalist,
Malphighius, has informed the World? Which of the Ancients ever dreamt, That
the Testicles of the Male should be nothing but a Conglomeration of Vessels;
and the Female Testicles, Ovaries; was not this Discovery also an honor
reserved for the present Age, and to the Industrious and Learned De Graef are
the thanks due? Who among the Ancients ever rightly informed us as to the
Operation of Cathartick Medicines in Humane Bodies; or as to the Reason of the
different Colors of the Excrements, that are observed to be evacuated by them,
until that great Anatomical light, Sir George Ent, imparted it to the World?
Which was it of the Ancients, that ever had a true notion how the Chyle was
conveyed into the Mass of Blood? We very well know, they told us it discharged
it self through the Meseraick Veins into the Liver; but as to its true Passage
into the Blood, they were as little able to give an account of that, as they
were to demonstrate the Commixture of the Air therewith; and yet they had the
confidence to teach it in their Schools as an Ens Rationis, though they had
never made any Proof, or Experiment for the truth of this Assertion. In what a
high Measure then did that great Antomist Dr. Lower, oblige the World, by his
great Industry and indefatigable pains, who in that rare and admirable Tract of
his, De Cord, has not only more punctually showed the true passage of the
Chyle through its Lacteals, Receptacle, and Chyliferous ducts, than formerly;
but has plainly demonstrated that it is impossible there can be any other, by
which it should have its discharge into the Mass of Blood? Nor are his
Arguments less nervous and cogent, for proving the Commixture of the nitrous
Particles of the Air with the Mass of Blood. Thus have I given you an account
of several of the most considerable Improvements made in this present Age, in
that part of Physic relating to Anatomy; All which ingenious and excellent
Inventions, are of great use, as affording us better Hypotheses in Physic, and
by Consequence tending to a better and more effectual way of Curing Diseases.

The next thing that falls under our Consideration, is to show how much
Geography has lately been Improved. The Ancients were so very defective in
this Art or Science, that the Learned Varenius tells us, That the most General
and Necessary Things belonging thereunto, were then unknown; as the Flux and
Reflux of the Sea; the Habitableness of the Torrid Zone; the Poplar property of
the Magnet; the Diversity of Winds, the true Dimension of the Earth; Nor had
they any true Descriptions of remote Countries, concerning which both the
Greeks and Romans had very sabulous Relations; they knew not that the Earth was
encompassed by the Sea, and might be salled round; They were totally ignorant
of America, and both the North and South parts of this Hemisphere; yea, and
understood very little of the remoter parts of their own Asia; That part of the
Indies that lies on the other side of the River Ganges, was in a manner a Terra
Incognita to them; they knew little or nothing of the vast Kingdom of China,
nothing of Japan, or the numerous Oriental Islands, and these made a great, if
not the best part of Asia. But that which to me seemed stran ger, or more
remarkable, is, That neither Thucydides nor Herodotus, nor any other Greek
Author Cotemporary with them, have so much as mentioned the Romans, though then
growing up to a dreadful power, and being both Europeans. Budoeus in his 4th
Book De Ass, tells us, That the Grecians were so utterly ignorant of the
Spaniards, that Ephorus, one of their most accurate Geographers, took Spain,
which he calls Iberia, to be a City. It was in former times counted so
dangerous a thing to believe the Antipodes, that Boniface, Archbishop of Mentz,
by chance seeing a Treatise written by Virgilius, Bishop of Salizburg, touching
the Antipodes, thinking that some Damnable pernicious Doctrine might be couched
under that strange Name, complained first to the Duke of Bohemia, and
afterward to Pope Zachary, Anno. 745. By whom the poor Bishop (whose great
misfortune was to be Learned in such a blockish Age) was condemned as a
Heretic. Nay, even St. Austin, Lactantius, and some other of the Ancient
Writers, do by no means allow of the Antipodes, but look upon it to be a
ridiculous, incredible story; And Venerable Bede is much of the same Opinion.
The Learned Fracastorius says, That our Ancestors knew little Westward beyond
the Fortunate Islands, and Eastward as little beyond Catygara, now called
Canton, the Richest City in China; So that (as that Learned Author informs us)
of the whole Habitable World, scarce one half was known to the Ancients. Now,
by the account I have here given, it plainly appears, how grossly ignorant the
Ancients were in the knowledge of Geography, at also what a vast Improvement i*
has received in these latter Days For our Navigation is far greater, our
Commerce is more general, our Charts more exact, our Globes more accurate, our
Travels more remote, our Reports more intelligent and sincere; and
consequently, our Geography far more perfect, than it was in the Elder Times of
Polybius and Possidonius; yea, than in those of Ptolomy, Strabo, and Pomponius
Mela, who lived among the Coesars. And if this Art was so very defective in the
flourishing times of the Roman Empire, there is no dispute but it was much more
so, in the days of Aristotle and the Groecians: And therefore no wonder the
Macedonian Youth was no better instructed, than to believe he had Conquered the
whole World: when (God knows) there were Nations enough, both before him and
behind him, to have swallowed up the Young Commander, and his Triumphant
Armies, at a Morsel.

I am now come to the last Parallel, and that is, to show what vast
Improvements the Art of Navigation has received in these last Ages. Cardan, a
great searcher into the Curiosities of Nature, tells us, That among other late
Noble Inventions, that of the Mariners Compass is the most worthy of
Admiration, as being of the greatest use and Convenience to Mankind. By the
help hereof, we are now able to find out a way through the vast Ocean, in the
greatest Storms and darkest Nights, where is neither Path to follow, nor
Inhabitant or Passenger to enquire; It points out the way to the skillful
Mariner, when all other helps fail him, and that with greater certainty than
the wit of Man can possibly do. By means hereof, are the Commodities of all
Countries discovered, Trade, Traffic, and Humane Society maintained, their
several Forms of Government and Religion observed, and the whole World made as
it were one Commonwealth, and the most distant Nations, Fellow Citizens of the
same Body Politic. But the best way to make us rightly value the blessing of
this Invention, is, by considering the many shifts and Inconveniences the
Ancients were put to, for want of it. We may easily imagine, how inconvenient
the Ancients found it to sail by the guidance of the Stars: For in dark Cloudy
weather, when their Pleiades, Helice, and Cynosura were not to be seen, the
Pilot was always at a loss for his Guide, and knew not how to steer his Ship,
but lay exposed to the casual conduct both of Winds and Tides. And for this
reason, the Ancients seldom or never durst venture into the main Ocean, but
were fain to go creeping along by the Shore side: And no more than this (as we
have reason to believe) did the Phoenicians and Carthaginians, the Tyrians and
Sydonians; who though renowned in History for great Navigators, yet by the most
Learned are thought to have performed their Voyages only by Coasting, and not
by Crossing the Ocean. Hence therefore it was, That the Commerce and
Communications of those days were very inconsiderable; Their famed Travels in
Comparison were nothing: And that renowned ten years Voyage of Ulysses (so
highly celebrated by the Poets of Old) was much short of what many of our
Merchants do now every Year perform. Thus you see how very defective the
Ancients were in this Art of Navigation, the Benefits and Advantages whereof
are so very Considerable, That the Wealth and Strength of a Nation are really
to be computed in Proportion to their flourishing herein. It was long since a
wise and true Observation of Cicero, Qui Mare tenet, eum necesse est RERUM
potiri, He that commands the Sea, must necessarily enjoy all things. There is
not any thing can be a greater Demonstration of the Flourishing of a Nation,
than when its Genius lies toward Naval Affairs, and when by its Industry it is
arrived to a Sovereignty of the Seas; This is the true Characteristical mark of
the greatness of Empire: For whoever is Master of the Ocean, does ipso facto
command the Trade of the World, and whoever has the Command of that, has the
Absolute disposal of the Riches of the World, and that Money is that which
governs Mankind, is a Demonstration as clear as any in Euclide. Thus without
the least straining of the Argument, we see it naturally follows, That nothing
is more vain or ridiculous, than for a Prince, or State, to pretend to an
uncontrolable Greatness, that has not first laid their Foundation in the Deep.
And who can be a better instance of this than that Great Emperor Charles the
Fifth, whose carelessness in his Naval concerns not only broke his own Design
as to the Universal Monarchy, but likewise terminated in the ruin of his
Successor? And this oversight or neglect (though too late) that great Prince
was sensible of, when he so strictly gave it in Charge to his Son Philip, That
if either he would be happy at Home, or considerable Abroad, he should take
care to make himself Great at Sea. By his Example then, let no Prince, who
aspires to be great, slight or neglect this Watery Element; since it is but a
jest in Politics, and an Utopian Fancy, to think to arrive at the utmost
height of Empire, without Fleets and Armada's: And that Prince who thinks to
give Law to Mankind, must be sure in the first place to make the Sea his
Friend. This (without a Figure) is to build upon a Rock, whose Foundation will
stand firm and sure. And therefore that Spirit of Laziness, which makes the
Spaniard so much slight this Rule, is that, which (in spite of the Wealth of
the West Indies) keeps him so poor and beggarly: And while he sits idle at
home, swelling with his own Pride, the English and Dutch (by their Industry)
grow Rich by his Spoils, and with his Treasure of the West Indies do they carry
on the Trade of the East. Thus you see, the improving of Trade and Commerce, is
no such slight matter; Nor is it to be wondered, that this does so often prove
the Ball of Contention; for men may well be allowed to be zealous, when their
interest is so nearly concerned; and this, that Wise and Glorious Princess,
Queen Elizabeth, very well knew, when she so narrowly eyed and observed the
Dutch, whom she was always jealous of, lest they should grow too great in
Navigation, and so by that means might prove our Competitors both by Sea and
Land. Since then Commerce and Navigation bring such mighty advantages to a
Nation, it is no wonder, I say, that the greatest and wisest States, and
Governments, have been so very sollicitous for the improving it. Trade is the
very Life and Soul of the Universe, which, like the Vital Blood in the Body,
Circulates to the Health, and well-being of the whole and when by the failure
of Industry, there is a stop put to Commerce, it often proves as fatal to the
Body Politic, as the stagnating of the Blood does to the Natural Body. What
were the World but a rude and dull Indigested Lump, a noisome and pestilential
Mass, did not Commerce, like the Sun, by its Universal Rays, exhale all its
malignant and noxious Vapors, and by a continual Motion and Transaction,
render it wholesome and profitable? What would become of the Busy Soul of Man,
had she not found out variety of Employment for its Exercise? And therefore
Nature wisely did foresee the many and great Inconveniences of Idleness, how
that it would Convert the World into another Chaos, making the Earth but as one
dull and useless Mass, when she hid her Rarities and Treasures in the secret
Bowels thereof, and buried them in the Watery Deep, and lodged them at so vast
and remote a distance, that so their Worth and Value might be a Spur to Labor
and Industry to fetch them thence. Nay, God himself is particularly called the
God of the Isles, as looking on them, by Virtue of their skill in Navigation,
to be the best Factors for the Common Good; and as a Blessing upon their
Industry, we find most Isles and Maritime places exceed all Inland Cities and
Countries in Riches, and Variety of Plenty. We see then, it is not the vastness
of Territory, but the Convenience of Situation; nor the Multitude of Men, but
their Address and Industry, which improve a Nation. Now, since we have hitherto
discoursed of Trade in general, and the several Advantages that accrue from
thence; possibly the Reader may not think it altogether impertinent, if we
entertain him with an Account of the Original of Trade, and show how, and by
what steps and Methods Commerce has advanced it self amongst Mankind. The
first of all Humane Race, when they were dispersed into several Lands, were at
first sustained by the Fruits of the Earth, which fell to their share. These at
first they cherished, and used, not by any Rules of Art, but by that Natural
Sagacity, which teaches all Men to endeavor their own Preservation. And that
they might peaceably enjoy these, they thought the best Course they could take,
was to Associate themselves into Families, and to enter into little Leagues,
and thus begun Civil Government. But finding that no Place was so fruitful as
to produce all Things necessary for Humane Life; this put them upon a
Necessity, either of taking by force what their Neighbors possessed, or else
of Exchanging the several Productions of their respective Soils. This then was
the way and Method of Trading, in the first Ages of Mankind; when one had eaten
or spent what was his own, he repaired to his Neighbor for more, at the same
time accommodating him with some other Thing whereof he stood in need, by way
of Exchange, the respective value of the Things being limited according to
their estimation of their goodness and scarcity, in the first place; and then
of their Beauty or Comeliness. And because Oxen and Sheep afforded them the
most Commodities, as their skins for Clothing, and their Milk and Flesh for
Food, besides other uses to which they were serviceable, they made all their
Traffic with Cattle, in which their whole wealth consisted. But because 'twas
too troublesome a thing for Man to drive always a Flock of Sheep before him, or
lead a Cow by the Horn, for making of payment; the Industry of Men increasing,
they cast their Eyes upon that which was in the next degree of most use to
them, and most durable; and finding that nothing was of more general use than
Iron and Copper, and especially that the latter was the fairest, and easiest to
be melted, and cast into Kettles and other Domestic Utensils, they made choice
thereof, mutually giving and receiving it, by weight, for other things they
needed, and divided it by Pounds, which word still remains amongst us, to
signify Twenty Shillings, which is very near the just value that a Pound of
Copper had in those days. And to save the Labor of weighing this Pound, and
the parts of it, they stamped upon one side the Figure of a Ship, with the
weight and value; and on the other side the Picture of one of those Beasts,
which are designed by the word Pecus, whence Money came to be called Pecunia.
Afterward the Arms of the Prince were substituted instead of the Ship, and
Cnostantine put a Cross in the place of the Beast. Now because, in the old
Gaulish Language, a Ship was called Pile (whence the Word Pilote remains to
this day) the side of the Coin on which the Ship was is still called Pile, and
the other Cross, how different stamps soever have succeeded since. This was the
first Original of Trade, which from a narrow Commerce between the Hills, the
Valleys, the Woods, the Plains, and the Rivers, that bordered one upon another,
is since extended to the whole Compass of the Earth. And now, it is high time to
dismiss this Subject of Navigation and Trade; and therefore having already
demonstrated, how much the Present Age has transcended Former Ages in those
three parts of Learning, viz. Anatomy, Geography, and Navigation, I now proceed.

If from the first Ages of the World we turn our Eyes to latter Times, I mean,
to the Times of Popish Darkness, we shall Comparatively find that great is the
light we now enjoy. Ignorance (we know) is the Mother of their Devotion and the
very Essence of Popery, therefore no wonder that before the Reformation
Learning was at so low an Ebb. King Alfred in his Preface upon the Pastorals of
St. Gregory (which he translated into English) says, That when he came first to
his Kingdom, He knew not one Priest on the South side of the River Humber, that
understood his Service in Latin, or that could Translate an Epistle into
English. Vignier in his Ecclesiastical History affirms, That Gerbertus the
first Archbishop of Rhemes and Ravenna, afterward Pope, under the name of
Silvester the Second, was reputed a Magician, because he was well skilled in
the Mathemathicks. (Thus, says Dr. Fuller, do Ignorant People count all
Circles above their own Sphere to be Conjuring, and presently cry out, those
Things are done by the Black Art, for which their dim Eyes can see no Color in
reason. And in such Cases, when they cannot fly up to Heaven to make it a
Miracle, they fetch it from Hell to make it Magic.) And how low Learning ran
in England amongst the Native Nobility, in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth,
too plainly appears by the Motto on the Sword of the Martial, Earl of
Shrewsbury, which was, Sum Talboti, pro Occidere in imicos meos, the best Latin
that Noble Lord, and perchance his Chaplains too (in that Age) could afford.
Erasmus tells us, That some Divines in his time undertook to prove, That
Heretics ought to be put to Death, from those Words of the Apostle, Haereticum
Hominem devita, which it seems they understood, as if he had said, De vita
toll. I have read of two Friars disputing whether God had made any more Worlds
than One; the One wisely alleging that passage of the Gospel touching the ten
Lepers which were cleans'd, Annon December facti sunt Mundi? As if God had made
Ten Worlds; the other (with great gravity) looking into the Text, replies as
wisely, with the words immediately following, Sed ubi sunt Novem? But what is
become of the Nine? So as from thence he would prove but one to be left. An old
Priest in Henry the Eighth's time, being reproved for reading in his Service
Book Mumpsimus Domine, instead of Sumpsimus, replied, He had now used Mumpsimus
these thirty Years, and for his part he would not leave his old Mumpsimus for
their new Sumpsimus. At any time when their Priests were taken breaking
Priscian's head, their common Defense was, those words of St. Gregory, Non
debent verba coelestis Oraculi subesse regulis Donati, The words of the
Heavenly Oracles ought not to be Subject to the Rules of Donatus. But these are
Stories so well known, that I ought to Apologize for insisting so long upon
them; and therefore to proceed to the last Question, viz.

Whether Men do now live to as great an Age, as they did formerly? It must be
granted, That in the first Ages of the World, both before and for some time
after the Flood, Men did generally arrive to a much greater Age, than they have
done since. But this is certainly to be attributed to some extraordinary Cause,
and not to the Ordinary Course of Nature. The World (we know) was then to be
replenished with Inhabitants, which could not so speedily be done, but by an
extraordinary Multiplication of Mankind; Neither could that be done, but by the
long lives of Men. And again, Arts and Sciences were then to be planted, for
the better effecting whereof, it was requisite, that the same Men should have
the Experience and Observation of many Ages. We know it was the Complaint of
Hippocrates, Ars longa, Vita brevis; And therefore Almighty God, in his Wisdom
did then proportion Men's Lives to the length of Arts: And as God gave them this
special Privilege to live long; so it is probable he gave them withal a Temper,
and Constitution of Body, answerable thereunto. As also the Food wherewith they
were nourished, especially before the Flood, may well be thought to have been
more wholesome and nutritive, and the Plants more Medicinal: And happily the
Influence of the Heavens was at that time, in that Climat where the Patriarchs
lived, more benign and favorable. These (as far as we poor Mortals can
Conjecture) might be the reasons, why Divine Providence did assign to those
first Inhabitants so long a lease of their Lives. But in aftertimes, when the
World was fully Peopled, and Arts and Sciences were Propagated, then it pleased
the same Divine Providence to curtail, and abrige the Life of Man; insomuch
that in Moses's time the common Standard of Humane Life was Seventy, or at most
Eighty Years. And so it was ever after counted. Hence also Herodotus sets the
longest Bounds of Man's Life to be but Eighty Years. Barzillai was said to be a
very Old Man, and yet he lived but to fourscore: And David was full of Days,
yet but Seventy Years Old. Solomon, as Divines Conjecture, was not Sixty, yet
it is said, when Solomon was Old. The Learned Joannes Jonstonius tells us, That
in all the Records of the Roman, Greek, French, and German Emperors, there
were but four who lived to be fourscore. And our English Chronicle informs us,
That Queen Elizabeth outlived all her Predecessors from William the
Conqueror. Petrus Crinitus says, that the Egyptians by a subtle Conjecture,
taken from the Weight of the Heart, found out within what bounds the Life of
Man was included; they affirming, That it was scarce possible for a Man to live
above a Hundred Years: For, said they, the Heart every Year till Fifty
increased two Drams, and from thence to an hundred Years it decreased as much,
and so returning to its Original Weight, it can then make no further Progress.
Now, though this Observation does certainly carry in it more of Curiosity than
Truth, yet does it plainly show, That the common Opinion of the Ancients, was,
That Men did seldom live above a Hundred Years. And we find, the Learned Varro
was also of the same Belief, and therefore he tells us, They called the space
of a Hundred Years, Seculum, from Senex, an Old Man, because they thought that
was the utmost Period of Man's life. Thus then we see, That Men live now as long
as they did formerly; and that for these three Thousand Years at least there
has been no Alteration. It is the Observation of that great Philosopher, the
Lord Verulam, Decursus Seculorum, and Successio Propaginis, nihil videntur
omnino demere de Diuturnitate vitae; The Course of Times, and Succession of
Ages, seem to have no whit abated from the length of Men's Lives. No doubt, says
that Noble Lord, There are times in all Countries, wherein Men live either
longer or shorter; longer, most commonly when the Times are Barbarous, and the
Diet more plain, and more given to Bodily Exercise; Shorter, when they are more
Civil, and there is more Luxury and Idleness; But in these Things there is a
Vicissitude and Revolution; The Succession of Generations alters it not. If it
did, the first Man in reason should have lived longest, and the Son should
still come short of his Fathers Age: So that whereas Moses tells us, That the
Days of Man in his time were Threescore Years and Ten, by this reckoning they
might well enough by this time be brought to ten or twenty, or thirty at the
most. In a word, we will not say, but that Accidents, Accidental Occurrences,
Intemperance, ill and noxious Effluvia from the Earth, Waters, and
intemperature of the Air, and other Accidents may in these latter Ages of the
World produce some such Diseases, and accidental Disorders, as may possibly
more infest Mankind, and occasion more Mortality, than in former Ages: But as
to the regular and ordinary Course of Natural Procedure and State of Things
with Mankind, yea and other Animals, there seems to be little or no decay, or
Variation from what has been formerly.

ESSAY VI.
Of Passion; And whether the Passions are an Advantage, or Disadvantage to Men.

'TWas the usual saying of a very Ingenuous Person, That Passionate Men, like
Torkshire Hounds, are apt to overrun the Scent. They have not the Patienee to
pause and deliberate, but Quicquid in Buccam venerit, whatsoever they think
they speak; and therefore it is, they often run into such gross Absurdities;
for as Aristotle well observes, Qui cito pronunciat, ad pauca respicit. A mind
transported with Passion, rejects the best Reasons, and retains the worst
Opinions; like a Bolter, which lets the Flour pass, and keeps nothing but the
Bran. Therefore Plato speaking of Passionate Persons, says, They are like Men
who stand upon their Heads. They see all things the wrong way. How inconsistent
Passion and Reason is, Seneca seems to intimate, by that Expression of his,
Nemo consilium cum Clamore dat: And how incompatible the Spirit of God and
Passion is, the Holy Scriptures themselves do plainly show; For when Elias was
upon the Mountain, there came a Whirlwind, and God was not there; then an
Earthquake, and God was not there; But at last came a still Voice, and God was
there. The Scripture likewise exhorts us, To possess our Souls in Patience;
intimating, according to the Lord Bacon's Paraphrase, That whosoever is out of
Patience, is out of the Possession of his Soul: Well therefore might the Poets
call Anger a short Madness: For look upon an Angry Man, when he is in the
height of his Rage, and you may see all Africa, and its Prodigies in him; He is
more savage than the Tigers there; Blow him into a Flame, and you may see
Vulcano's, Hurricans, and Borasco's in him. And certainly were he (while his
Passion was thus raging) forced to look himself in the Glass, those very
Convulsions and Distortions his Anger had put him into, would soon shame him
into a better temper. In short, there is no surer Argument of a Great Mind,
than not to be transported to Anger by any Accident whatsoever; The Clouds and
Tempests are formed below, but all above is quiet and serene; which is the true
Emblem of a Brave Man, that surpasses all Provocations, and lives within
himself. This made a Great Philosopher say, that a Wise Man ought to be like
the Caspian Sea, which is said never to Ebb or Flow. But from this excess of
the Passions to infer an utter uselessness of them, to me seems very
unreasonable: For I cannot think Nature is such a severe Step-Dam, as that by
her Planting these Passions in us, she designed only to Plague and Torment us:
I therefore conclude, There is an honest and an innocent use of them. As Bias
once said of the Tongue, that it was the best and worst part of Man, so may we
of the Affections; Nec meliores unquam servos, nec Dominos sentit Natura
Deteriores, They are the best Servants, but the worst Masters that Nature can
have; like the Winds, which being moderate, carry the Ship; but drown it, being
tempestuous. And as it is observed in greater States, so does the same hold
true in Man's little Commonwealth, That those who are the fittest for Service,
if once they become Mutinous, always prove the most dangerous sort of Enemies:
And thus the old Rule, Corruption Optimi P^ssima, holds true. I know there have
been several Modern Stoics, who with a zeal much transcending their Knowledge,
have declaimed against the Passions; Nothing less than an utter Extirpation
will satisfy these Men: They are not contented with our keeping them under,
and retaining them upon the same terms, as Abraham did those Domestics he
bought with his Money, whom the Scripture says, He both Circumcised, and kept
as Servants; But they tell us, that the Mind ought to deal with its Affections,
just as Pharaoh would have dealt with the Jews-Males, whom he thought it best
to cut off, for fear they might (some time or other) be in a condition to make
head against him. But whether this be reasonable or no, let any Man judge:
Because the Passions are now and then disorderly, must we therefore wish there
were no Passions? No certainly; for this would be every whit as unreasonable,
as to wish there were no Rivers in the world, because it sometimes happens,
that by their overflowing we receive great Detriment. When I consider, That our
Blessed Savior, who took upon him all our Natural Infirmities, but none of our
Sinful, has been seen to Weep, to be Sorrowful, to Pity, and to be Angry; I
cannot but then conclude, That a Man may be Angry and Sin not. It is not the
bare Agitation, but the Sediment at the bottom that troubles and defiles the
Water. The Passions are so far from being always hurtful, that we read of
several that have received great advantages from them. For Wit proceeds from
Active Spirits, or a good Degree of Heat in the Brain; And therefore they, who
have been denied by Nature this Faculty, and will not take the Pains by Study
and Exercise to improve their Parts, do oftentimes increase their Heat by some
high Passion, and so appear more Witty and Ingenious than at other times, when
their Spirits (being as it were benumbed with Cold) are not able to exert
themselves; And from hence came that known saying, Vexatio dat Intellectum.
Seneca, hearing a dull Orator make a most Eloquent Harangue the very day his
Son died, cried out, Magna pars Eloquentiae est Dolor; so Polus the Actor, to
enable him to make a more lively Representation of the Grief of a Father upon
the body of his Deceased Son, brought in an Urne the Ashes of his own Son newly
Dead. So much for the Passion of Grief. Then for Anger, Si Natura negat, Facit
Indignatio versum. Archilochus and Hipponaux were two very indifferent Poets,
yet in mere Spleen and Malice, to be revenged of two Persons that had injured
them, invented those Doggrel sorts of Verses, Iambicks and Scazons, which they
did to such a Perfection, that their Adversaries despairing of ever being able
to answer them, made away themselves. And as for the Passion of Love, let the
Smith of Antwerp pass for an Instance; who being rejected by his Sweetheart
because of his dirty Profession, changed his Hammers and Anvil, for Pencils and
Tables, and so from an Inconsiderable Blacksmith, he became the most noted
Painter of his time. Thus we see, the Passions, if rightly managed, are of
great Use and Service to us; But if once we suffer them to grow headstrong,
Lions, Wolves, and Tigers are more governable. We too well know, there is not
any one thing has done more hurt to the Christian Religion, than the Spirit of
Passion; as is most evident by those many late unhappy Disputes and
Controversies amongst us. It Is strange, that Men cannot talk of Religion, but
at the same time they must Quarrel too; as if the best way of establishing the
Law of God, was by violating the Laws of Charity. I thank God my Charity is of
an Extensive Nature; I refrain no man's Company, because his Opinion comes not
up to mine; Nor do I think it reasonable, that a difference in Opinion should
divide an Affection. Men's Understandings are not all of one Size and Temper;
and therefore it cannot be imagined, there ever will be such a Consonancy, and
Uniformity of Judgment amongst all Men, no, not amongst Wise and Good Men, but
that in many things, yea, and those sometimes of great Importance, they may and
will dissent one from another unto the Worlds end. But it is one thing to
Dissent from, and another, to be at Discord with, a Man: Ita dissensi ab illo
(says Tully concerning himself and Cato) ut in disjunctione sententiae,
conjuncti tamen amicitia maneremus. It Is an excellent Rule, says Bishop
Wilkins, to be observed in all Disputes, That Men should give soft words, and
hard Arguments: That they should not so much strive to vex, as to convince an
Enemy. If this were but diligently practiced in all Cases, and on all sides, we
might in a good Measure be freed from those vexations in the search of Truth,
which the Wise Solomon, by his own Experience, did so much complain of, when he
told us, That in much Wisdom there is much Grief, and he that increases
Knowledge, increases Sorrow. There is nothing so impertinent in Disputes and
Controversies, as Anger and Passion: For every Man is fond of his own Notion,
and no Man cares to be Huff'd and Hectored out of it; And therefore this
Blustering way is so far from inclining us to yield to Men's Opinions, that it
rather hardens us against them, by giving us a prejudice to their Persons. They
are the gentle Insinuations which pierce, as Oil is the most penetrating of all
Liquors; And the best way of Proselyting Men, is to gain their Affections. If
Disputes could be managed with Temper and moderation, Men might certainly reap
great benefit by them: But our unruly Passions do so much get the Ascendant
over our Understandings, that this is a thing rather to be wished, than to be
expected. Upon this Consideration was it, That the great Montaign was for
suppressing and hindering all Disputes and Controversies: And much of the same
Mind was the Philosopher Plato, who in his Republic prohibits this Exercise
t^o Fools and ill-bred People. I think, there is not any Man so ignorant, but
knows, That nothing has been a greater scandal to the Reformed Religion,
either among Heathens, Mahometans, or Papists; nay, nor has given a fairer
occasion for bringing in of Atheism and Infidelity, than our Divisions and
Animosities, which proceed from our many Controversies and Disputes of
Religion. Indeed, our Controversies about Religion, says the Learned Stilling
fleet, have brought at last even Religion it self into a Controversy: For
weaker heads, says he, when they once perceive the Battlements shake, are apt
to suspect the Foundation it self stands not firm; And if they see any thing
called in Question, they presently conclude, there is nothing certain. Luther,
observing how prejudicial School Divinity had been to the Christian Religion,
cries out, Quam primum apparuit Theologia Scholastica evanuit Theologia Crucis.
I wish the Disputes of this Age, have not done as much mischief. When Men will
be wiser than God, and in their foolish Wisdom think it fit to add their
strength to Gods weakness, as a speedier and surer way to establish the Truth;
then does God, to convince them of their folly, suffer that strong Man, the
Enemy of the Gospel, (whom none but his Almighty Arm can bind and Master) to
come, and Sow his Tares of Division, which soon over-runs the good Seed of the
Church, and so brings all to Confusion. Thus then, by our foolish Notions and
Conceptions do we often stain and dilute the very Fountain it self. And as the
Jews dealt with the Blessed Jesus, so do we now with his Holy Religion, by
platting its head with a Crown of Thorns. And this is that, that has robbed
the Christian World of its Unity and Peace, and made the Church the Stage of
Everlasting Contentions. For nothing puts Men more out of humor one with
another, than Schisms and unnecessary Breaches of Church Communion: This
naturally sours the Tempers of Men, and alienates their Affections to the
highest Degree; for both Parties endeavoring to vindicate themselves, are
forced to recriminate, and these Recriminations always end in Heat and Passion;
And so, like two Flints struck together, they will be continually sparkling and
spitting fire at one another, till they have kindled the Quarrel into an
inquenchable Flame. Thus we see, how much even Religion suffers by these
unhappy Disputes and Quarrels among us: For there is nothing does more abate
the inward strength of Religion, than when it is rarefied into Airy Notions and
Speculations; This (indeed) gnaws and consumes the very Vitals, and in a short
time will quite destroy the substance of it. It was the Motto of the Primitive
Christians, Non magna loquimur, sed vivimus, our Religion consists not in
Talking, but in Doing Great Things. But may not the Reverse of this be properly
applied to the Present Age, viz. Non vivimus, sed Magna Loquimur. Religion is
now become one of the Arts Sermocinales, a Talkative Mystery, an Art not to
govern the Mind, and to regulate the Actions, but to Frame and Fashion
Discourse. And now to conclude, it is no wonder, that our Disputes and
Controversies have so ill an effect, when our unruly Passions have so great a
share in them. For, as we have said before, the Passions if not moderated, are
the Brutish Part in us; and therefore, when we transform our selves into
Beasts, it is not to be supposed we can Act like Men.

ESSAY VII.
The variety of Opinions: Whence it proceeds: The uncertainty of Humane
Knowledge.

ALL our several Opinions are nothing but the mere various Tastes of several
Minds, framed partly by our several Natures, partly by our different
Educations, and Instructions, and partly by the various Encounters, which we
have met with in our ways of Life. Hence it is, that Quot Homines, tot
Sententioe, Opinions are as numerous as Mankind it self; and that the several
Constitutions of our Minds, differ no less than those of our Bodies. There are
as many Internal Forms of the Mind, as there are External Figures of Men: And
the Soul of Man has its Palate, as well as the Body; Opinion being nothing but
the Gusto or Relish of the Soul: Nay, some have been so Critical, as to affirm,
That there is so great a Correspondence betwixt the one and the other, that
those who are of a different Diet, are generally observed to be of different
Opinions; and the Learned Dr. Harvey gives this for the reason, Because (says
he) a different Diet sends up different Steams to the Head, and according to
these Steams are Men's Opinions. But this sounding more like a Notion than a
Truth, we shall lay no stress upon it, but proceed. There is (then) a certain
Congruity of some Opinions to the particular Tempers of some Men; and therefore
we see, how readily such Doctrines, as suit themselves to the particular
Inclination of the Mind, or Understanding, are embraced, and received; whereas
those that are opposite to it, are commonly rejected with the greatest contempt
imaginable. Thus do we Love, and Hate without being able to give a Reason why.
Some Faces both of Persons, and Things, we admire and dote on; to others, much
better deserving our esteem, we can scarcely afford a common Civility. Indeed,
the dull and unactive Spirits, that concern not themselves in Theory, give not
themselves the trouble to examine Matters, but taking Things in the Gross,
follow the Common Belief, and are for keeping the beaten Road; But those, whose
Minds are of a Brisker, and more Vigorous Constitution, will fall into that of
their particular Crasis. Hence then, I say, is it, we find Men taking in some
particular Opinions with strange Pleasure and Satisfaction, upon their very
first Proposals; when at the same time they will not hearken to others, though
they recommend themselves with a much greater strength of Reason. In a word,
almost every one is satisfied, That there is a particular Genius, or special
Inclination in Men's Minds, and that some Opinions do naturally make a much
greater impression than others; But the vexata Quaestio is, how, or from whence
this Temperament of the Mind proceeds. Some therefore tell us, That this great
Diversity of the Operations of the Mind, is to be ascribed to the Souls
Dependence upon the Body, and that a Good, or Bad Disposition of the Organical
Parts, does certainly render the Soul either Vigorous or Unactive in its
several Operations. Whatsoever defect (then) we may perceive in some Men, we
are not to think it proceeds from any Deficiency in the Soul, but from the
Coexistence it has with a Body ill disposed for Assistance and Information. For
he who is carried in a Coach, (as the Body is Vehiculum Animoe) though he
himself could go much faster, must yet receive such Motion as that affords; And
Water, which is conveyed through Pipes and Aqueducts, though its Motion by it
self would have been otherwise, must yet then be confined and limited by the
Posture and Proportion of the Vessels through which it passes. Hence we are
told, That some Men are even by Nature, and Complexion, inclined to Virtue and
Goodness; As it was said of Clitus, (whom Alexander in a Drunken humor slew,)
That he had Virtues by Nature, and Vices by Accident; And that others, even by
the oddness of their particular Make and Contexture, are determined to Actions
of Vice. It was a received Opinion among the Ancients, That outward Beauty, was
an infallible Argument of inward Beauty; and so on the contrary, That a
deformed Body was a true Index of a deformed Mind, or an ill Nature. Hence was
that of the Poet:

Clauda tibi men's est, ut pes: Natura notasque Exterior certas Interioris
habet. As also that of Martial, Lib. 12. Epigram 54.

Crine ruber, niger ore, brevis pede, lumine laesus: Rem magnam praestas,
Zoile, si bonus es. It was also the saying of Victorinus, In distorta Membra
virtus cadere non potest: And Pythagoras was so bigoted to this Opinion, that
he would never admit into his School any that had the least Natural Blemish or
Deformity. Upon this general Opinion was grounded that common saying, Cave tibi
ab iis, quos Natura Signavit, which we may render thus, Whom God has Marked,
let Man Mark. And therefore Homer, speaking of the several ill Qualities of
Thersites, takes care to fit him with a Body suitable to such a Mind. Now, the
reason (possibly) why Nature for the most part orders it so, may be this; the
Method she takes (though imperceptible to us) is Regular and Mathematical, and
therefore probably nothing may more break and disorder that Symmetry she
observes, than by matching a good Soul with a deformed Body; for this seems to
be Impar Congressus, putting things unequally together. But yet this Rule is
not so general, as to admit of no Exception, as we may see in the Emperor
Galba, a Prince of an unhappy outward Figure, of whom it was said, Ingenium
Galbae male habitat; The same may be also observed of Agesilaus, and some
others, (though not many;) and therefore Seneca tells us, Ex casa vir Magnus
exire potest, and ex deformi humilique Corpusculo formosus Animus and Magnus. I
grant indeed, several Examples there are of Great Persons, whose outward
Deformities have been very remarkable, and yet we find their Virtues and good
Qualities highly celebrated; But yet (possibly) did we but make a narrow search
into their Lives, we should find the difference and alteration was chiefly
wrought by Education or Custom, which oftentimes over-sways Nature. Thus we
see, what a great Correspondency there is betwixt the Soul and the Body, which
is such, that they manifestly participate the Affections one of the other: And
therefore if the Body be sick, the Soul is altered in its Operations, as we see
in high Fevers, and other acute Diseases: And on the contrary let the Soul be
sad or joyful, the Body is so too. Therefore the Sophisters of old were wont to
Purge themselves with Hellebore; when they would dispute best. For though in
its Essence the Soul depends not on the Corporeal Organs, yet it depends upon
the same in its Operations, which are different according to the diverse
structures of the Organs; which, if they were alike disposed, their Actions
would be alike in all, and at all times. Whence says Aristotle, if an old Man
had a young Man's Eyes, he would see as clear as a Young Man. That Ingenious
Master of Poetry, Mr. Dryden, speaking of the mutability of Man, says, That our
Minds are perpetually wrought on by the temperament of our Bodies: which (says
he) makes me suspect, they are nearer allied, than either our Philosophers, or
School Divines will allow them to be. I have observed, says Montaign, That when
the Body is out of Order, its Companion is seldom at ease: An ill Dream, or a
Cloudy Day, has power to change this wretched Creature, who is so proud of a
Reasonable Soul, and make him think to day what he thought not yesterday. The
Learned Dr. Henry More. says, That our Imagination alters, even as our Blood
and Spirits are altered; And therefore, says he, as Dreams are the Fancies of
those that sleep, so Fancies are but the Dreams of Men awake; And these Fancies
by Day, as those Dreams by Night, will vary and change with the Weather, and
present Temper of the Body. But to proceed; Others are of Opinion, that this
great Diversity proceeds from another Cause, to wit from the Climat. Peter
Heylin, speaking of the Dispersion of the Families of the Sons of Noah, says,
That though they all descended from one Common Root, yet by the Situations of
their several Dwellings, they came to be of several Tempers and Affections; in
which they were so different from one another, that they seemed rather to have
been made at first out of several Principles, than to have been derived from
one Common Parent. The Ground or Reason of which difference (says Heylin) is to
be attributed to the different Tempers of those Countries in which they lived,
and to the different Influences of the Heavenly Bodies on those several
Countries; which do continue still the same, though many times the Countries
shift and change their Old Inhabitants. Thus, if we enquire into the old
Characters, which either Florus, Coesar, Tacitus, or Juvenal gave of the old
Britains, Gauls, Germans, Normans, etc. we shall find that the same Virtues,
and Vices, do still prosper under the same Climats, notwithstanding in most of
these Places the old Inhabitants, or their Breed, are quite wore away. It Is
observed, That where the Heaven is always in the same Posture, as toward the
Poles; or where the Sun heats almost in the same Degree, as near the Equator,
(which makes the Days and Nights equal,) the Manners and Inclinations of the
People are also equal: And on the contrary, Those that by the several Remotions
and Approaches of the Sun have different Constitutions of Air, receive suitable
impressions from the same, which are afterward manifested in their Actions. As
(therefore) Fruits and Beasts differ according to the several Countries, in
which they are; so are Men born more or less Warlike, Just, Temperate, and the
like, according to their several Climats. And therefore Plato thankt God, That
he was an Athenian, and not a Theban. Plutarch tells us, That those of the
higher part of the City of Athens were of a quite contrary humor to those that
dwelt about the Gate of Pyreus; and it is observed, that those who dwell on the
Noth-side of a Mountain, differ as much from those that dwell on the South
side, as they do both from those in the Valley. Now, from this Diversity of
Men's Tempers, proceed the several Forms, and Constitutions of Government; and
thence it is, that in the same Countries we find little Variation as to
Government, but that in all Ages they have still kept to much one and the same
Form; the same Genius or Temper ever continuing under the same Climat: And
whenever any Country, either by persuasion, have Voluntarily, or by force have
been compelled to quit their old Form of Government; yet in process of Time
they naturally return into the old Channel. This then is the reason, why those
who inhabit the most Intemperate Climes, are always for preferring the
Despotick, Arbitrary Rule; whereas those who live under the more temperate, and
less severe Climats, especially in Europe, have affected and preferred more
gentle and moderate Governments, running anciently much into Commonwealths,
and of latter Ages into Principalites, circumscribed by Laws, which differ not
so much in Nature as in Name. The natural reason whereof, says that
Accomplished Author, Sir William Temple, I take to be this, viz. That in the
more Intemperate Climats, the Spirits either exhaled by Heat, or comprest by
Cold, are rendered faint and sluggish, and by that reason the Men grow tamer
and fitter for Servitude: That in more temperate Regions, the Spirits are
stronger and more active, whereby Men become bolder in the Defense or Recovery
of their Liberties. Now by what we have already said, it plainly appears, That
the great Variety of Men's Actions and Opinions cannot proceed from the
Diversity of their Souls, which are accounted all equal, but from that of their
Bodies; wherein according to the various Tempers thereof, the Soul produces
that variety of Manners. Let us not then any longer wonder, to find so great a
Diversity of Opinions in the World; since it is a thing wholly impossible for
all Men to be of the same mind: For so long as Men's Organs are of several
makes, and we live under diverse Climats, we must necessarily have different
Sentiments, and Apprehensions of Things. Nor would there be any harm in this
Diversity of Opinions, could Men but divest themselves of that Pride and
Arrogance, which makes them so fond of Propagating their own Notions, But while
every Man pretends to the Spirit of Infallibility, and must be a Dictator to
the rest of Mankind, then there is nothing but Confusion and Disorder to be
expected. And this was that, which made such Disturbance, and Embroilments
amongst us in the late times: every Opinion was made an Article of Faith, and
every Article became a Ground of a Quarrel, and every Quarrel made a Faction,
and every Faction was zealous, and all zeal pretends for God, and whatsoever is
for God cannot be too much; and indeed, we were come to that pass, That we
thought we loved not God, unless we hated our Brother, and that we had not the
Virtue of Religion, unless we persecuted all Religions but our own. But let us
not deceive our selves, for, whatsoever some may think, this is not the
violence that gains Heaven; Nor is there any thing that makes us more unlike
God, who is the Father of Mercies, and the God of all Consolation, than a
Furious, Hot, and Persecuting Spirit. His appearance was in the soft and still
Voice, not in Whirlwinds and Hurricanes; and where there is Spiritus Procelloe,
we may satisfy our selves it proceeds from another Principle. The Holy Ghost
was pleased to appear not in the Form of a Vulture, (a ravenous and devouring
Creature) but in the shape of a Dove, the Emblem of Meekness. The true Church
is styled by the name of the Lilly amongst Thorns: The Lilly does not Scratch
and Tear, that is the Property of Thorns and Briars, the most inconsiderable
sort of shrubs. (And indeed, let us but reflect who were the chief Promoters of
our late Persecutions, and we shall find they were the slightest of the Clergy,
and the most Profligate of the Laity: None being so fit to make Shipwreck of
other Men's Consciences, as those who have none of their own.) The most natural
and effectual way (then) of Promoting the Blessed Gospel, is by following its
own Rules, and Precepts of Meekness and Moderation. Sweetness and Ingenuity
will more command Men's Minds, than Passion, Sourness, and Severity: As the soft
Pillow sooner breaks the Flint, than the hardest Marble. Therefore, when we
would convince Men of any Error by the strength of Truth, we should do it with
all the tenderness, and in the most obliging manner we are able. For Truth and
Love are two the most Charming Things in the World; and when these go hand in
hand together, there is no Humane Force can withstand them. But that which
proves very mischievous to many, is their taking that to be zeal for God and
Religion, which really is nothing but their own violent and surious Passion.
True zeal then is a sweet, Heavenly, and gentle Flame, which makes us active
for God, but always within the Sphere of Love. It never calls for Fire from
Heaven, to Consume those who agree not with us in all Points and Circumstances.
It is much of the Nature of that kind of Lightning, (that the Philosophers tell
us of) which melts the Sword within, but never sindgeth the Scabbard: It
strives to save the Soul, but at the same time hurts not the Body. In a word,
we may learn what kind of Zeal it is we should make use of in promoting the
Gospel, by an Emblem of Gods own, given us in the Scripture, those Fiery
Tongues, which upon the Day of Penticost sat upon the Apostles; and that these
were Innocent Flames, no Man can doubt, for we do not find, that they did so
much as sindge an hair of their heads. This then is true Zeal, and whatsoever
is more than this, proceeds from evil, and is no other than a Fever in the
Soul. There is not any thing that drives Men more furiously, nor that has more
disturbed the Peace of Mankind, than Mistaken Zeal. Odia Religionum sunt
acerbissima, is now grown into a Proverb; of all Hatreds, there are none more
furious and unnatural, than those which arise out of Contrarieties in Religion;
and it is generally observed, That the less Material their Difference, the more
implacable is the Hatred: As the Turks think it more acceptable to God, to kill
one Persian, than seventy Christians. Nothing so vehemently alienates Men's
Affections, as variety of Judgment in matters of Religion; Here they cannot
disagree, but presently they must fall together by the Ears; and when once
Religion divides Men's minds, no other common Interest can unite them; and where
Zeal dissolves Friendship, the ties of Nature are not strong enough to
reconcile it: And therefore our Savior tells us, That in this Case Men would
forget all the Bonds of Natural Obligation; insomuch that the Father would
deliver up his own Child, and the Children their Parents unto Death: As we
find, that the bloody Hatred of Cain against Abel arose from the different
Acceptance of their Sacrifices. Nor indeed is it to be wondered, if that enmity
grow excessive, which has zeal to kindle it, and pretense of Religion to
warrant it: For when that which should restrain, and set limits to a Passion,
is made a Party to engage it, and fuel to foment it, no wonder if a Passion,
which has no Bounds from Religion, do impose none upon it self. And this
occasion of mutual Hatred, we find observed even in the ridiculous
Superstitions of Egypt, when one Town would kill and eat the Flesh of another,
in zeal to the Calves, or Sheep, or other Creatures, which they did severally
worship. Now, having showed how much mischief Mistaken Zeal has done in the
World, I need not spend much time in showing the ill Success that Persecution
has constantly been attended with; the History of all Ages has done this to my
hand. Sanguis Martyrum, semen Ecclesiae, is a Truth will last to the Worlds
End. For there is scarce any Man so void of Humanity, but has good Nature
enough to compassionate those that are in misery, and at the same time to show
their abhorrence to the Authors of such Cruelties: And therefore, no wonder
that Persecution does rather increase, than lessen the number of Martyrs; for
as it gives most Men a prejudice to the Persecuting Party, so it enclines them
to commiserate the Suffering Party; and this kindness to their Persons, does
often terminate in the favoring their Opinions. How preposterous then is it in
any State, or Government, to endeavor to force their Subjects to Unity in
Religion; when, alas! the experience of all Ages shows how impracticable the
Thing is. It Is true, a State may sometimes force all its Subjects, to submit to
an outward Uniformity in all Things that concern Divine Worship; but yet they
must know, that every public Disturbance in the Commonwealth, breaks all those
Bonds asunder of dissembled Obedience, and that such Compulsions do both beget
and ripen all Disorders. Thus we see, that it is Men's being so fond of their
own Opinions, which gives the greatest disturbance to Mankind; and while we are
so highly conceited of our own Parts and Abilities, it cannot be otherwise.
Now, the only cure for this sort of Vanity, is to reflect upon the uncertainty
of Humane Knowledge. The reason then, why wise Men do never appear so
peremptory, and Dogmatical as others, is, because they very well know, there
are but few things so certain, as to create much boldness, and confidence of
Opinion. It was probably upon this Consideration, that the wise Romans showed
so much Modesty, when they gave their Sentiments and Opinions, concluding still
for the most part with these two words, IT A VIDETUR. It Is the Observation of
the witty Montaign, That as amongst wise Men he is the wisest, that thinks he
knows least; So amongst Fools he is the greatest, that thinks he knows most.
Humane Nature is very fallible, the wisest of Men do sometimes err, and
therefore at the very instant a Man seems most positive, how does he know but
he may be most Mistaken? Do not even our very Senses sometimes deceive us? And
yet most of our Conceptions are taken from the Senses, and we can scarce judge
of any thing but by the help of Material Images, that are thence conveyed to
us, according to that old Rule, Nihil est in Intellectu, Quod non fuit prius in
sensu. Since therefore our Senses are so very fallacious, and from them result
most of Humane Knowledge, how fond and ridiculous is it in any Man to pretend
to such an Assurance? Est in ipsis rebus Obscuritas, and in judiciis nostris
Infirmitas, says Tully; so slight a Thing is Humane Knowledge, That the most
inconsiderable, and minutest Works of Nature, serve to Puzzle, and Confound it.
Plato says, That in Man there is no such Thing as Science or Knowledge, it is
but barely Opinion: And in another place he calls Opinion, a middle Thing
betwixt Ignorance and Knowledge. Indeed, while we are in this World, we do but
behold by the favor of a Glimmering-Light, the Phantasms and Shadows of
Things, which Custom makes us take for Bodies and Truths: In a word, we may
properly be said to see the wrong side of the Hangings; and let us pretend to
what we will, the utmost of Humane Knowledge, is but a fair and hopeful
Conjecture. Our Demonstrations are raised upon Principles of our own, not of
Universal Nature; and, as the Lord Bacon notes, We take up Opinions, suitable
rather to the Analogy of our selves, than that of the Universe. How
unreasonable then are those Men, who are so positive and Dogmatical in their
own Opinions, that rather than admit of the least Contradiction, choose to make
the whole World an Aceldama and a Babel? And thus, have we not by sad
Experience found it most true, That all the Miseries, which have attended the
variety of Opinions since the Resormation, have proceeded from this Grand
Mistake, the making our own private Opinions the Standard of infallible Truth?
Whereas all wise Men ought to consider, That truth is a thing not certainly
known; Nay possibly, the All-Wise God thinks it too dazzling a Thing for the
Eyes of us poor Mortals, and therefore reserves it for our Glorified Faculties.

FINIS.

