THE Academy of Eloquence By Tho: Blount Gent:
Demosthenes.

Cicero.

Fr: Lo: Bacon.

Sr: Ph: Sidney.

W: Faithorne. Fe:



THE ACADEMIE OF ELOQUENCE. Containing a Complete ENGLISH RHETORIQUE,
Exemplified, With Common-Places, and Forms, digested into an easy and
Methodical way to speak and write, fluently, according to the mode of the
present times, Together with LETTERS both AMOROVS and MORAL, Upon emergent
occasions.

By THO. BLOUNT Gent'

CICERO, Vt Hominis decus est ingenium:
Sic ingenij lumen est Eloquentia.
LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Humphrey Moseley, at the Princes-Arm's in S.
Paul's Church yard. 1654.

TO ALL NOBLE GENTLEMEN AND LADIES OF ENGLAND.
WEre it absolutely necessary for him that should write of Eloquence to be
perfectly Eloquent, I would easily confess my self too rash in this enterprise:
But having seen often those treat knowingly of Painting, that never held
Pencill; and Cicero remarking that Aratus, by the common consent of learned men,
wrote excellently of the Heavens and Stars, though he was no celebrated
Astronomer; I Am encouraged to say, Why then may not I too discourse of
Eloquence, without being a Orator?

Galen that great Master of Physic, who wrote so learnedly of every part of
that Science, was little seen in the Practick; Nor are those, that discourse
best of the embattailing Armies, and differencing military functions, always
the best Warriers, or the most daring. The like may happen in this subject,
that he, who is able to set down the Rules and Laws which ought to be observed
in Speech or style, may notwithstanding find himself defective in the
application, and so may be said to give that to others, which he has not
himself.

The conceits of the mind are Pictures, whose Interpreter is the tongue, and
the order of Gods Creatures in themselves, is not only admirable and glorious,
but Eloquent; he then, that could apprehend the consequence of things in their
truths, and deliver his apprehensions as truly, were a perfect Orator; Thus
Cicero; Dicere recte nemo potest nisi qui prudenter intelligit.

Eloquence is equally fortunate in taming Passions and in charming senses: she
imitates Music, and makes use of the voice of Orators to enchant the Ears,
with the cadence of Periods, and the harmony of Accents; whilst the gestures,
apt motions, Natural Air, and all those graces, which accompany exact
Recitation, steal away the Heart by the eyes, and work wonders upon the will.
But Eloquence is chiefly grounded upon Wisdom, and Wisdom arises principally
from a due pre-consideration of all our actions; Hence that excellent saying of
a modern French Author, Il est impossible de bien dire, sans avoir bien pense,
it is impossible to speak well, without having first well considered what to
speak. And Plotinus says, it is wisdom to think upon any thing, before we
execute it.

Now, as it is certain, that No harmony, can appear in his thoughts, nor
soundness in his reason, whose speech is faltering and preposterous: So
likewise no clearness nor perfection in that Fancy, which delivers it self by a
confused abortion. Great is the disparagment which flows from the defailance of
the Tongue: it not only dishonours the person of the Speaker, but even sullys
the opinion of his reason and judgment with a disrepute, and oft-times renders
the very truth suspected.

If then it so befall our verbal expressions, which are transient and less
liable to censure, and where one hansome expression may excuse a number of
solaecismes; how shall that person be esteemed prudent, whose pen lays him
wide open in a fungous and sordid style; how shall we expect ingenuity from
him, whose leisure and Genius, assisted with the examen of his eyes, yield us
no spirit in his writing? He that has worth in him and cannot express it, is a
Cabinet keeping a rich Jewel and the key lost, says a modern. Author; whereas
a good style, with choice matter and embroidery of well chosen words, is like a
beautiful Woman with a virtuous Soul, who attracts the eyes and charms the
hearts of all beholders.

This excellent faculty of speech has bin in high esteem even from the very
infancy, and will be to the end of the World; For in sacred Story we read,
Prove. 16.21, 24.
the wise in Heart shall be called prudent and the sweetness of the lips
increases understanding: Pleasant words are as an honycomb; sweet to the soul
and health to the bones. Hence 'twas, an ancient Author maintained, that
Pericles (the Orator) was no less Tyrant in Athens then Pysistratus; without
acknowledging other difference, then that this exercised his Empire armed, the
other without arms, by the sole terror of his speech, which Aristophanes
compared to a thunder bolt, as Homer did that of Ulysses to a Torrent, that
bears down all with its violence. And 'twas said of old, that the tongue of
Cyneas (the famed Scholar of Demosthenes) conquered more Cities, then the
sword of Pyrrhus, the valiant King of Epire.

To have said thus much, of the much more might be added in behalf of this
charming Faculty, and of the disadvantage commonly attending those who are
unskilled in it, may serve as an inducement to the youth of both Sexes (for
whose benefit this little Work is chiefly intended, and to their acceptance
consecrated) to make the perusal of it their subservient Recreation for vacant
hours, this with little study, will not only facilitate your discourse into the
moding language of these times, but adapt your pens too with a quaint and
fluent style, then which no qualities (with confidence I speak it) can render
you more accomplished.

Here shall you be furnished with all necessary materials and helps in order to
the acquiring so great a treasure; such helps as have bin advised and often
wished for, but never before published.

I. The first part contains a more exact English Rhetorique, then has been
hitherto extant, comprehending all the most useful Figures, exemplifi'd out of
the Arcadia and other our choicest Authors.

II. In the second part, you have formulae majores or Common-places, upon the
most usual subjects for style and speech; The use and advantage whereof is
asserted by my Lord Bacon, who (in his Advancement of learning) says thus; I
hold the diligence and pain in collecting Common-places to be of great use and
certainty in studying; as, that which aids the memory subministers copy to
invention, and contracts the sight of judgment to a strength.

III. In the third place you shall find Formulae minores (as my Lord calls
them) lesser forms, which he then reckoned among the defects in our Language,
and says, they are as it were, the Portals and postern doors of style and
speech, and of no small use.

IV. Lastly, you have a Collection of Letters and addresses written to, for,
and by several persons, upon emergent occasions; with some particular
Instructions and Rules premised, for the better attaining to a Pen-perfection.

The Formula's are but Analects, which like the Humble-bec I gathered in Spring
time out of the choicest Flowers of our English Garden; nor have I in the
Rhetoric or Letters transplanted much from my own barren Seminary; I may say
to some noble Correspondents, what the Poet did of old in a like Case, sic vos
non vobis -- But, you will easily distinguish Tinsill from better metal: what
is mine will appear to be so, by the Bluntismes that frequently occur, the rest
are of better allay; So that, if the defects of my own Essays be but pardoned,
the rest I am confident will abide the touch, and pass for Sterling.

T. B.

AN English Rhetorique exemplified.
FIgures and Tropes (says Alexander the Sophister) are the virtues of Speech
and Style, as Barbarismes and Solecismes are the vices; we shall then begin
with A METAPHOR or Translation is the friendly and neighbourly borrowing of a
word, to express a thing with more light and better note, though not so
directly and properly as the natural name of the thing meant, would signify.
As to say, Drops of Dew are Pearls; Flowers in Meadows are Stars, and the
murmuring of waters, Music; that little Birds are Angels of the Forests;
Whales are living Rocks, or Ships with souls; that the Sea is a moving Earth;
and fountain water, liquid Crystal. And in expressing Desirous; a kind of
Desire, is thirst, and not much different from thirst is hunger; Therefore for
swords desirous of blood, Sir Philip Sidney says, hungry of blood. Where you
may note three degrees of a Metaphor in the understanding; First, the fitness
to bloodshed in a weapon usurps the name of Desirous, which is proper to a
living Creature, and then that it proceeds to thirst, and so to hunger.

The rule of a Metaphor is, that it be not too bold nor too far fetched; And
though all Metaphors go beyond the true signification of things, yet are they
requisite to express the roving fancies of men's minds, which are not content to
fix themselves upon one thing intended, but must wander to the confines; Like
the eye that cannot choose but view the whole knot, when it purposely beholds
but one flower in the Garden; Or like an Archer, that knowing his Bow will
overcast or carry too short, takes an aim on this side or beyond the mark.
Besides, a Metaphor is pleasant, because it enriches our knowledge with two
things at once, with the Truth and a Similitude; As this, Heads disinherited of
their natural Seigniories, whereby we understand both beheading, and the
government of the head over the body, as the heir has over the Lordship, which
he inherits; Of which in another place, To divorce the fair marriage of the
Head and body; where besides the cutting off of the head, we understand the
conjunction of the head and body to resemble a marriage. The like in concealing
love, uttered in these words, To keep love close Prisoner. There came along the
street a whole fleet of Coaches, for a great number. Longinus says, That
Metaphors and exchanges of words, are of excellent use, and much conducing to
height in eloquence.

An Allegory is the continual prosecuting of a Metaphor, (which before I
defined to be, a translation of one word,) and that proportionably through the
whole sentence, or through many sentences; As Philoclea was so environed with
sweet Rivers of virtue, that she could neither be battered nor undermined:
Where Philoclea is expressed by the similitude of a Castle; her natural
defense, by the natural fortification of Rivers about a Castle; and the
Metaphor continues in the attempting her by force or craft, expressed by
battering or undermining. Another, But when she had once his Ensign in her
mind, then followed whole squadrons of longings, that so it might be with a
main battle of mislikings and repinings against their Creation; where you have
Ensigns, Squadrons, main Battles; Metaphors still derived from the same thing.
i. War.

As I said before, a Metaphor might be too bold, or too far fe^ch'd, so I now
remember it may be too base, and too bald a translation; As the Tempest of
judgment had broken the main mast of his will. A goodly Audience of sheep,
Soldiers of friendship, or such like. Too base, as in that speech, Fritter of
fraud, and seething pot of iniquity. And they that say, A Red herring is a
shooing horn to a pot of Ale. But if you speak of disdainful ^atter, you may
use the grosser terms.

Therefore for general delight, take your expressions from ingenious Arts and
Professions; to please the learned in several kinds; As from the Meteors,
Plants, Beasts in natural Philosophy; And from the Stars, Spheres and their
motions in Astronomy; from the better part of Husbandry; from politic
government of Cities; from Navigation, from the military profession, from
Physic; but not out of the depth of those mysteries; And (unless your purpose
be to disparage) let the word be always taken from a thing of equal or*
greater dignity, As speaking of Virtue, The sky of your virtue overcast with
sorrow, where 'twas thought unfit to stoop to any Metaphor, lower then the
Heaven.

An Emblem, an Allegory, a Simile, a Fable, a Poetical Fiction differ thus.
An Emblem is but one part of the Similitude in the body and the other part
under application in the words; An Allegory is the similitude of the
application expressed indifferently, and joined in one sentence with words, some
proper to one part, some to another; A Simile has two sentences of several
proper terms compared. A Fable is a Simile acted by Fictions in Beasts; A Poets
Tale, for the most part by Gods and Men. In the former example, Paint a Castle,
compast with Rivers, and let the Motto be NEC OBSIDIONE NEC CUNICULIS, Neither
by siege nor undermining, that is an Emblem. Lay it as it is in Sir Philips
Philoclea; Virtue, environed, Rivers, battering, undermining, the terms of the
other part; Put all these terms in one sentence, and it is an Allegory; But let
it be thus, There was a Lamb in a Castle, and an Elephant and a Fox besieged
her; The Elephant would have assaulted her, but he could not swim over the
River; the Fox would make an earth to get under her, but he feared the River
would sink in upon him and drown him; then it is a Fable. Let Spencer tell you
such a Tale of a Fairy Queen, or Ovid of Danae, and it is a Poetical Fiction:
But utter it thus in one sentence, As a Castle, compassed about with rivers,
cannot be battered or undermined. (And thus in another) So Philoclea defended
round about with virtuous resolution, could neither be forced nor surprised by
deceit; Then it is a Similitude in its own nature, which is the ground of all
Emblemes, Allegories, Fables and Fictions.

METONIMIA is an exchange of a name, when one word comes in lieu of another,
not for a similitude, but for other natural affinity and coherence; As when
the matter is used for that which consists thereof; As, I want silver, for
money. When the efficient or author is used for the thing made; As my blade is
right Sebastian; for, of Sebastians making. The thing containing, for the thing
or person contained; As the the City met the General, for the Citizens. The
adjunct, property, or quality, for the subject of it; As, deserts are
preferred, for men deserving. Take heed young idleness; for, idle youth. Give
room to the quoif, for, the Sergeant; with the like.

SYNECDOCHE is an exchange of the name of the part for the whole, or of the
name of the whole for the part. There are two kinds of total comprehensions;
An entire body, or a general name; As, my name is tossed and censured by many
tongues, for many men; where the part of an entire body goes for the whole.
Contrariwise he carries a Goldsmiths shop on his fingers, for Rings. He fell
into the water and swallowed the Thames, for the water. So the general name
for the special; Put up your weapon, for your Dagger. And the special, for
the particular, As, the Admiral is gone to sea, for Admiral Blake. The
particular for the special. As I would willingly make you a Sir Philip Sidney,
for an eloquent, learned, valiant Gentleman; or, for many; as, the Hollander
they say comes against us, for the Hollanders, and such like; which (because
they are easy) I have exemplified familiarly. Both these figures serve well,
when you have mentioned something before, that may require Variety in repetition.

CATACHRESIS, in English, Abuse, is now grown in fashion, as most abuses are;
It is somewhat more desperate then a Metaphor; And is the expressing of one
matter by the name of another, which is incompatible with, and sometimes clean
contrary to it; As, I gave order to some servants of mine, (whom I thought as
apt for such charities as my self) to lead him out into a Forest, and there
kill him; where Charity is used for Cruelty. But this may also be by the Figure
IRONIA. The abuse of a word drawn from things far differing; As, a voice
beautiful to his ears. Accusing in himself no great trouble in mind by his
behavior or action. Do you grudge me part of your sorrow being sister in
Nature, I would I were not so far off a Kin in fortune? This is a usual figure
with the fine conversants of our time, when they strain for extraordinary
expressions; As I am in danger of preferment. I am not guilty of those praises.
I have hardly escaped good fortune. He threatens me a good turn. All by the
contrary. And as he said that misliked a picture with a crooked Nose. The elbow
of his Nose is disproportionable.

The ear is not only pleased with store and variety of words, but takes great
delight in the repetition of the same words; which, because they may be at the
beginning, at the middle, in the end, and in sundry correspondencies of each of
these places one to another; it happens that it has purchased several names of
Figures; As Repetition of the same word or sound immediately without
interposition of any other, is called EPIZEUXIS. O let not, let not from you be
powered upon me destruction. Tormented, tormented? torment of my soul, Philoclea
tormented. This figure is not to be used but in passion.

ANADIPLOSIS is a repetition in the end of a former sentence, and beginning of
the next; As, you fear lest you should offend; offend, O how know you that you
should offend? Because she does deny, deny? now in earnest I could laugh, etc.
Why loved I? alas, alas; why loved I? to die wretched, and to be the example of
the heavens hate, and hate, spare not; for ^our worst blow is given. -- From
whom they have commonly such respect, and respect soon opens the door to
persuasion, etc. This figure is often and handsomely used by Sir William
Davenant in his Preface to Gondibert. And as no man strikes in thought upon any
thing, but for some vehemence or distrust; so in speech there is no repetition
without importance.

CLIMAX is a kind of ANADIPLOSIS, by degrees making the last word a step to a
further meaning. If it be turned to an argument, it is a SORITES; A young man
of great beauty, beautified with great honor, honored with great valor. You
could not enjoy your goods, without government, no Government without a
Magistrate, no Magistrate without obedience, and no obedience, where every one
upon his private passion does interpret the Rulers actions.

Now to make it a SORITES or climing argument, join the first and the last with
an ERGO. As ERGO you cannot enjoy your own goods, where every man upon his own
private passions does, etc, This in a penned speech is too Academicall, but in
discourse more passable and plausible. Seeing to like, liking to love, loving
to, etc. Deceived me, after deceit abused me, after abuse forsaken me. What
does better become wisdom then to discern what is worthy loving? What more
agreeable to goodness then to love it, so discerned? and what to greatness of
heart, then to be constant in it once loved. Where the last word or some one
word in the last sentence begets the next clause. This Figure has his time,
when you are well entered into discourse, have procured attention, mean to rise
and amplify.

ANAPHORA is when many clauses have the like beginning; You whom virtue has
made the Princess of Felicity, be not the minister of ruin. You whom my choice
has made the Goddess of my safety. You whom Nature has made the Load-starr of
comfort, be not the rock of shipwreck. This figure beats upon one thing, to
cause the quicker apprehension of it in the audience, and to awake a sleepy or
dull passion.

EPISTROPHE is contrary to the former, when many clauses end with the same
words; Where the richness did invite the eyes, the fashion did en^ertain the
eyes, and the device did teach the eyes. And all the night did nothing but
weep. Philoclea, sigh Philoclea, and cry out Philoclea, etc. Either arm their
lives, or take away their lives. This is rather a Figure of Narration or
Instruction, then of motion.

SIMPLOCE or COMPLEXIO, is when several sentences have the same beginning and
the same ending. The most covetous man longs not to get riches out of that
ground which can bear nothing; Why? Because it is impossible. The most
ambitious person vexes not his wits to climb to heaven. Why? because it is
impossible. This is the wantonest of Repetitions, and is not to be used in
serious matters.

EPANALEPSIS is the same in one sentence which SIMPLOCE or COMPLEXIO is in
several; As, Severe to his servants, to his children severe. Or the same sound
reiterated first or last in a sentence. As, His superior in means, in place his
superior. In sorrow was I born, and must die in sorrow. Unkindness moved me,
and what can so trouble my courses, or wrack my thoughts as unkindness? This is
a mild and sweet Figure, and of much use, though single and by it self, not
usual in the Arcadia, unless thus, Overthrow of my desires, recompense of my
overthrow.

EPANADOS is when the midst and the end, or the midst and the beginning are the
same, As, If there were any true pleasure in sleep and idleness, then no doubt
the Heathen Philosophers would have placed some part of the felicity of their
heathen Gods in sleep and idleness. Your diligence to speak well must be great,
but you shall be abundantly recompensed for the greatness of your diligence in
the success of persuasion. If I should ever wish the perfection of your
eloquence, it is for your instruction, and for your benefit, that I would wish
you eloquent. This kind of Repetition and the former EPANALEPSIS are most
easily admitted into discourse, and are freest from the opinion of affectation;
because words recited at the beginning of many sentences, or at both ends of
the same, are more remarkable.

ANTIMETABOLE, or COMMUTATIO, is a sentence inverst, or turned back; as, If any
for love of honor, or honor of love, etc. That as you are the child of a
mother: so you may be mother of a child, etc. They misliked what themselves
did; and yet still did what themselves misliked, etc. If before he languished,
because he could not obtain his desiring; he now lamented, because he could not
desire the obtaining. -- Either not striving, because he was contented; or
contented, because he would not strive -- Just to exercise his might, mighty to
exercise his justice. Learned Sir Philip slipped often into this Figure, yet he
sometimes conceald the particularity of his affection to it, by not turning the
words wholly back, as they lay; To account it not a purse for treasure, but as
a treasure it self worthy to be purs'd up, etc. Men venture lives to conquer;
she conquers lives without venturing, etc. Showed such fury in his force, such
stay in his fury; which is rather EPANADOS; Sometimes the same sense inverst in
contrary words. As, Parthenia desired above all things to have Argalus; Argalus
feared nothing but to miss Parthenia. Where he returns fear to miss in stead
of desire. Neither could you have thought so well of me, if extremity of love
had not made your judgment partial; nor could you have loved me so entirely,
if you had not been apt to make so great undeserved judgment of me. Where he
returns, for, extremity of love; loving entirely, and for partial judgment;
great undeserved judgment.

Though this be a sharp and witty Figure, and shows out of the same words, a
pretty distinction of meaning very convenient for Schoolmen, yet to ^^e this or
any other unreasonably or unseasonably, is ridiculous. Let discretion therefore
be the greatest, and most general Figure of Figures.

PARANOMASIA is a present touch of the same letter, syllable or word, with a
different meaning. And as for the running upon the letter more then very
little, is more then too much, Sir Philip Sidney in Astropell and Stella, calls
it the Dictionary method, and verses so made, Rimes running in rattling rows,
which is is an example of it. There is an old Swinish Poem made of it in
Latin, called PUGNA PORCORUM.

Hector, Hanno, Haniball dead,
Pompey, Pyrrhus spild,
Cyrus, Scipio, Caesar slain,
And Alexander killed.
Agnomination of some syllables is sometimes found in the Arcadia; as, Alas what
can saying make them believe, whom seeing cannot persuade. And, while he was so
followed by the valiantest, he made a way for the vilest. She went away
repining, but not repenting. Our Alms-deeds are turned into all Mis-deeds; our
praying into playing; our fasting into feasting. That kind of breaking words
into another meaning, is much sed in Drolerie, and youthful Discourse; as, you
will have but a bare gain out of this bargain, A man not only fit for the gown,
but for the gun; for the pen, but for the pike; for the book, but for the
blade. The garnish of this figure has been in much request in less serious
matters, but the more learned have avoided this kind of flourish, lest their
writings should savor more of the general humor, then of private judgment.

POLEPTOTON or TRADUCTIO, is a repetition of words of the same lineage, that
differ only in termination; as, exceedingly, exceeding. His faulty using of our
faults. Sometimes the same word in several cases; as, for fear, concealed his
fear. Sometimes the same word in several voices; as, forsaken by all friends,
and forsaken by all comfort. Sometimes the same adjective in several
comparisons; as, much may be said in my defense, much more for love, and most
of all for that divine creature, who has joined me and love together. This is
a good figure, and may be used with or without passion, yet so as the use of it
come from choice, and not from barrenness.

To Amplify and Illustrate, are two of the principal Ornaments of Eloquence,
and gain men's minds to the chiefest advantages, Admiration and Belief; For how
can you commend any thing more acceptable to our Attention, then by telling us
it is extraordinary, and by demonstrating it to be evident. We love to look
upon a Commet above all Stars, for these two excellencies, its Greatness and
its Clearness; such in speech is Amplification and Illustration. We amplify
five ways, by Comparison, Division, Accumulation, Intimation, and Progression.

Comparison is either of things contrary or equal, or things different: Equal,
as, Themisto^les and Coriolanus (both great Statesmen, both of great deserts
to their Country, both banished, both dead at one t^me: Themistocles his
Council could not prevail against the Ingratitude of the Athenians; nor
Coriolanus his Discretion overcome the unkindeness of the Romans; the one was
too excellent, the other too noble, for the envious eyes of their Countrymen to
endure, such is the force of virtue, above all quarrels of Nations, or
divisions of Allegiances; that their exiles were honorably entertained,
Coriolanus by the Volsci, Themistocles by the Persians, both by their enemies,
and both leading great Armies against those Countries, which so ingratefully
expelled them) were so inwardly restrained with a conscience of sacking their
native soil, that they rather chose violence to their own lives, then to the
lives of their fellow Citizens, and took it for a sufficient revenge, to make
it evident that they might be revenged. But this is not so forcible an
Amplification of things equal indeed (wherein, as you see, all the several
points of a consorted, equality are to be searched out), as when things seeming
unequal are compared, and that in Similitudes, as well as in Examples; for
instance, where a woman is compared to a ship, out of Plautus, both ask much
tacking, and sometimes rigging: And you shall profit most of all, by inventing
matter of agreement in things most unlike: London and the Tennis-Court are
like: for in both all the gains go to the hazard. Policy is like the Sea, it
serves for intercourse of profit, for defense against in^asions; the^^ are both
^^bings and flowings, calms and tempests; the observation whereof may make a
man first wise, then rich. But as the water serves for many outward uses, so
can it not please, if it be inwardly swa^^wed. If you ^ail upon it, it will
carry you whereso'ere you will desire; but if you drink it, it does not
satisfy, but increase desires. Again for Example; Eriphyle and Tarpeia (both
women in whom nature should govern love, and love warrant fidelity) were both
easily induced to be false, with triffling temptations, they both betrayed, not
one friend to another, nor the dearness of love for the height of preferment,
but their most assured lovers to their most deadly enemies, for toys, jewels
and bracelets; Eriphyle, her husband Amphiaraus ( the stay of her life) to
Adrastus, his professed enemy: Tarpeia, the Capitol ( the defense of her
Country) to the Sabines, that besieged it, yet neither can remain as
invitation, much less a encouragement to Treason; For Eriphyle was slain by her
son, whom nature should have bound to her defense; Tarpeia by the Sabines, whom
her deserts should have obliged to her safeguard. In comparing of two, when
you would raise the person or thing, which you intend to make excellent, you
must take the meanest parts of a greater example, and match them with the best
of your purpose, and by such partiality you shall amplify and extol the
subject you treat of; as Isocrates did in his comparison of Cyrus and
Thaagarus. Otherwise for impartial comparisons, which notwithstanding do
amplify, read the matches, or encounters of the most famous Grecian and Roman
Examples in Plutark.

Comparisons of things different. In the former Comparison, is a Composition of
the points at first, because I presuppose the histories on both sides to be
familiar unto you by reading; but if you were to marshal histories, whereof
both or either were not sufficiently known, then had you need to begin with
single relations; As if a man would compare Vascus G^ma with Sir Francis Drake,
he might say, Sir Francis Drake indeed traveled round about the world in two
years, saw diverse Nations, endured many perils at sea, and returned laden with
great Treasure; And Vascus Gama first searched the Coast of Quiloa, Mozambique,
and Calicute, and opened the passage to the East Indies. But as it was easy
for Drake to proceed further in discoveries, when he had entrance made by
Columbus: So was it most dangerous and difficult for Gama to adventure a
course, without example and direction: Drake scoured the Coasts with a
sufficient company of ships, made pillage of others, and thereof furnished
himself for his interprize; Gama went but weak at first, lost most of his small
Fleet, and met nothing at seas, but tempests and famine. Drake invaded upon
opportunities, hazarded but his own fortune, and retired to sea upon all
advantages: Gama had in charge an expedition of his Sovereigns Commandment, was
constrained to victual himself amongst barbarous Nations, and not only buy
provision in their continent with the price of his blood, but durst not depart
without leaving his King proclaimed and possessed in their Territories, diverse
places of strength fortified, and established to his use: So that if Gama had
been to pursue the example of Drake, as Drake had the light of Columbus and
Magellus Travels, Vascus Gama' s spirit was as like to have conquered the whole
world, as Drakes fortune was to compass it. And where the parts of Collation
are most obscure, there your narration must be the longer; As, Cicero in
comparing Marcellus and Verres, makes a long recital of the acts of Marcellus
to acquaint the hearers with them before comparison. In some cases, after good
confidence of proof, your examples may come in more thick and plentiful; As, If
to protract a battle upon advice, be cowardice, then Ph^cion, then Metellus,
then Fabius, and all the valiantest Captains of all ages were cowards. If to
displant the rebellious natives of Scotland, and to root them out of that
kingdom, be cruelty, then the Colonies translated by the Romans into Sicily,
into France, into the several coasts of Italy, and diverse other places,
testify great cruelty. But comparison of things different is most commendable,
where there seems to be great affinity in the matters conferred; As in the King
of Spains assisting the Irish, and the Queen of Englands aiding the
Netherlands. The Spaniard gave assistance to a people untrue in their Treaties,
uncivil in their manners, to those who have traitorously rebelled without
provocation, and fled out contrary to their own submission, brake their own
peace, and wasted their own Country. The Queen did but lend some few
voluntaries to the protection of a Nation, peaceable in their lives, free by
their privileges, a people denying no claim of any true Prince, except
perpetual servitude of their bodies, and importable exactions of their goods.
Another example of things different compared. Is not the marriage of heads of
Houses and Colleges as lawful as the marriage of the Doctors of the Arches, or
the Clerks of the Chancery, both were interdicted by the same law, and yet I
take it not indifferent, that both should by the abrogation of the same Law be
equally repealed; The one has his living casual by his temporal pains, the
other his maintenance certain by Ecclesiastical provision; The one may purchase
by the improving his revenues, and so may lawfully raise a patrimony to
maintain his posterity: The other can by no thrift upon the common goods,
gather a living for a wife and children, without imbezeling from the poor,
deducting from Hospitality, defeating the intent of the giver, or defrauding
his succession. Lastly, the one has all to the use of his office, the other is
owner of nothing, but to his own behoof and disposition. In these two sorts of
Amplifications you may insert all Figures, as the passion of the matter shall
serve.

Comparison of contraries is the third and most flourishing way of Comparison.
Contraries are sometimes arranged together by pairs one to one, thus. Compare
the ones impatiency with the others mildness, the ones insolency with the
others submission, the ones humility with the others indignation, and tell me
whether he that conquered seemed not rather confounded, then he that ^yeelded
any thing discouraged. Compare not mind with mind lest it seem fantastical,
and beyond the trial of our senses; But set the ones triumph against the
others captivity, loss against victory, feasts against wounds, a Crown against
fetters, misfortune against felicity, and the majesty of courage will be found
in the overthrown. More examples of this you have in the figure Contentio,
which is one of the instruments to aggravate, by way of Comparison. Yet one
example more. He that prefers wealthy ignorance before chargeable study,
prefers contempt before honor, darkness before light, death before life, and
earth before, heaven.

This is one way of arranging contrarieties.

There is another way of ordering them with interchangeable correspondence in
sentences, that though each touch not other, yet it affronts the other: As,
Shall a Soldier (for a blow with his hand given in war to a Captain) be
disgraced? And shall a Lawyer (for the Bastinado given in a Court of Justice to
his companion) be advanced? shall we that profess Laws, maintain outrage? And
shall they that break all Laws, yet in this observe civility? Where you may see
every word in the later sentence aggravated by opposition to every word in the
former. Another, Did the most innocent vouchsafe a part of his glory to pray
for his enemies? And shall we the most sinful esteem it a blot to our
reputation to be unrevenged on our brethren? Of this you shall have more
examples hereafter. But unless it be for the Declamatory exercise, you are to
avoid too great swelling without substance.

The second way of Amplification, is by Division, which (as a modern Author
says) is to anatomize it into several parts, and to examine it according to
several circumstances; Not unlike the show that Pedlers make of their Packs
when they display them, contrary to the German magnificence, that serves in all
the good meat in one dish. But whereas the same Author says, that this Art of
Amplifying will betray it self in method and order. I think it rather adorns it
self. For in stead of saying, He put the whole Law to the Sword; let me reckon
all ages and sorts, and say; He neither saved the young men, as pitying the
unripe flower of their youth; nor aged men, as respecting their gravity; nor
children, as pardoning their weakness; nor women, as having compassion on their
Sex; Soldier, Clergyman, Citizen; armed or unarmed, resisting or submitting,
all within the Town were destroyed by the fury of that bloody Executioner. Note
that the divisions here, are taken from age, profession, sex, habit, or
behavior. It may likewise be from all circumstances; All dance, the Heavens,
Elements, men's minds, Commonwealths, and so by part all dance.

Another example varied, He apparels himself with great discretion; Thus
amplify for circumstances, For stuffs, His clothes were more rich then
glittering: As to the fashion, rather usual for his sort, then fantastical for
his invention; for color, more grave and uniform then wild and light. For
fitness, made as well for ease of exercise, as to set forth to the eye those
parts which had in him any excellency. So, to say, he would take an occasion of
discourse with a young witty Lady, and would raise it first from her behavior.
If she said nothing he would partly quarrel with her silence; if she smiled,
he would gather out of it some interpretation of praise of her favor, and of
his own joy and good fortune; if she frowned, he would both move her to mirth,
and deny that she could be angry in earnest; if she were sad, he would conform
his speech and action in that soberness to her humor, as might beguile her
passion, by way of false confederacy; if she walked or played, the secret
praise of her face, her eyes, her hair, her voice, her hands, her body, her
gait, was the application of most conceits, whatever gave the ground of them;
yet with such dissembling art, as if forgetfulness or love alluded in them, not
cunning or want of variety.

So you may divide by the forms of speech in general; as, he was never to seek
how to propose or invent, raise or maintain, reconcile and distinguish any
Arguments, Histories, Similitudes, Proverbs; Jests attended him in great
plenty, when he needed to employ them: he would deliver strong Reasons
carelessly, and choice words smoothly and unaffectedly; he used a sporting
wisdom, an eloquent prating. But with Gallants and Ladies of better respect,
and less curiosity, his duty, their kindeness, their common acquaintance, the
occasion of his coming, the remembrance of his last conference, the place, the
time, the last news of foreign parts, the Court, the Country, the City, fed
his invention, and satisfied their ears. All this is but division of the
persons, with whom you conversed, their Manners, Carriage, the Fashions and
Ornaments, the Matter and Subject of discourse. This in some sort used, is more
properly called Dilatation, then Amplification; and being often practiced, will
enable you to discourse almost of any thing, wherein you are not precisely tied
to the exact manner of division, which Logicians use. But you have liberty of
seeking all things comprised within the sense of your general Theme, differ
they essentially, or in any notable Property. You may also if you please, run
over the entire part of Amplification; as, the ship was blown up; for the ship
you may say the mast, sails, tacklings, keel, prowe, stern; for blowing up, you
may say rent, torn, smouthered, scattered in the air, sunk under the water, all
the circumstances of blowing up. So in saying a fair tree, you may divide the
tree into the root, body, branches and fruit; and fairness, into talness,
straitness, verdure, sweetness, and such things as are fair in a tree. In
describing a gallant man, you may talk of his mind, person, his attempting,
prosecuting and finishing an enterprise. And note, that this Amplification has
in it both credibility and instruction; for it makes instances of that which
being generally spoken, would seem but a flourish, and gives more special note
of that kind, which universally could not be conceived, without confusion and
dullness. This kind of Amplification is more taken up by Cicero then
Demosthenes; for Demosthenes never uses it, but as it falls in his way.

The third way of Amplification, is Accumulation, which is a heaping up of many
terms of praise or accusation, importing but the same matter, without
descending into any part, and has his due season after some argument of proof.
Otherwise it is like a Schoolman foming out Synonima's, or words of one
meaning, and will sooner beget a censure of superfluity of words, then of
sufficiency, of matter. But let us give some example to amplify a Sedition;
tumults, mutinies, uproars, desperate conspiracies, wicked confederacies,
furious commotions, traiterous rebellions, associations in villainy,
distractions from allegiance, bloody garboyles, intestine Massacres of
Citizens. But this example is somewhat too swelling. Now to describe a
beautiful woman; you may say, She has a most winning countenance, a most
pleasant eye, a most amiable presence, a cheerful aspect, she is a most
delicate object, etc. The taste of former times has termed it sweet, to bring
in three clauses together of the same sense; as, Your beauty (sweet Lady) has
conquered my reason, subdued my will, mastered my judgment. How this will hold
amongst our curious successors in their time, I know not; he that looks on the
wearing of it, will find it bare, how full of stuff soever it appears. First,
it passes for parts of division, when indeed it is but a variation of an
English. Yet notwithstanding the practice will furnish you store of phrases,
without which you shall never have choice, the Mother of perfection. Cicero in
his Orations uses it much; some others follow it to four clauses, but he seldom
exceeds three. It has this certain effect, that it will sufficiently secure
your vein not to be dry and exhausted. But to return to our first sort of
Accumulation, and reduce it with this under one precept. I take the use of this
to be in anger, detestation, commiseration, and such passions, as you, seeming
thoroughly possessed with, would willingly stir up in others.

The fourth way of Amplification is by Intimation, and leaves the collection of
greatness to our understanding, by expressing some mark of it. It exceeds
speech in silence, and makes our meaning more intelligible by a touch, then by
direct treating; as he that should say, you must live very many years in his
company, whom you should account for your friend, says well; but he that says,
you had need eat a bushel of salt with him, says more, and gives you to reckon
more then many years in his company, whom you should account for your friend.
It savours sometimes of Hyperbole; as, that man that is grown gross, is grown
from a body to a corporation; again, for a little man on horse back, He was
taken for a hat riding on the pommel of a saddle. Of this sort, examples are
familiar; So honest a wrangler, that his nose being betwixt, was the only
cause why his two eyes went not to Law. So the hugeness of a Giant is expressed,
by saying, his skull held half a bushel of wheat. This may be done with Ironia,
or denial. He was no notorios malefactor, but he had been twice on the pillory,
and once burnt in the hand for trifling oversights. So, by ambiguity of the
word, he draws his sword oftener then his purse. This fashion of Amplification,
I term Intimation, because it does not directly aggravate; but by consequence
or proportion, intimate more to your mind, then to your ears.

PROGRESSIO is the last kind of Amplification, which by steps of comparison
scorns every degree, till it come to the supreme; and sometimes to advance the
matter higher, it descends lower. It is an ornament in speech to begin at the
lowest, that you may aspire to the highest Amplification. For example, in
reprehending the prodigality* of Monuments. I begin with the excesses of
Alphonsus on his fathers funeral; thence to Alexanders profusion upon one of
his friends Tombs; then to Urbanus, toward his servant; thence to Caesar, on
his horses burial; after that, to the Molossians on their dogs; and thence to
the Egyptians, that charged themselves with the sumptuous burial of a Crocodil.
So seeming in some sort, to admit the first less then the second, and by
growing weaker and weaker in the excess of every one, as I proceed, the last
will seem most rediculous, if not odious. So Cicero against Verres meaning to
amplify his Bribery and Extortions. It is rigorous exaction (says he) not to
absolve the innocent without money; great cruelty to commit him, till be ransom
himself; but not to suffer the parties to have access unto him without reward,
is wretched covetousness. To sell the egress and regress of them that shall
bring him victuals; nay, to take money that he shall have an easy death: To
put a price upon the strokes that shall execute him; So much, that he shall be
beheaded at one blow; so much, at two. This is beyond all degrees of most
barbarous and intolerable extortion. So in another example; He was careless of
doing well, a looseness of youth; he was inclined to do ill, a weakness of
flesh; his mind consented to offend, a shrewd temptation; he committed the
act, an unhappy fault; he accustomed himself to abuse, a sad employment: yet he
did not this alone, but infected others with his persuasion, and seduced them
by his example. And not that only, but detained those he had drawn in, with
fresh inventions, and disgraced the modesty of them who resisted his
corruptions, with scorns and derisions, which could argue no less in him, then
a most reprobate damnable resolution.

The rule of this is, when you would praise or discommend any thing, to
consider how many less things there are of that kind, to which notwithstanding
you would give some show of importance. As he that would render sleep
obnoxious, may say that Idleness (which is less) by Draco's Laws was Felony.
Or, to give that Bishop his right, that built two absolute Colleges at his own
charges, and endowed them with Lands. Look downwards how rare it is for a
Prelate in these days, not to grant long Leases, diminish the revenues of his
fee. How laudable it is to repair the ruins of his own decayed Palaces and
Granges? How magnificent an Act it is thought for a noble man to build an
Hospital. How royal for two or three Princes to erect one College. And can
there be such an unthankfulness, as to bear but an ordinary remembrance of him,
that inricht his Bishopric, built two the most famous Nurseries of Learning in
the Land, was liberal to all wants in his life, and left worthy bequests to all
degrees at his death. In like sort, by an example of abusing the name of God.
To make table talk of a mean man's name were injurious; to run upon a Noble man's
title, were great scandal; to play with a Princes name, were Treason: And what
shall it be to make a vanity of that name, which is most terrible even to
Tyrants and Devils, and most reverend even to Monarchs and Angels? There be two
contrary ascents to the top of this form, either by extenuating the means, as
in a former example: or by aggravating them, as in this last of swearing. And
may not a matter be well amplified in this manner, by exchanging the comparison
of every particular circumstance, that the whole may seem the greater? As in
this example, It is lamentable that a young man should be offended with the
advice of his experienced friend, tending to his profit. First, it is a hard
case that counsel should be neglected, but harder that it should offend. It is
a sad thing to see any displeased with good admonitions, but more sad, to see a
youth so affected, Who would not grieve to have his advice ill taken? but who
would not grieve more, to see his experience controlled? Unhappy is that youth,
that listens not to the good exhortations of the Skilful. But more, that
disdains the instructions of his discreet friend. He is miserable and
unfortunate, that quarrels with the sound precepts of his dear friends; but
more miserable and unfortunate, that mislikes directions given for his own good
and advantage.

This is a most easy, clear and usual kind of Amplification; For it gives
more light and force to every circumstance. The circumstances are these. The
persons, who and to whom, the matter, the intent, the time, the place, the
manner, the consequence, and many more: Out of every one of which, any thing
may be made more notable, and egregious by way of comparison. And that it may
the better be remembered by you, let inquiry be made in every controversi^ for
the circumstances, and compare them with other less matters, and you shall
hardly fail of discourse, or be left on ground for want of good invention.
There is a richer show in this kind of amplifying by every circumstance, then
in any other. First, you must begin every circumstance with a new figure.
Sometimes with Affirmation, sometimes with Interrogation, sometimes with
Admission, sometimes with Ironia. Secondly, when you, upon every circumstance,
urge the whole sense, you are for every circumstance almost to vary the words:
As before, for Lamentable; unhappy, unfortunate, heavy, sad, grievous; so for
Counsel; A^monitions, Advice, Exhortations, Instructions, Precepts, Directions.
Again, I say, remember this kind of Progression by circumstances, and urging
and aggravating all the points of a Sentence: For you shall find it used as
much as any figure in Rhetorique, by all good Speakers and Writers.

There are Figures that help Amplification, and make show of setting forth a
matter fairer then it is. The first of them is HIPERBOLE, whereof I will give
you some such examples, as my own reading long since observed in the Arcadia.
Sometimes it expresses a thing in the highest degree of possibility beyond the
truth, that in descending thence, you may find the truth. Sometimes in flat
impossibilities, that you may rather conceive the unspeakableness, then the
untruth of the relation. Possibly, as for Hypocritical Host; he gave as
pleasing entertainment, as the falsest heart could give him, whom he means
worst unto. That ever eye saw, or heart could imagine. For diligent inquiry;
making their eyes, their ears, and their tongue serve for nothing else, but for
that inquiry. This is the utmost that is possible. But in the very frontiers of
impossibility, thus, though a thousand deaths followed it, and every death were
followed with an hundred dishonors. The world sooner wanted occasions, then he
valor to go through them. Words and blows came so thick together, as the one
seemed a lightning to the others thunder. Sometimes there is no certain
quantity of a thing set, but plainly and ingeniously told unvariably. As,
Beyond the bounds of conceit, much more of utterance. And, this Figure is more
for the credit of your wit, then of your speech.

CORRECTIO, having used a word of sufficient force, yet pretending a greater
strength of meaning, refuses it, and supplies the place with one of more
extension; as, I persuade you not to let slip occasion, whilst it may not only
be taken, but offers, nay sues to be taken. Where the first rising of the
matter is, upon, Not only, but, then upon the correcting, Nay: Again, you must
be content, nay you must be desirous to take pains, if you will write well; It
is the only quality, which in all actions will gain you praise, praise (said
I,) nay honor. This Figure is to be used, when you would make the matter more
credible in it self, then by the manner of delivery; it is sometimes used upon
passion, without intent to amplify. As, you stars, if you do not succor me:
no, no, you will not help me. O Parthenia, no more Parthenia, what art thou?
There are two contrary ways to this form, and both lead to Amplification, but
in a dissembling sort. The first is by Ironia, which expresses a thing by the
contrary, by show of exhortation, where indeed it dehorteth. As, yet a while,
sleep a while, fold thine arms a while: so shall necessity overtake thee, like
a traveller, and poverty set on thee like an armed man. It was but small
charges of idle money that the Egyptians bestowed in erecting of a Pyramid of
Brick, when the expenses in Onyons and garlike for Workmens diet, came to about
238000 l. of our money. Milo had but slender strength, that carried an Ox a
furlong on his back, then killed him with his fist, and eat him to his
Breakfast. Titornus had a reasonable good arm; that could hold two bulls by the
tails, the one in the one hand, and the other in the other, and never be
stirred out of his place by their violence. Here small, slender and reasonable,
amplify as much as if you had said great, exceeding, or in^redible.

Paralepsis (the second counterfeit of Amplification) is when you say you let
pass that which not withstanding you touch at full: as, I make no account of
any hinderance in other the direct studies of my course: I value not my pains
in collecting these Observations. I will forget that I denied the earnest
entreaty of many kind and learned Gentlemen, that sued to me for helps: I am
loath to tell you they are notes of his whom your Masters of the University
have thought as great a Reader, and a greater observer, then themselves; I
desire not, that you should make any greater estimation of them, then of a
testimony of my love to you, and a pledge of my resolution to encourage those
lovely sparks of good invention, which if you smother and quench in your self,
you commit a kind of intellectual murder. The like is used often in
Progression. But an other, I urge not to you the hope of your friends, though
that should animate you to answer their expectation, I lay not before you the
necessity of the place, which you are to furnish, wherein to be defective and
insufficient were some shame; I omit the envious concurrencies, and some
prepared comparisons in your Country, which have some feeling with young men of
foresight; I only say, how shall our promises give judgment against us? how
shall we discharge our own Engagements to your Father, if this time has not
taken his full effect of profit in our labors and endeavors. Two figures
properly belong to this kind of Amplification, which are called Accumulation
and Division.

The first is a round dispatching of much matter, not plainly and simply the
same in sense, yet tending to the same end; as, Loves companions be
unquietness, longings, fond comforts, faint discomforts, hopes, jealousies,
rages, carelessness, yieldings, etc. Spite, rage, disdain, shame, revenge came
upon hatred. These examples are out of Arcadia. You may frame one thus, All men
exclaim upon these exactions, Nobles, Gentry, Commonalty; Poor, Rich,
Scholars, Merchants, Peasants, Young, Old, High, Low, and all cry out upon the
hard impositions of these burdens.

The second Figure differs not much from the first, but that the first is a
sudden entrance into a confused heap of matter: This is a wild and dissolute
repetition of all that went before. As, you have heard of his pride, ambition,
cozenage, robberies, mutinies, in the City, in the Camp, in the Country. What
kinsman of his unabused, what friend undeceived, what companion uncorrupted,
can speak for him? where can he live without shame? where can he dye with
honor? These two Figures do not only make your cause seem better, but skilfully
and properly used, do amaze an adversary of mean ability.

There are other Figures that come in fitly after Amplification* or any great
heat justly i^flamed, Interrogation and Exclamation.

Interrogation is but a warm proposition, yet it oftentimes does better then a
bare Affirmation, which were but too easy and live-less a speech: as, The
credit of behavior, is to cover imperfection, and set forth your good parts
better. Thus expressed, Is it not the chiefest credit of behavior, to set
forth your good parts fairly and clearly, and to cover imperfection. Men are
ignorant, and therefore by good expressions without raunting or affectation,
you shall gain a more general opinion, then by sufficiency smothered in too
modest a silence. By Interrogation thus, Are not most men ignorant? shall you
not then by quaint expressions, withoutraunting or affectation, please more,
and get a more general good opinion, then by great sufficiency concealed by
your own shamefastness? To dissemble excellencies is good policy in him, whom
his course must at length necessarily draw into light and proof, and then all
that he delivers will be admirable, because expectation forestalled nothing of
his worth; which may likewise be turned into an Interrogation, and is very fit
for a speech, addressed to many illiterate hearers; is much used in Pirocles
Oration to the seditious multitude, and then it may be well frequented and
iterated. Did the Sun ever bring fruitful Harvest; but was more hot then
pleasant? Have you any of your children, that be not sometimes cumbersom? Have
you any Fathers that be not sometimes froward? shall we therefore curse the
Sun? hate our children? and disobey our Fathers? An example of many
Interrogations. Have you not seen a stately kind of courtesy, and a proud
kind of humility? have you not seen a wise man withdraw himself from mean
company, with better grace, and more kindeness, then some silly Gentleman that
has bestowed himself on fools, thrown himself down into the midst of his
miseries? does not a commendations, a hat, a good word, a good morrow, p^rchase
more hearts then a months familiar prattling; with a flock of rude people? Do
you converse with your superiors, to learn of them to be able to judge them,
and benefit your self? And shall not your inferiors do the like with you? Is
it not a safer gain of popularity, with ceremonies, then with discovering your
Nature? Many such like Interrogations might be added; but let it suffice, that
it is easy and gentile to sharpen the flats of affirmations and downright
telling of Tales.

EXCLAMATION is not lawful, but in the extremity of motion; as Pyrocles, seeing
the mild Philoclea innocently beheaded, cried out, O Tyrant Heaven, and Traitor
Earth, blind Providence, how is this done? How is this suffered? Has this
world a Government? The like in the beginning of the second book of the Arcadia
in the person of Ginetia tormented in mind. O Sun! O Heavens! O Deserts! O
Virtue! O imperfect proportion! And in another Author thus; O endless
endeavor! O vainglorious Ignorance! Do thou desire to be known? Where? In
Europe, how can thou be famous? When Asia and Africa, that have thrice as
many people, hear not of thy actions? Art not thou then thrice as obscure as
thou art renowned? Do thou look that all the world should take notice of
thee, when for five thousand years three parts of the world took no notice of
the fourth. But Europe is the house of Fame, beca^se it is the Nursery of Arts,
and Books, wherein reports are preserved. O weak imagination! O self-pleasing
fancy! Can thou expect in these parts from 40 degrees to 90 Northward, such
praises and honors for thy name, when every Map on every wall shows thee as
much space from 40 to 90 Southward, inhabited with nothing but silence and
forgetfulness.

ACCLAMATION is a sententious clause of a discourse, or a report, such as
Daniel in his Poems concludes with often. It is a general instruction for
every man commonly for his pains in reading a History, or other men's Books for
some private use of it to himself. Like a Cash-keeper, who drawing great sums of
other men's money, challenges somewhat in the pound for his own Fee. It serves
for Amplification, when after a great crime or Desert exclaimed upon, or
extolled, it gives a moral note worth credit and observation. As after the true
relation of Scipio Africanus's course, who having been chief governor of the
greatest Armies in the world; having all his life time Kings suitors for his
favor, and nations kept in awe of his Name; yet in 56 years neither bought nor
sold goods or lands, built any House or Castle of his own, left not above 46.
l. in Gold, and 6. l. in silver behind him at his death. It may be folded up in
this Acclamation: So little need has he to stoop to private cares, that thrives
upon public victories; and so small leisure has he to be desirous of riches,
that has been so long possessed and satisfied with honor, which is the immortal
end of mortal actions. Such notes are th^se scraps of policy which some
nowadays gather out of Polybius and Tacitus, and not unlike are the Morals
that hang upon Esops Fables.

This Acclamation sometimes is the cause and reason of a former Narration, as a
story of one, who being a servant to a family, and of mean quality, won the
doting love of a witty Lady in the House, whereas she never looked upon the
humble suits, the cunning insinuations, the noble deserts of many lovers of
higher degree, but with free judgment and careless censure; This close may
follow, So hard entrance has affection into a heart prepared to suspicion,
especially in the weakest natures, whose safeguard is mistrust: So easy is the
increase of love by insensible steps, when the service you offer seems to
proceed out of the goodness of your own disposition, which women expect to be
permanent, and not out of the necessity of your suit, which may force you for
the time to a wained difference from the proper humor. Yet if this be too much
used, it is like a note-book gathered out of Histories.

Contrary to Amplification is DIMINUTION, and this descends by the same steps
that Amplification ascends, and differs no more then up Hill and down Dale,
which is the same way, begun out of several sentences; Yet some examples in
Arcadia, will make you observe two ways of Diminishing single terms, one by
denying the contrary; As if you should say, But reasonably pleasant; Arcadia
speech is, Not unpleasant, hardly liked, nor misliked. But why should I give
examples of the most usual phrases in the English tongue, as we say, Not the
wisest that ever we saw, for a man of small wisdom. The second way is, by
denying the right of the words, but by error of some; As, Those fantastical
mind-infected people, which Children and Musicians call Lovers. That misfortune
of letting fall his Dagger, which the rude Swaggerers of our time, call, being
disarmed. That opinion of honesty, which has lately been so proudly translated
by the Soldier into the word (Honor.) And such like. But the former fashion of
Diminution sometimes in Ironious sort goes for Amplification, As speaking of a
great personage, No mean man; This is an ordinary Figure for all kinds of
speeches.

The Figures following serve for Amplification. (...) is a composition of
contraries, and by both words intimates the meaning of neither precisely, but a
moderation and mediocrity, As, bravery and raggery are contrary, yet somewhat
better then both is meant by brave raggedness. So, wanton modesty; enticing
soberness. And with that she prettily smiled, which mingled with tears, a man
could not tell, whether it were a mourning pleasure, or delightful sorrow.
With what a witty ignorance she would understand? etc. Absented presence;
well-willing spite. The one contrary is aff^rmed to be in the other directly,
by making the one the Substantive, the other the Adjective, as above in those
examples; or indirectly, as in these words following. Seeking Honor by
dishonor; And building safety upon ruin; O foolish woman, and most miserable
foolish woman, because wit makes thee foolish. Captivity might seem to have
authority over tyranny. This is a gentile way to move admiration in the
hearers, and make them think it a strange harmony, which must be expressed in
such discord. Therefore this example shall conclude. There was a perfect
agreement in so perfect a disagreement: like music made of cunning discords.
This is an easy Figure, and useful.

CONTENTIO is contrary to the former; That was a composition of Sturmius
disagreement; This is an opposition of them. As, there was strength against
nimbleness, rage against resolution, pride against nobleness. He is a swaggerer
amongst quiet men? but is quiet among swaggerers? Earnest in idle things, idle
in matters of earnestness. Where there is both Antimetabole for the turning of
the sentence back, and Contentio respecting the contra^iety of things meant
thereby. Could not look on, nor would not look off. Neither the one hurt her,
nor the other help her. Just without partiality, humble without contradiction,
Liberal without profusion, Wise without curiosity. This Figure is fit to
embelish a copious style, and serves much for Amplification by Comparison.

COMPAR is an even gait* of sentences answering each other in measures
interchangeably. Such as are in St. Augustine often, but oftener in Gregory the
Divine; And in Bishop Andrews works in English. But many do intermingle this
Figure with Agnominatio, and Similiter cadens; It is very useful in elocution;
But in penning it must be used with modes^y and mediocrity. A touch of
Agnomination of the Letter is tolerable with a Compar; As, If ever I could
wish my Faith untryed and my Council untrusted. And (where there is a similiter
cadens, but a more evident falling alike) in this. My years are not so many,
but that one death may conclude them; nor my faults so many, but that one death
may satisfy them. Without consonancy of fall or harping upon a letter or
syllable, yet a Compar; because the words match each other in rank. Save his
gray hairs from rebuke, and his aged mind from despair; where gray hairs, aged
mind, rebuke and despair answer each other. Again, Rather seek to obtain that
constantly by courtesy, which you cannot assuredly enjoy by violence. Verb to
Verb, Adverb, to Adverb, and Substantive to Substantive. Lovelines can neither
warrant you from suspicions in others, nor defend you from melancholy in your
self. In some places there is a shorter Compar: where word to word, or
substantive to substantive, are joined, and yet without conjunction, which is
ASYNDETON. Her face with beauty, her head with wisdom, her eyes with Majesty,
her countenance with gracefulness, her lips with loueliness; Where many ( Ands)
are spared. In some places only the Conjunction is put in the last in a Compar
of three; As, her wit endeared by youth, her afction by birth, and her sadness
by her beauty. A fair woman shall not only command without entreaty, but
persuade without speaking. This is an excellent Figure, in no place untimely,
if not too often used; It fits well the even pauses* and interruptions of an
eloquent tongue, seems to be rich and copious, and to contain many parts
(whereof each with a tedious man would be a sentence) and make an impression
upon the hearers senses; It has long bin in request, ever since the days of
Isocrates, whose Orations are full of it. This Figure belongs more properly to
that part of Amplification, called Division, then to Accumulation.

Sententia, if it be well used, is a Figure; if ill and too much, a Style, of
which none that wri^e humorously and factiously, can be clear in these days,
when there are so many Schisms of Eloquence, We study nowadays according to
the predominancy of Critical fancies. Whil^t Moral Philosophy was in request,
it was rudeness, not to be sententious; whilst Mathematics were of late in
vogue, all similitudes came from Lines, Circles and Angles; But now that Mars
is predominant, we must recruit our wits, and give our words a new Quarter. It
is very true, that a Sentence is a pearl in a Discourse; but it is a good
Discourse that consists all of pearls. It is like an Eye in the body, nor is it
monstrous to be all Eyes. I take Cyclops to be as handsome a man, as Argos. And
if a Sentence were as like a hand in the Text, as it is commonly noted with a
hand in the Margent, yet I should rather like that work that had no more hands
then Hercules, then that which had as many as Briarius.

These are Sentences, The rich man's bounty is the poor man's Exchequer. The
sickness of age is avarice; The errors of youth profaneness. There is small
difference between a Proposition and a Question, if I forget not Aristotle. (1.
Top.) Since length of acquaintance, mutual secresies, nor height of benefits
could oblige a savage mind. There is a Sentence, and in it ZEUGMA, ASYNDETON,
and METAPHORA. Guiltlesness is not always with ease oppressed, Where there is
Meriosis, not always with ease, for, ever and hardly. Who stands only upon
defense, stands upon no defense; A sentence with EPANADOS. Unlawful desires
are punished after the effect of enjoying; But impossible desires are punished
in the desire it self. A Sentence with DISTINCTIO and CONTENTIO. Love to a
yiedling heart is a King, but to a resisting, a Tyrant. COMPAR and CONTENTIO;
It is a foolish wittiness to speak of more then one thinks. Neither is this
sentence without a Compar: it is a double sentence, as they call it; To a heart
fully resolved, counsel is tedious, and reprehension loathsome. And, There is
nothing more terrible to a guilty heart, then the eye of a respected friend.
There may be also Sentences particular to some men as well as general; As, --
Amphialus, in whom abused kindness became spiteful rage. Fearfulness, contrary
to all other vices, making Clinias think the better of another, the worse he
found himself. Evarchus making his life the example of his laws. All which may
be taken for Rules and Common-places, by putting the general name for the
special, as they say, drawing it a THESI ad HYPOTHESIN. These Examples may
make you believe, that a Sentence may be cours'd through the whole Figure-book,
and that many Figures may easily assemble in one Clause, and any one Figure
consort with another. Yet it were absurd to ground the form and fashion of your
whole style upon any one Figure.

ILLUSTRATION consists either in things or words, in the description of things
living or dead. And of living things, either reasonable, as men and their
personages, and qualities; or un^e^sona^le, as of Horses, Ships, Islands,
Castles, and such like. Men are described most excellently in the Arcadia, As
Basilius, Plexe^tus, Pirocles, Musidorus, Anaxius, etc. But he that will truly
characterize a ^an, in a feigned Story, must first learn handsomely to describe
a humor, a passion, a virtue, a vice, and therein, keeping decent proportion,
add but names, and knit together the accidents and encounters. This perfect
expressing of all qualities, is learned out of Aristotle's tenth Book of Moral
Philosophy. But because (as Mac^iavel observes) perfect virtue, or perfect vice
is not seen in our time, which altogether is humorous and spirting: Therefore
the understanding of Aristotle's Rhetorique is held to be the best means to
attain to true Eloquence; Excellent on this subject also are Theophrasti
imagines; Heliodorus and Longinus in Greek (the last lately well translated
into English) Zanaxarus his Arcadia in Italian, Diana de monte majori in
Spanish, etc. But to our purpose, of personages and affections described in
Arcadia. For men; pleasant, idle retiredness in a King Basilius, and a
dangerous end of it. Unfortunate valor in Plangus; Courteous valor in
Amphialus; Proud valor in Anaxius; Hospitality in Kalandar; The mirror of true
courage and friendship in Pirocles, and Musidorus; Miserableness and
ingratitude in Chremes; Fear and false subtilty in Clynias; Fear and rudeness,
with ill affected civility in Dametas; And through this Story Mutual love in
marriage in Argalus and Parthenia; O^t of marriage in Pirocles and Philoclea,
Musidorus and Pamela, True constant love unrespected in Plangus, in Helena, in
the true Zelmane; Inconstancy, envy, suspicion and tyranny in a King and his
Counselors; General false love in Phamphilus; and slight carriage and
credulity in Chremes daughter; base doting on a wife in Plangus father. But in
women a mischievous and seditious stomach in Cecropia; Prudent courage in
Pamela; Mild discretion in Philoclea^; Pamela's prayer, her discourse,
squeamish cunning; Unworthiness in Artesia; Respective and restless dotage in
Gynetia's love. Proud ill-favored, sluttish simplicity in Mopsa. Now in these
persons is there ever a steadfast decency, and uniform difference of manners
observed wheresoever you find them? However each interrupt the others story and
actions.

And as for actions of persons, there are many rarely and perfectly described.
As the mutiny and fire in a ship; causes of an uproar; The Garboyl; an armed
skirmish; policy and preparation. Sometimes managing a Horse is described;
tilting and shows. Many other lively and notable portracts there are, which I
will not set down to save you so sweet a labor, as the reading of that which
alone will make you eloquent and wise. Sir Philip Sidneys course (besides
reading Aristotle and Theophrastus) was to imagine the thing present, that his
pen might the better describe it.

Under this notion of Illustration may come lively descriptions, and the apt
fitting a person represented with speech and action, both which grow into very
pleasing acquaintance with the understanding and memory of the Reader.

For special light in every Sentence, there are other sparks of Figures.
First, if there be any doubt or ambiguity in the words, it is better left out
then distinguished. But if you are to answer former speeches, that imply any
doubtfulness, you may disperse all clouds, and remove all scruples with
Distinction. As being charged you have brought very light reasons, you may
answer, If by light you mean clear, I am glad you see them; If by light, you
mean of no weight, I am sorry you do not feel them. So you may express a man of
hidden learning, Hidden as well for the obscure and mean estate of his person,
as hidden for the unusual and not vulgar conceit of the matter. But as
ambiguity is not only in words but in matter; so both ways it is taken away
by Distinction. Sometimes it is in single words, as in these former, light and
hidden. Sometimes in coherence of Sentences, by reason of the relation of each
word to other, or by reason of the change of the pointing, which is cleared by
delivery. You have many examples of this in the second Book of Tully de
Oratore, and Quintilian, where there is mention of Jocus ab ambiguo. As also in
Erasmus his Apothegmes.

Distinction of ambiguity in matters of determination of the truth of general
propositions, is to tell wherein they are certain, wherein they are not. As,
Travel in foreign Countries, settles a young man's humor. If it be taken in
this sort, that it will enforce him to wariness and secrecy, and restrain him
from pouring forth his counsails, it is very profitable: For he shall have few
friends in whom to put confidence, and few companions with whom he might bestow
his idle time, or communicate his youthful thoughts. But if you intend that,
by travel, all vanities should be cast off, it seems not so likely and
admirable, because he shall walk through many ill examples, and great liberty.
Another proposition distinguished. They are but frail merits that you shall
bestow upon young men's friendship. It Is true, if you satisfy those desires
which are like to depart with their youth; As, gaming, feasting, idle sporting,
you are like to be cast off with these toys, and forgotten. But if your deserts
be in noble Exercises, learned Conferences, and civil frien^^y Offices, the
remembrance thereof will increase as fast as their discretion.

So much for Distinction; Next follows Definition, which is the shortest and
truest exposition of the nature of any thing; hereof you have examples of all
virtues in Aristotle's Morals, of passions in his Rhetorique, both in Thomas
Aquinas secunda and secundae, of many affections and perturbations in
Tusculan's Questions, and Cicero de Finibus, as the general definition of
virtue is this, VIRTUS EST HABITUS RATIONI CONSENTANEUS. Virtue is a quality
seated in Reason. Fear is an apprehenston of future harm. Thrift is a moderate
and lawful increase of wealth by careful governmemt of your own estate.
Complement is a performance of affected Ceremonies in words, looks, and
gestures. Where Definition runs into division of seven or eight ways. Of
Definition you may read Valerius his Logic. But (to be most perfectly
instructed) read the sixth book of Aristotle's Top. Your definitions need be no
more tied to the Rules of Logicians, then your divisions. The matter is
sometimes illustrated by Periphrasis; As, spurred his horse apace; Made his
spur claim have of his horse. A man not to be contemned; Nor a man over whom
contempt might make any just challenge. Snorting loud; Snorting so loud, that no
man might lay the stealing of a nap to his charge. But of Pariphrasis and
Periphrasis more severally.

Sometimes a Parenthesis makes your discourse more graceful and intelligible:
As, Tell me ingenuously (if there be any ingenuity in you) whether, etc. That
what his wit could conceive (and his wit can conceive as far as the limits of
reason stretch) was all directed to the setting forth of his friend. Till the
next morning (better known to be so by the Hourglass, then the days clearness)
having run fortune, etc. And indeed all Parentheses are in extremes, either
graces or foyles to a Speech. If they be long, they seem interruptions, and
therefore at the end of them must be a retreat to the matter, called
ANTANACLASIS. As, Assure thy self most wicked woman (that have so plaguily a
corrupted mind, as that thou can not keep thy sickness to thy self, but must
most wickedly infect others) Assure thy self, I say, etc. Shall that heart
(which does not only feel them, but has all motion of his life placed in
them,) Shall that heart, I say, etc.

Division is a severing the whole into parts, as of time into that past,
present, and to come, (which is rather a breathing then a Division) into
supreme or subordinate. From their order; beasts or unreasonable creatures,
into those of the Air, Water, Earth; Love is either of Beauty, or of Virtue.
From the object. Study is of Liberal or Mathematick Science. And so you may
divide as many ways as things may differ, as by their beginnings, endi^gs,
properties, marks, effects, times, tunes, place^, forms, persons, in whom they
are, and howsoever, which properly belongs to Logic; yet something is spoken
thereof, in our second way of Amplification. Out of Divisions arise three
several inforcements and manifestations of your purpose, which (though by
Rhetoritians diversely handled and termed) yet are they in effect grounded upon
the Art of Distribution.

The first is Expedition, which (touching upon diverse parts) destroys all, but
that, on which you mean to rest; As, One of these courses must be taken, either
you must distinctly observe and practice these Rules, or deny that ever you
received Instructions, or allege want of capacity in your self, or want of use
of them in your life. That they are not necessary, you cannot say, for what
more necessary in your life, then to write well? That you are incapable, is a
slander, and a contradiction to your own conscience and my experience, that
has seen such fair Essays of your endeavors. And to say you had never any
directions, were to give your two eyes the lie, and to make me believe, that I
did never but dream your good. Therefore must your labor conspire with my
inventions, and so must you unavoidably become skillful. This is Enumeration
and Inference, whereupon is that which the Logicians call Induction, as in
reckoning up. It is neither that nor this, therefore this. And as one merrily
says, It is the Dogs Syllogism in a cross way, or that, or that, but I smell
him not this way, nor this way, therefore he runs on his conclusion the third
way, without smelling.

The second of this sort is PROSOPODOSIS, that overthrows no part of the
Division, but returns some part to each member. In Arcadia thus, Heretofore I
accused the Sea, condemned the Pirates, and hated my evil fortune, that deprived
me of thee: But now thy self art the Sea, thy self the Pyrat, and thy will the
evil fortune. Time at one instant seeming short and long to them; short in the
pleasingness of such presence, and long in stay of their desires. Your silence
must carry with it a construction of contempt, unkindeness or displeasure. If
you take me not for your friend, you offer unkindeness; if you deem me unworthy
of an answer, it proceeds of contempt; if your Passion defers a reply, it
argues displeasure. The first of these denied all parts, save one: This affirms
and keeps all sides up. The last is Dilemma, which proposes two sides, and
overthrows both ability and will to write well: for to say I cannot, is
Childish; and I will not, is Womanish.

PERIPHRASIS and PARAPHRASIS.
There is in the best Writers oftentimes a vain of style, wherein vulgar
fancies are exceedingly pleased, and know not wherewith. For they admire this
most, that there is some excellency in it, and yet they themselves suspect that
it exceeds their admiration. In some examples I would gladly discover the
reason hereof: It cannot be, that if either the meaning of the words be
obscure, and unfamiliar to a man's understanding, that the speech so composed,
should be so accepted: And yet it is possible that there may be some
extraordinary fancy in ordinary words, and plain meanings, how then shall we
determine? It is as in many usual dishes at a table, both eyes and taste give
them commendation, not for the substance, but for the dressing and service.
What plainer meaning then, sleep among thieves? And verily sleep, life trust
and thieves, are common English words, yet is it no common way of speaking, to
say, To trust a sleeping life among thieves. In the same sense, when they had
slept a while, is ordinary. But when they had a while hearkened to the
persuasion of sleep, is extraordinary. Though all the words of it by themselves
are most known and f^miliar; yet the ordering and fetch of it is strange and
admirable to the ignorant; We therefore call it Periphrasis or Circumlocution,
and it is much helped by Metaphors, as before: inclined to sleep is expressed by
a Metaphor taken from one who moves and inclines by persuasions. But let us
have one combat more with our adversary sleep; for, having risen early, having
striven with the suns earliness; Instead of Mopsa wept ill-favouredly, Mopsa
disgraced weeping with her countenance. Instead of saying* they that guarded
Amphialus, were killed themselves; its said, seeking to save him, they lost the
fortresses, which nature had planted them in. Instead of Plangus speech began
to be suspected; it is said, Plangus speech began to be translated into the
language of suspicion. Thus purposely did Sir Philip write, to keep his style
from flatness. As being to name a Thresher, he calls him one of Ceres servants,
Instead of his name was known to high and low; he says, That no Prince could
pretend highness, nor beggar lowness, to bar him from the sound thereof. And
this is by going a CONCRETO AD ABSTRACTUM, and diverse other ways.

If a short ordinary sense be oddely expressed by more words, it is Pariphrasis;
but if by as many other, it is Paraphrasis: as, manifest Oaths, plentiful
perjury. To make a great show of himself. To make a muster of himself in the
Island: for kill any married man; make his sword cursed by any widow, which is
by consequence, seeking by courtesy, to undo him. Making courtesy the outside
of mischief, by Similitude or Metaphor: so then the course is, instead of any
ordinary words importing a trivial matter, to take the abstracts, or some
consequence, similitude, note, property or effect, and thereby express it.
These two figures serve for Illustration.

It is sometimes requisite for gaining life and luster in your discourse, to
represent some unexpected strangeness, besides the tenor of your Theme or
Story: and, as it were, to act your meaning; which is done either by faigning
the presence or the discourse of some such persons, as either are not at all:
or if they be, yet speak not but by your imagination. The first is by
Apostrophe or Prosopopeia.

APOSTROPHE, is a turning of your speech to some new person, as to the people
or witnesses, when it was before to the ^udges or Defendant: as, Herein you
witnesses are to consult with your own consciences, and to enter into a true
examination of your own memory. Did you mark ^is looks? Did you note his
speeches? Did you truly conceive the particular proceedings of the Action? To
the people thus, Now let me entreat any man here present, that thinks himself
not exempted from misfortunes, and privileged from all mischiefs, to imagine
himself in my case, and to undertake for my sake some few thoughts of my
Distress. Sometimes the occasion is taken from some quality or other thing,
whereto your self gives show of life; as, Hope tell me, what have thou to hope
for? Love, be ashamed to be called Love. But to animate, and make dead men
speak is PROSOPOPAEIA; as, If your Ancestors were now alive, and saw you
defacing so goodly a Monument by them erected, would they not say thus, etc.
And as Sir Philip Sidney gives sense and speech to the Needle and Silk in
Pamela's hands, as learning, as a Lily: as death it self is feigned to live,
and make a speech.

Another way of clearing and reviving your discourse, is by deliberating, by
entering into communication, by preventing and answering Objections. In
deliberating sometimes you are amazed; as, Whom shall I blame? what shall I
pretend? shall I make learning hateful to you by my reprehensions? shall I make
my silence accessory to your idleness? It is not in my power, It is not in my
discretion to reform it. Under this figure are Philoclea's wishes of Zelmaine.

There is another kind of Deliberation, which proposes many things with
intricating or intangling a man's self: as Nothing can assure me of the
countenance of your love toward me, if you discontinue the study of speaking
well. For suppose you marry into some worthy Family; suppose they enrich you
with some new friends; may not a vain of thriving rob me of your acquaintance?
may not I lose you? nay, may not you lose your self in a labyrinth of worldly
cares? Sometimes we enter into Communication; as, Were it your case, what would
you answer? Tell me, I appeal to your secret thoughts. Your friend has
esteemed better of his own stomach, then of the eternal love vowed betwixt you,
and prefers the trial of his valor, before the regard of both your credits,
which must dye, however either or both of you survive the combat. Would you not
judge him unworthy to be your friend, that began his fidelity with an
inviolable Covenant never to be an Enemy.

Prevention of an Objection has two figures; the one is Occupatio, the other
Subjectio.

Occupatio is thus, You will say to me, that in a factious Country, it is the
only policy to stand neutral. I say, not unless many circumstances help you;
viz. These, if none of your friends be entered into the quarrel, If you be
assured that your wealth and discretion is equal to the best. If there be a
likelihood to scatter the reliance on both sides, and make a new park, then it
is wisdom to stand aloof a while, that if you please, you may add the victory
to which side you will. But having declared your self, you intend to be
upright? you will grow contemptible, you offer Reconciliation? your strength
will forsake you, you dispraise your adversaries? you will be deemed envious.
You commend his wisdom? you betray your own weakness: praise then his wealth,
his Ancestors, his Beauty, his pleasures; but praise not his foresight nor his
valor. Are you Judge amongst your neighbors and inferiors? be precisely just
and rightful. Are you Assistant to your friend? be advisedly and thoroughly
partial. You would be counted liberal? testify it seldom; but if publicly,
worthyly. You would thrive in bargaining? let your transactions be private: for
many small breaches of conscience are more infamous, then one great one. But
^ffend not your conscience willingly to be Treasurer of all the Indian Mines.
Thu^ you see how Counsels, Precepts and Sentences may be translated into the
form of Occupatio and Subjectio. Sometimes Occupatio is left out, and an
Argument brought to the contrary; as Cecropia persuading her son Amphialus to
offer violence to Philoclea, presupposed that he would say, He must be modest:
she replies, Each virtue has his time, the soldier that should march foremost,
must not give way for modesty. There is Occupatio and Subjectio in Arcadia, if
she contemned, then thus -- if otherwise, then etc. Did I walk abroad to see my
delight? my walking was the delight it self. He saw her alive; he was glad to
see her alive. He saw her weep: he was sorry to see her wee^. He heard her
comfortable speeches: nothing more joyful.

This figure cannot be out of season, unless purposely, as it was in the
fustian speech: You listen to my speeches, I must needs confess it; you hearken
to my words? I cannot deny it; you look for some sense? I partly believe it:
But you find none? I do not much regard it.

There is another figure, which has been called by the name of Concessio. But
I mean to mistake Occupatio and Concessio, one for the other, till I can
distinguish them better. The form of Concessio is this, I admit you are
resolute: I grant your determination is immovable, but it is in things against
your friends judgments. And in things against your own praise and profit.

OF EPITHETES.
EPithetes do much embelish Style or Discourse, yet they must be used
(according to the comparison of Demosthenes) as sauce or seasoning, which whe^s
the appetite, since they cannot pass for solid viands: otherwise in his
opinion, there can be nothing more flat, and of less grace. Quintilian
resembles a discourse, which is stuffed too full of Epithetes to an Army,
wherein there are not more soldiers for service, then boys for attendance; and
which is, by that means, rendered very great in number, but weak in force and
courage. Conform to this is that of Longinus, who advises that we moderately
use such Epithetes, as are not too high swollen, nor far fetched, but such as are
apposite to the subject. In these late^ refined days, we have a kind of
compound Epithetes, annexed to a noun with a Proche or Division (as the
Printers call it) which are much used in Poetry, and sometimes in Prose: of
which let me give you some examples, and so leave them.

The Quiver-bearing Meads. The Tempest-tossed seas. The Wool-ore-burthened
sheep. The Meadow-loving sorrel. A horror-strucken mind. The Earth-encircling
Ocean. An Heaven inspired art. Sence-distracting grief. Fancy-pleasing faces.
The Pine-plow'd sea. The Green-mantled earth. Soul-subduing graces. A
Heaven-faln star. A Self-condemning mind. An un-Sun-seen cave. Love-distilling
tears. This Heaven-displeasing war. Liver-scalding lust. Marble-hearted
cruelty. Time-beguiling pleasure. This Blood-be-dabled Kingdom. People-pleasing
Lectures. Corner-haunting lust. A Life-Conferring form. etc.
Formulae Majores. OR, COMMON PLACES.
Absence.
AS thou art the food of my thoughts, the relief of my wishes, and the only
life and repast of all my desires: So is thy love to me a continual hunger, and
thine absence an extreme famine.

In absence my grief grows, in finding my present estate so weak in fortune,
and my des^rts so slender in nature; that not knowing with Anthony how to
requite his Cleopatra, I only rest with Anthony* to dye for my Cleopatra.

Tell him my love does burn like vesta^ fire, which (with his memory, richer
then all ^pices) disperseth odours round about my foul, and did re^ress it,
when 'twas dull and sad with thinking of his absence.

He more breath^d A.B. then the air it self; and all her absences were to him
so many deaths.

I want no part of welfare, but your wished presence.

The love which he bare to her at her return was as a torrent, (which a^te^ it
has a long time been restrained) breaks the forced damm^, and with vigorous
impetuousness drowns the fields. Holy Court.

Hoping, forgetfulness (which commonly waits upon absence) might possess him,
he departed.

Since your absence, melancholy has been my Concom^tant, and you^, remembrance
my greatest comfort.

I departed from you, like a hungry infant, pulled from his nurses breast, or a
thirsty Heart chased from a sweet fountain.

Live I pray you in repose, as much as you may, during this absence; and if my
being away causes sorrow in you, let the assurance of my affection diminish it.

-- forced a tedious separation of those sacred bodies, whose souls are
entirely linked in divine affection.

Acknowledgement.
MY acknowledgement of your favors shall appear in my willingness to do you
serv^ce

And my self shall not only acknowledge this favor with humb^est
thankfulness, but etc.

The acknowledgement of your favors shall be my meanest thanks; and to thank
you for those favors must be my best acknowledgement: I can do no more, I will
do no less.

They acknowledge (with more or less degrees of homage) some kind of fealty.

-- It shall not be without a just confession of the bond your benefits have,
and ever shall hold upon me.

Affection.
THe construction of his Speech might best be made by the Grammer-Rules of
affection.

It is the flaming Agony of affection that works the chilling access of your
fever.

The coals of his affection were so kindled with wonder, and blown with
delight, that --

Suffering neither his unworthyness nor his wrongs to cover with forgetfulness,
or diminish with consideration, the affection she had born him.

-- to whom with words (which affection endited but amazement uttered) he
delivered --

(Looking down upon her from the high-top of affections Tower.)

If you retain as yet any spark of affection (which you have often given me
witness of) kiss this paper in remembrance of him, who, etc.

My affections no less love the light and witness, then they have conscience of
your virtue.

The high tide of overflowing affection restraining his tongue with
astonishment, as unable to express an unexpressable passion.

The blood of her face ebbing and flowing according to the tide of affection.

He grafted his affection in the stock of her constan^y.

(Testimo^ies of a never-silent hearty affection.)

But perceiving his affection so grounded, that striving against it, did more
anger then heal the wound, and rather call his friendship in question, then
give place to any friendly Counsel. --

The large testimony of your affection makes me willin^ to suppress a great
number of errors.

She in an instant was made an unfortunate winter of affection.

To intrinsecate my self in your affection.

My affection shall find no parallel in its well-wishes to you.

The tender tinder of his affection began to sparkle.

Striving to match her matchless beauty, with a ma^chless affection.

He (whose affection clymed by another stair) --

In ^rue affection, two so become one, as they both become two. Rel. Med.

-- You, in whom my affection holds a steady mansion.

Nor life, nor death shall divorce my affection from you.

Upon what briars the roses of his affection grow.

I conjure you to this by my affection, that never had equal. Ar.

The sight of this place does call my thoughts to appear at the Court of
affection, held by that (...) Steward Remembrance.

Th^se lines ^epresent in the poverty of fancy, the riches of my affection.

-- Good offices are the marks and ciment of true affection. H.C.

-- The heart is the Continent of affection.

Affection flows uncompelled.

Anger.
ANger is the fever of the Soul, which makes the tongue talk idle: it puts a
man into a tumult, that he cannot hear what counsel speaks: it is a raging sea, a
troubled wa^er, that cannot be wholesome for the use of a^y. Feltham,

-- They are things below the merit of my indignation; objects of scorn, which
a little slighted, and not inflamed by opposition, or countenanced to a reply
by confutation, will, within a while of themselves extinguish and vanish: like
some dispersed roving winds, which without enc^unter are dispirited and dye.
Doctor Wats upon Bacon.

Beauty.
THen was plainly to be seen the Empire, which humane beauty and an eloquent
tongue have over earthly powers.

Beauty consists in complexion, in lineaments, and in harmony.

You are the most excellent star that shines in the bright element of Beauty.

Some became Petitioners and Prisoners to her Beauty, others did homage to her
virtues.

Beauty is to be reckoned, but as an outward fading benefit, that nature has
bestowed.

The Idol of beauty ought not to be honored with such oblations.

My eyes drank much more eagerly of her beauty, then my mouth did of any other
liquor.

Her face is such a spark of beauty, as is able to en^^ame a world of love.

-- She, who in a definite compass, can set forth infinite beauty.

The excellency of her returned beauty, was a credible ambassador of her health.

Where beauty is, there needs no other plea.

S^ll not your soul for such a vanity as eye-pleasi^g beauty

Virtue is nothing else but inward beauty; and beauty nothing else but an
outward virtue. Bacon.

Making her beautiful beams to thaw away the former icyness of his --

-- Two sisters, about whom, as about two Poles, the sky of Beauty was turned.

Rather then those eyes should overflow their own beauties, or the sky of your
beauty should be over clouded with sorrow, --

Beauty in the heaven of her face (two Suns eclipsed) was wrapped up in
paleness.

Beauty which has no grace, is a bait floating on the water without a hook, to
be taken, and to catch nothing. Eustatius.

Beauty is like the herb Larix, cool in the water, but hot in the stomach.

I cannot but applaud the wonder of your beauty.

Such is the divine power of loves deity, such the virtuous force of your
heavenly beauty, and such the happy issue of our decreed destiny.

Beauty without chastity, is like a Mandrake apple, comely in show, but
poysonful in taste*

I must accuse my self of presumption, for daring to consider any moles in that
face, which you had marked for a beauty. Sir K.D.

-- A beauty, which always with too eloquent a tongue did dictate tacit
persuasions to his heart*

What a fair vestment is to a deformed body, the same is a comely body to a
deformed mind. Bacon.

A fair soul in a fair body, is a river that windingly creeps with many
wavy-turnings within the ennamel of a beautiful meadow, and ravisheth the whole
world with the admiration of its exc^llency.

B^auty in it self is such a silent Orator, as ever i^ pl^^ding for respect and
liking: and by the eye^ of others* is ever sending to their hearts for love.
Feltham.

The modest sweetness of a lilied ^ace --

Beauty is the wit of nature put into the frontispiece.

I have seen (and yet not with a partial eye) such features, and such mixtures,
as I have thought impossible for either nature to frame, or art to counterfeit:
yet in the same face, I have se^n that which has our gone them both, the
countenance. Oh! if such glory can dwell with corruption, what Celestial
excellencies are in the Saints above? who would not gaze himself into
admiration, when he shall see so rich a treasure in so pure a Cabinet,
unmatched virtue in matchless beauty? Feltham.

Zeno said, grace of body was a voice of flower, and a fl^wer of voice: Voice
of flower, (...).
because it draws amity to it, as the flower of a garden, not crying out nor
tormen^ing it self; H*C. Max. 296.
a flower of voice, because it is one of the most flowery elo^encies among the
attractives of nature.

What is temporal beauty, but a transitory charm, an illusion of senses, a
voluntary imposture, a slave of pleasure, a flower which has but a moment of
life, a Dial on which we never look, but whilst the Sun shines on it? What is
human^ beauty but a dunghill covered with snow, a glass painted with fals^
col^urs, a prey pu^sued by many Dogs, a dange^ous h^stess in a ^rail house, a
sugared fruit in a feast, which some dare not touch for respect* and ^ther^
gormandize through sensuality? Go ^rust so a ^ing a good Go, b^take you to so
^nhappy a s^are: G^, tie your contentments to ^o sl^ppery a knot. What else
will happen unto you, bu^ to court a fantasy which loos^ing your hold, will
leave you nothing but the sorrow of your illusions? H. Court.

Blush.
AS she s^ake that word, her cheeks in ^ed Letters writ more then her tongue
did speak.

As the wonder strove to make her pale, warm love did fortify her cheeks wi^h
guilty blushes.

-- At whose presence a fr^sh vermilion dye bestowed a new complexion on her.

Company.
HIs pleasing company did beguile the times haste, and shortened the ways
length.

Why will you give me with so sparing a hand, the riches of your presence?

Constancy.
She -- whose constancy neither time nor absence, (the mothes of affection)
nor, what is more, this my change in fortune, could alter.

-- He, who signed his faith with the seal of his constancy.

Be but thou as constant a friend to my mind, as thou shall be a true possessor
of my heart, and I shall have as just a cause of joy, as thou no cause of doubt.

Though the surging sea has moved the humors of my body, yet it has not power
to change the inclinations of my mind; for I love you no less at Antwerpe
(where I am arrived) then I did at London, etc.

He continued always constant, like the Needle of a Sea-compass in a storm.

Constancy is the foundation of virtue. Bac.

Fortune is lik Proteus; if you persist, she returns to her true shape. Bacon.

Comparisons.
THis comfort in danger was but like the honey that Sampson found in the Lions
jaws, or like lightning in a foggy night.

R^solved he was not to touch the forbidden fruit, nor to drink on Circes cup;
he would not with the Spider suck poison out of a fair flower

In the greenest grass is the greatest Serpent: ^n the clearest water the
ugliest Toad; In the most curious Sepulcher are enclosed rotten bones: The
O^^^ich carries fair feathers, but rank flesh.

As there has been an unchaste Helen in Greece; so there has been also a chaste
Penelope; As there has been a prodigious Pasiphae: so has there been a godly
Theocrita.

Hipp^manes ceased to run when she had gotten the Goal: Hercules to labor when
he had obtained the victory: Mercury to pipe when he had cast Argus in a
slumber: Every action has his end.

Each book sent into the world, is like a Bark put to sea, and as liable to
censures, as the Bark is to ^oul weather. Herbert.

Like the City Mindus, whose Gates were so big, that the City might go out of
them.

-- Which like the flaming two edged waving sword of the Cherub cuts asunder on
all sides, whatsoever does oppose it. Cressy.

Li^e the stone that grows in the River of Curia, which the more it is cut,
the more it increases.

There is no iron but will be softened with the fire; So no, etc. --

As a fair flower nipt with the morning frost' hanging down his head, as much
sorry for his declining glory. --

When the Halcions hatch, the Sea is calm; and the Phoenix never spreads her
wings, but when the Sun shines on her nest: So --

Like the Spaniel which gnaws upon the chain that ties him; but sooner marres
his teeth, then procures liberty. --

Consider that the heavenly Sun disdains not to give light and shine upon the
smallest worm.

-- In this it is so evident that I will not light the Sun with a rush candle.

He commends unto us a golden chain of Christian perfections, consisting of
these links, Faith, Virtue, Patience, etc.

We can expect but Polyphemus courtesy, to be last devoured.

Romes Capitol was not built in one day; nor was Zeuxis Helena suddenly limn'd
forth with one pensill.

They have long sported in the blood and treasure of the land, as the Leviathan
does in the Waters.

His mind was all this while so fixed upon another devotion, that he no more
marked his friends discourse, then the child that has leave to play, marks the
last part of his lesson, or the diligent Pilot in a tempest attends the
unskilful words of a Passenger.

She trembled like the unlickt lamb newly yean'd upon a sheet of s^ow.

My expression is but like a picture drawn with a cole, wanting those lively
colors which a more skillful pen might give it.

It is the Decree of Heaven, That every Composition here beneath, as well
framed by the hand of Art, as fashioned by the help of Nature, should sustain
some imperfection; for glass has its lead, gold its dross, corn its chaff.
Helen her mole, the moon her spots, and the Sun its shade. Spa. Bawd.

(Like the Sun that illuminates the whole air, (if no cloud or solid opacous
body intervene) S. K.D.

-- Did make no more impressions on him, then. an Arrow on a rock of Adamant.

-- More impure then the stable of Augaeus. H.C As pensive as the night.

-- You, as cruel as the Duke of Muscovia, named Basilides, who commanded from
his subjects a tribute of Sweat and of Nightingals in the midst of Winter. H
Court.

If thou be as hot as the mount Aetna, feign thy self as cold as the hill
Caucasus: carry two faces in one hood.

As ingenious Cicero could pick gold out of Ennius's dung; so may --

His Fetters (like King Agrippa's golden chain) more became him then his
Imperial D^adem. Ka meka thee*

As liberal as the Sun which shines on all.

like Aesops Crow prankt up in borrowed feathers.

Descriptions.
-- HE was even ravished with contentment, in beholding th^se goodly P^^aces,
where was seen an admirable Consort of Art and Nature, so many H^lls, so well
furnished within; such rich hangings, such most exquisite pict^^es, such
marbles, such guildings, and without mountains, which make a natural Theater,
tapistred without Art to surpass all workmanship, forests, which seem born
with the world, hedges and knots curiously cut, Alleys and Mazes, where both
eyes and feet are lost, Rivers which creep along with silver purlings about
gardens enameld with most fragrant flowers, caverns replenished with a sacred
horror, grotts and fountains, which gently gliding, contend with the warble of
birds, and so many other spectacles, which at first sight astonished spirits and
never satiate. H.C.

-- There were Hills which garnished their proud heights with tree^s, humble
valleys, whose low estate seemed comforted with refreshing of silver rivers,
meadows e^ameld with all sorts of eye-pleasing flowers, thickets, which being
lined with most pleasant shade, were witnessed so too, by the cheerful
disposition of many well-tuned birds, each pasture stored with sheep, feeding
with sober security, while the pretty lambs, with bleating oratory, craved the
dams comfort; Here a Shepherds Boy piping, as though he should never be old,
there a young She^^^^rdesse knitting, and withal singing, and her hands kept
time to her voices music, a show as it were of an accompaniable solitariness,
and of a civil wildeness.

-- Neither are the gardens to be omitted, which for their largeness have the
face of a forest, for their variety, of a Paradise; Here Cypres Groves, there
walks with Statues; Here a Sea of fountains, there Swans, Ostri^hes, and other
recreative creatures. Mer. Ital.

-- It is a place which now humbling it self in fallowed plains, ^ow prou^ in
wel-husbanded hills, marries barren woods to cultivated valleys, and joins neat
gardens to delicious fountains, etc.

Death.
DEath is that inconsiderable atome of time that divides the body from the
soul, etc.

Scaliger defines Death to be the Cessation of the souls functions.

When Hadrian asked Secundus what Death was, he answered in these several
truths; It is a sleep eternal, the bodies dissolution, the rich man's fear, the
poor man's wish, an event inevitable, an uncertain journey, a thief that steals
away man, sleeps father, life's flight, the departure of the living, and the
resolution of all. Feltham.

Death had no sooner absented him from her eyes but forgetfulness drew him out
of her heart.

When we once come in sight of the port of Death, to which all winds drive us;
and when by letting fall that fatal Anchor, which can never be weighed again,
the Navigation of this life takes end: Then it is, I say, that our own
cogitations (those sad and severe cogitations formerly beaten from us by our
health and felicity) return again and pay us to the uttermost for all the
pleasing passages of our lives past. Sir Wa. Rawl.

Death deprived me of my paradized bliss, and not only made my broken heart
the sad habitation of woe, but also turned my mind (which before was a kingdom
to me) into a hell of tormenting thoughts.

Torches made of Aromatique wood, cast out their odoriferous exhalations when
they are almost wasted: So the virtuous A. made all the good odors of her life
evaporate in the last instant of her death

Tha^ he is dead, -- As if she now scorned life, Death lends her cheeks his
paleness, and her eyes tell down their drops of silver to the earth, wishing
her tears might rain upon his grave, to make the gentle earth produce some
flower should bear his name and memory.

-- She (prostrated on the body of her Lover) sought in his eclipsed eyes and
dead lips, the remnant of her life.

I shall not be unwilling to suffer a jail-delivery of my soul from the prison
of my body, when I am called to it.

-- Delivered up to the immortality of another world. This deadly sha^t passing
through him, so wounded me, that I my self was arrived within few paces of the
land of darkness. In his silent marble, the best part of that small portion of
joy I had in the world* but all my hopes are entombed. Wats in Baa. Preface.

(Drawing near to the confines of Deaths kingdom*)

Death ^rees a man from misery, and wafts him to the haven of his happiness.
Her.

As soon as Death has played the Midwife to our second birth, our soul shall
then see all truths more freely* then our corporal eyes at our first birth see
all bodies and colors. Sir K.D.

Desire.
IF you desire that I make you a picture of the nature and perquisites of
Desire, I will tell you, It is a strange Country, whereunto the prodigal Child
sailed, when he forsook his Fathers house to undertake a banishment: a Country
where Corn is still in Grass; Vines in the Bud; Trees perpetually in Blossom,
and Birds always in the Shell; You neither see Corn, Fruit, nor any thing fully
shaped, all is there only in expectation: It is a Country full of Figures,
Phantosmes, Illusions and hopes, which are dreams without sleep. A Country
where the Inhabitants are never without Fevers, one is no sooner gone, but
another comes into its place. There dwells Covetousness, a great woman, meager,
lean, starven, having round about her, a huge swarm of winged boys, of which
some are altogether languishing, others cast her a thousand smiles, as she
passes along; upon herself she has an infinite number of Horse-leeches, which
suck upon her to the marrow. Time looks on her a far off, and never comes near
her, showing her an enchanted Looking-glass, wherein she sees a thousand and a
thousand false colors, which amuse her, and when she has sported enough, she
has nothing to dinner but smoke. Holy Court.

Albeit you can no ways quench the coals of Desire with forgetfulness, yet rake
them up in the ashes of modesty.

As Pharaoh longed to know his dream: so desired he to --

Desire (the nurse of perseverance) gave him wings to make the more speed.

Thus wishing my deserts still suitable to my desires, and my desires ever
pleasing to your deserts.

-- More ready in desire, then able in power to serve you.

-- Then which nothing could shoot righter at the mark of my desires.

-- And wish you, as full of good Fortune, as I am of desire.

She ^^a^d not (...) desires.

Desire is a wind, that against the tide can carry us m^rrily; with it, make us
fly. Feltham.

Desire so blew the fire of his new conceived rage, that --

Desert.
HOw much my sm^ll deserts are overballanced by your unspeakable goodn^ss?

-- You, whose desert pass^th my best endeavors of requi^all.

-- I^ flies to the sacred Al^ar of your immutable goodness, set off with all
the additions of greatness which nature or affection can throw upon unmatched
desert.

-- Thi^ is the hard fate my just merit has encountered.

-- It is a matter so far above my merits, that I (...) not think upon i^
without presumption.

Despair*
THe fire of mine affection was blown by the bellows of despair.

Despair of success was the hearse of his supposed idle thoughts.

Love wanting desire, makes the mind desperate, and fixed fancy ^er^ft of love,
turns into fury.

My Lords! I speak to minds too Noble to be stifled in the narrow con^in^s of
fear: follow your Prince, whose virtue the spite of Fortune, shall not wrack
into despair.

Whilst I wear a hand, commanded by a heart, that knows no fear, I shall not
despair of --

Displeasure.
Y^u^ displeasure is so contrary to my des^^t, and your w^rds so ^ar beyond all
expectations, that I have least abili^y, now I have m^st need, to speak in the
cause upon which my life depends.

What has your poor servant deserved to have his own misfortune loade^ with
your displeasure?

Eloquence.
ELoquence is a way of speech prevailing over th^se whom we design it prevail;
That is, if we will take it in the short or Laconick way, a distilling our
notions into a quintessence, or forming all our thoughts in a Cone and smiting
with the point, etc. Mr. Hall in his Epistle before Longinus.

-- A man, who (filling the sails of Eloquence) as easily moved his auditors,
as winds do the sands of Lybia, which stir at their pleasure.

His Speech appeared in costly robes, adorned with lofty and glorious language,
sweetened by many a pleasant and clear Simile, quickened by diverse acute and
learned Criticismes; My Cabinet enshrineth no such treasure.

Though I have not eloquence enough to win, yet I hope to find language enough
to persuade.

He was dazzled with ^he brightness of her aspect; bu^ when she b^gan to unloose
her tongue, never was Siren so attractive with songs, as she with words.

-- It Is a speech wherein the abundance of supereminent conceits choakes not
the grace, nor does curiosity take any thing from the propriety there^f.

-- Your manner of speech is indeed Prin^^-like, flowing a^ from a fountain, and
yet streaming and branching it sel^ into Natures order, full of facility and
felicity, imitating none, and inimitable of any Bacon.

Your conceptions are inimitable, your language sweet and polite, your
Sentences are full of weight, your Arguments of force, and your Words glide
along like a River, and ever bear in them some slashes of lightning --

How greedily my ears did feed upon the sweet words she uttered.

Were not your affection stronger tied to the Orator then the Oratory, I should
not hope to persuade you that -- Her.

-- He, with a fearless fashion, thus bespake the audience. --

Every accent falls like a fresh jewel to increase her value.

-- His masculine eloquence was thought worthiest to enjoy the maidenhead of
the Cities attention. --

-- Forcibly won by the smooth artifice of speech --

It is no small dominion the imagination has in persuasions, insinuated by the
power of Eloquence. Bac.

You have truly found out the Philosophers st^ne; for every gross matter you
can convert into the gold of fine language

Eloqu^nce does commonly storm the mind of the Auditor, and at length take him
in.

Entertainment.
I want expression to give you the circumstance ^it^ what a ^owing l^ve, or
rather with what (...) de^o^ion, I entertain you. G^at. Ser.

-- Y^u much hon^r me; for ^ill this white (...) th^se walls were never proud
to enclose a ^^^st, ^he G^nius of my house is, by s^ great a pre^^^^e wak^d*
and glories to entertain you.

Could this roof ^e capable of ill, your only pre^^nce ( Lady) would convert
it* There is a virtuous magic in your eye, for wheresoever it casts a beam, it
does crea^es a g^odness.

I am much confound^d for this honor you do me, Madam, but yet I am more
ashamed ^o see you in a place, where virtue never entered but in your attndance.
Ariana.

Y'^re each of you a various banquet, where a breathing sweetness feasts the
sp^ctators, and diverts all thought of ea^ing to beholding, and from beholding
to enjoying. Am. War.

Your presence is restorative.

Friendship.
AS Passion has been well said to be Friendship run mad; So Friendship may be
properly styled Sober passion, as having all the spirit and cordiality of the
wine of Love, without the offensive fumes and vapors of it. Mr. Montagu in his
Misce^lenea

The love of men to women is a thing common, and of course; but the friendship
of man to man is infinite and immortal. Plato.

The words of a friend joined with true affection, give life to the heart, and
comfort to a care-oppressed mind. Chylo.

The mutual habitude of no intermiting-friendship between us, has strongly
confirmed --

(Receiving so dear witnesses of your friendship)

The resemblance of their beauties and of their wits, joined their souls
together, and soon after, that of their fortunes made this friendship perfect.
Ar.

(which your friendship rather finds, then I acknowledg^)

Hence gr^ws the height of friendship, when two similiary souls shall blend in
their commixions. Feltham.

As nothing unites more then a reciprocal exchange of affection: So there is
nothing hinders the knot of friendship more then then apparent neglect of
courtesies. Feltham.

Friendship a diligen^ Officer, takes care to see the bonds thereof fully
executed.

Frindship i^ the soul of humane society.

F^iendship is a pleasant sauce to any temporal happiness. Bacon.

The worst solitude is be destitute of sincere friendship.

Gift.
TRuly (Sir) I doubt whether is greater the poverty of the Gift, or the
boldness of the giver, who^e true respects have encouraged him to this small
expression of service.

I beseech you to excuse me, that this Present is not corr^spondent to your
merit.

Please to respect the enlarged heart of the giver, more then the quality of
the gift; Since the meanness of this, can only serve to express the
well-meaning of the other.

Hypocrisy.
DO not we know that Hypocrisy is the same the same thing to virtue, which
painting is to Faces, and that it is the very moath which devours sanctity.

What does not a plaistered sanctity for the subversion of the simple? What
does not a bad servant when once he possesses the easy nature of his Master?

Inconstancy.
INconstancy is properly a levity and an irresolution of mind, which shows it
self in his manners, actions and words, who is touched with it. To say truth,
this passion is a Devil that inhabits in a land of Quicksilver, where
Earthquakes are al^ost perpetual, winds blow on each side, and blowing, make
many weather-cocks turn to and fro and every moment change posture. In this
place a^ admirable creature is to be seen, who is not what she is, and is that
she is not, so many faces and figures she has: She likewise is still upon
transformations, and seems to do nothing at all, but to make and unmake
herself. One while she is great, another while little; one while gross, another
while sl^nder; one while affable, anoth^r while harsh; one while serious,
another while gamesome, but ever slippery; and if you lay hold of her, you
catch nothing. She goes forth of her lodging to appear in public, as if she
came into a Theater, clothed one while in changeable Taffata, another while
with different pieces, set together out of a singular fantastic addleness of
wit. She alone represents all personages, talks with all kind of voices, and
in all manner of languages, etc. H. Court.

Have.
(BEing born away with the hasty Tide of smallest leisure*)

-- Going with a pace not so much too fast for her body, as slow for her mind.

With such have (as if her ears hunted for words) desired to know. --

Hope.
HOpe is the gate of a great Palace replenished with riches. It is in my
opinion the place which Tertullian terms, The Porteress of Nature. It has two
arms, with which it endeavors to pursue and embrac^ objects, whereof the one
is called Desire, and ^he the other Belief to be able to obtain what one
desires, etc. H. Court.

The Babylon of worldly hopes shows it self in the beginning, as a miracle; but
if we proceed further, we find those desires, that were as pleasing as the
dawning of the day (which at its first springing ^appeares all over studded
with Emeralds and Rubies) turn at last, and are changed into the horrors of a
sad tempest.

Humane life has not a surer friend, nor many times a greater enemy, then
Hope. It Is the miserable man's God, which in the had^st gripe of calamity, never
fails to yield him beams of c^mf^^t. It is the presumpt^^us man's Devil, which
leads him a while in a smo^th way, and then makes him break his neck o^ the
sudden. Hope is to man as a bladder to a learning swimmer, etc. Feltham

-- The sight whereof made Hope (the Harbinger of happiness) to breath in her
this pleasing c^mfort.

Sweet, I see is the hope that springs in the bud, but most s^rrowfull I find
is the hap that decays in the blossom.

Our teeming hopes will ever be delivered of a gracious birth.

-- She whose weaker Bow^ls were straight full with the least liquor of hope.

Hope is but the dream of a man awake.
You have blasted the harvest of my hopes.
Jealousy.
Jealousy is a disease of the mind, proceeding from a fear which a man has,
that that thing is communicated to another, which he would not have common, but
private to himself: it is also bred of that love which will not suffer a partner
in the thing beloved.

Thereupon a furious jealousy, as if it had been breathed from hell, began to
lay hold on this gentle spirit, all the objects of what was past returned to
thicken this black-vapour, to frame a cloud thereof, and resolve it into a
storm. H.C.

What is it that you should thus conceal from me? Be my ears unworthy, or my
tongue suspected?

Love, as it is Divine with loyalty: so is it Hell, with jealousy.

There can be no greater Tyranny then jealousy whereby a man continually
murders himself living.

All his actions began to be translated into the language of suspicion.

Jealousy is a Gin that we set to catch Serpents, which, as soon as we have
caught them, sting us. Feltham.

Jealousy is the Canker of Wedlock.

Jealousy continually studies the Anatomy of hearts, and shows great severity
to the least defective part. Montagu.

He is as jealous as a Turkey.

Ingratitude.
INgratitude chalenges revenge by Custom, and is a vice most hateful before
God and Man.

Ingratitude deserves, that all the elements with their best forces, should
conspire in its avengement.

An unthankful man is compared to a vessel ul of holes.

Joy.
JOy triumphed in his eyes* and comfort lodged in his heart, and in this haven of
happiness he would have swimmed still, but that --

Joys had their fresh supplies, as if some golden dream had imparadised their
thoughts with some glorious vision.

-- Lifted up from a Hell of grief to a Heaven of joy.

Through how many restless nights, and less restless thoughts do we ^ncounter
these sweet-bitter joys: And as the more we grasp the water into our hands, the
loss we hold: So is content the farther from us, the more we seek it in these
fading glories of the world; which, like an Ignis Fatuus, first light us
through wild untrodden paths unto th^^selves, then through vast aeiry
thoughts they lead u^ up to that precipice, from whence we fall, and th^^e they
leave us. Her.

-- This Charm reduced his passion to that contentment, brought his hopes to
that height, and placed his soul in a heaven of such divine pleasures, that he
was even ready to expire in this pleasing Ecstasy.

O what a source of joy did then overflow her breast, that treasury of chaste
delights!

The Sun never met the Summer with more joy.

Letters.
LEtters are the very thoughts of the heart, but once removed, where all the
scapes of nature or breeding are most like to harbor. Rey. of Cab.

These Paper presents are but weak reflections of stronger affections, yet
being the best sacrifice of a friend, they deserve the higher place in your
esteem.

Letters are the sweet communication of fancy, which have been always esteemed
the best fuel of affection, and the very marrow of friendship.

Absence entertained by Letters full of confidence, is not always without its
profit; for the foul by the memory tastes what it has taken in by the
understanding, and gives it self more leisure to recogitate its pleasure, which
is not so well perceived, when presence drencheth the mind in a deluge of
contentments, and gives it not leisure to bethink it self. H.C.

If I write a Letter, I imagine Love gives me the pen, that I dip it in my
tears, that the paper is all over filled with flowers of affection, and that I
send my thoughts and sighs, as courtiers, to seek out the well beloved of my
heart. H.C.

You have prostituted my chaste and holy Letters, to the base adulteries of all
common eyes.

Words are the images of cogitations: Letters are the images of words.

I will not load your ears with those frivolous impertinencies, which would
swell this Letter beyond your patience.

An amorous Letter to a youthful heart, is a learned enchantment. The hooks of
such Characters are artificial pick-lock-tools, to open the secret b^lt of a
heart. To see a leaf written, is like seeing an Army in the field; every line
is a file of men Words give battle to the mind, and overcome it: For there is
no force more powerful, then that of words, to batter a mind. Stratonica.

Loquacity.
LOquacity is the Fistula of the mind, ever running, and almost incurable.

A talkative fellow is the unbrac'd drum, which beats a wise man out of his
wits.

Love.
LOve (in the interpretation of the envious) is sof^ness; in the wicked, good
men suspect it for lust; and in the good, some spiritual men have given it the
name o^ Charity: And these are but terms to this, which seems a more
considerate def^nition, That indefinite Love is Lust: and Lust when it is
determin^d to one, is Love. This definition ^oo, does but intrude it self on
what I was about to say, which is (and spoken with soberness, though like a
Layman) that Love is the most acceptable imposition of nature, the cause and
preservation of life, and the very healthfulness of the mind, as well as of
the body: But Lust (our raging fever) is more dangerous in Cities, then the
Calenture in ships. Sir William Davenant in his Preface to Gondibert,

Love (in the most obnoxious interpretation) is natures preparative to her
greatest works, which is the making of life. ibid.

Love in humane nature is both the source and center of all passion^; for not
only hope, f^ar and joy, but even anger and hatred rise first out of the spring
of love. Mr. Montagu.

To be in love, is the most intensive appropria^ion of all the powers of our
mind to one design. ibid.

Sensual love is the most fatal plague among all passions. It is not a simple
malady, but one composed of all the evils in the world; it has the shiverings
and heats of Fevers, the ach and prickings of the Meagrum, the rage of Teeth,
the stupe^action of the Vir^^go, the furies of Frenzy, the black vapors of the
Hypocondry, the disturbances of the Waking, the stupidities of the Lethargy,
the fits of the Falling Sickness, the faintness of the Tysick, the heavings of
the passions of the heart, the pangs of the Colic, the infections of the
Leprosy, the venom of Ulcers, the malignity of the Plague, the putrefaction of
the Gangrene, and all, which is ho^rible in nature. Holy Court.

Love! Care is thy Court, Tyranny thy Reign, Slaves thy Subjects, Folly thy
Attendance, Lust thy Law, Sin thy Service, and Repentance thy Wages.

Fear breeds Wit, Anger is the cradle of courage, Joy opens and enables the
Heart, Sorrow weakneth it; but love is engendered betwixt lust and idleness, his
companions are unquietness, longings, fond comforts, faint discomforts, hopes,
j^alousies, ungrounded rages, causeless yieldings; the highest end it aspires
to, is a little pleasure, with much pain before, and great repentance after.

At that time the flames of his chaste love, began to burn more forcible then
ever.

He loved her with a love, mingled with respect of merit and compassion of her
persecuted innocence.

To love is natural: not to love is monstrous. H.C.

Such was the unresistable force of his unlimitable affection, that in spite of
reason, he was enforced to do homage unto passion.

Her love was a rich rock of defense against all Syrene songs.

-- It received such an impression of that wonderful passion, which to be
defined is impossible, because no words reach to express the strange effects of
it, they only know it, who inwardly feel it, it is called Love.

He besought him not to make account of his speech, which if it had been over
passionate, yet was it to be born withal, because it proceeded out of an
affection much more vehement.

Humanity enjoins you to love me, seeing I hold my life an easy sacrifice to
enjoy you,

It is no pilgrimage to travel to your lips.

Worldly loves are the true Gardens of Adonis, where w^ can gather nothing but
trivial flowers, surrounded with many briars. Christian Diary.

A silent expression gives the pregnant'st testimony of a deep grounded
affection, where every look darts forth love.

Nothing shall have power to alien my love from you.

Let me draw from your look one blush of love, or line of fancy.

Let me become an abject in the eyes of fame, an object o^ contempt to the
world, if my faithful devotion and observance supply not all my defects.

I am he, who either you have great cause to love or no cause to hate.

She loved him as the pledge-bearer of her heart.

You -- toward whom I know not whether my love or admiration be greater.

Your affection has got a Lordship in my thoughts.

Love to a yielding heart is a King, but to a resisting, is a Tyrant.

(Sealing up all thoughts of love, under the image of her memory.)

The extreme bent of my affection compells me to --

Love in the heart is an exhalation in a cloud, it cannot continue idle there;
it daily forms a thousand imaginations, and brings forth a thousand cares, it
finds out an infinity of inventions to advance the good of the beloved, etc.
H.C.

Death may end my life, but not my love, which (as it is infinite) must be
immortal.

-- Him, whose love went beyond the bounds of conceit, much more of utterance,
that in her hands the balance of his life or death did stand.

Such a love as mine, wedded to virtue, can never be so adulterated by any
accident, no nor yet ravished by passion, as to bring forth a bastard
disobedience, whereof (my very conscience not being able to accuse my thoughts)
I come to clear my self.

The proportion of my love is infinite.

So perfect a thing my love is to you, as it suffers no question, so it seems
to receive injury by addition of any words unto it.

The more notable demonstrations you make of the love (so far beyond my desert)
with which it pleases you to make me happy, the more am I, even in course of
hu^anity, b^und to seek requitals witness.

-- (Having embarked my careful love in the ship of my desire) --

Good God! what sublimate is made in the lymbeck of Love.

His eyes were so eager in b^^^lding her, that they were like those of the
Bird, that ^atches her eggs with her looks. Stratonica.

He expected her at A. with so great impatience of love, that he would have
willingly hastened the course of the Sun, to measure it by his affections.

He, beholding her so accomplished, easily felt the glances shot from her eyes,
were rays from her* but arrows for his heart, from whence he could receive
naught but honorable wounds.

If you have as much confidence in me, as I have love toward you; --

Love is in effect, a force (pardon the exorbitancy of the word) that is
unresistable, so strong a war is that, which the appetite wageth against reason.

Then, then in the pride of your perfections you paradized me in the heaven of
your love.

The rare Idea that thus (through the applause of mine eye) has bewitched my
heart, is the beauteous image of your sweet self (pardon me if I presume, when
the extremity of love pricks me forward.) Faults that grow by affection ought
to be forgiven, because they come of constraint: Then ( Madam!) read with
favor, and censure with mercy; --

Why should not that, which is one, rest in unity? Bacon.

His bosom was the Cell, wherein I hid my secrets; his mouth was the Oracle,
whereby I directed my actions; As I could not be without his presence, so I
never would do any thing without his counsel.

When I am from you, I am dead till I be with you; when I am with you, I am not
satisfied, but would still be nearer you: united souls are not satisfied with
embraces. Rel. Med.

In the intercourse of affection, my love surmounts yours.

Fire comes out of the hardest Flint with a steel; oil out of the driest jet by
fire; love out of the stoniest heart by faith, by trust, by time. Eupheus.

I cannot but admire thy love, knowing from what height of virtue it proceeds:
as I will not envy thee thy death, so I wish a glory may await thy end, great
as the constancy that advanced thee to it. Her.

Two neighboring Lillies, whom rude winds disperse amongst restless dust, may
sooner meet upon their stacles again, and kiss each other in a second growth,
then we our loves renew.

Love is the good, which, by being diffused, is corrupted; she that loves one,
another and a third; takes in men at the coil, and loves only for her
pleasure. The object of true love is but one: From the Infancy of Time to her
decrepitude, the love between two has been held most honorable* Heroinae.

Our mutual minds thus combined, was like the Garden of Eden, wherein grew
more delights, then either Nature now affords, or Art can exp^ess.

Gra^ious is the face that promises nothing but love, and most celestial the
resolution that lives upon chastity.

She had a pure flame shot from heaven into her breast: from no other place
could so generous a mind be fired.

My love shall never end, but with my life.

There is nothing that belongs to us both, that can be divided: our wills
united make but one mind, which ruling all our actions, it seems we are in like
manner but one body. Ariana.

-- He was so rapt with these dear engagements, that the commotions of his
heart disturbed his mind, and stopped the freedom of his thoughts.

I must confess my self in prison, but it is a prison of love, where my desires,
my thoughts, my hopes, my joys, are chains. H.C.

Chaste love.] She changes the fire of Babylon into that of Jerusalem. Her
h^irs, which were the nets wherein so many captive souls did sigh under the
yoke of wan^^n love, are now (as the Ensigns and Standards of wicked Cupid)
tra^pled under the feet of the Conqueror. Those kisses, which carried the
poison of a luxurious passion in her heart, do now breath from her nothing but
the delicacies of chas^i^y. Her leasing od^urs, which before were vowed to
sensuality, are now become the sweetest exhalations from that Amber Isle, which
brings forth an odoriferous perfume. Entertainments for Lent.

My passion has for its object a thing too perfect to permit me a thought that
may be unworthy of the cause of it.

I like that love, which by a soft ascension, does degree it self in the soul.
Feltham.

Your presence is like Homers Nepenthe, that can banish the sadness of the mind.

The heart of a lover is a City, in which upon one and the same day are seen
sports and bankets, battles and funerals. Plutarch.

Who does not know, that love took away the senses of wise Solomon, and made
him violate the sacred law. Love moved Biblis to be enamoured on her own
brother Caunus, and Pasiphae to accompany with a Bull?

Love is like a pan of Charcoal, which meeting with the vvind, its contrary,
makes it turn more ardent, or like a rapid torrent, which justing against
adam, swells higher: so love meeting with opposition, grows hotter and
stronger. Dodona's Grove.

-- These two hearts; being dissolved into love, spoke in thoughts, not having
language enough to express their affection. H.C.

Since then I cannot retaliate your love, or retribute your favors, yet will
I receive them with a desire ^o pay.

The worthy St. Dionysius, in the book of Divine Attributes, distinguishes
three sorts of love, one is called circular, the other love in a right line,
and the third oblique.

Love (says an ancient Lover) has made a But of my heart, where, so soon as
it had shot all its arrows, it threw it self as an inflamed dart into the
bottom of my heart, to set me all on fire.

There is nothing comparable to the Martyrdom of love: It is an exhalation in a
cloud: It is a fire in a Mine, a torrent shut up in ditches; a night of
s^paration lasts ages, and all waxes old for it, but its desires.

The life of this young Hero, (which was ever hanging about the heart of his
Mistress, ever in the contemplation of her goodness, perpetually in the furnace
of love) wholy tranformed it self into his vvel-beloved, as one wax melted
into another, as a drop of water poured into a great vessel of Wine, as
incense wasted in flames. H. Court.

He said what a warm lover (when desire makes eloquent) could speak, he said
she was both Star and Pilot.

No birth or estate can challenge a prerogative in love.

The deep wound of his love, being rubbed afresh with -- began to bleed again.

Love is to the soul, that which vvings are to Birds, to carry us to its
fruition.

For want of well loving, we apply the most precious thing, which is love,
to gain wretched creatures, as if one used a golden hook to fish for frogs, and
a scepter to shake hay.

I Will always dwell with you like your shade.

I Will keep a Jubilee to your memory.

My eyes pay tribute where my heart pays love.

I will repay your love with usury.

(Love making in the field of his memory a muster of the virtues of that Lady.)

The man that applies not himself to some love, is like a body without life.

Love is the Wine of the soul.

Love is the greatest Philosopher in the world; He can transmute substances
without altering the accidents.

Man commended.
MAn is the pride of Heavens creation* (...) -- A man, whose life needs no
Advocate, whom detraction it self cannot mention without* addition of some
Epithetes of respect, to conclude him in a word no object for any evil
passion but envy; and a subject for no discourse, but what ends with
admiration.

It seems Nature from above had been dispatched as a brave Harbinger, to score
out a lodging for this great Soul, and give him a Body suitable to the vigor of
his Spirit (so well was it composed,) etc. H. Court.

-- What he is according to nature, a Master*piece, where many prerogatives
meet together, a Body composed of a mavelous Architecture, a Soul endowed
with --

He is the Orpheus, who with his looks only, without setting his hand to
the Lyre, enchants and ravishes the most savage of our Wilderness.

Aristotle (that Linceus of Nature) --

Nature was sent by God (as a gallant Harbinger) to compose a Body for him
suitable to his great Spirit.

He did with great nobleness and bounty (which virtues at that time had their
turns in his Nature) restore -- Lo. Bacon.

I find not any man, over whom he has not some advantage, nor any one life,
which (take it altogether) is so admirable as his. The Prince.

He is an Anthony in clemency, a Trajan in bounty* and another Augustus in
wisdom.

Though he exceeds not in those virtues which g^t admiration, as depth of
wisdom, height of courage, and the like, yet he is notable for those qualities
which stir affection, as truth of word, meekness, courtesy, mercifulness and
liberality.

He was Lord of great Revenues, to which his virtue not his fortune was his
Title; his mind was richly embroydered with all the studied ornaments of
learning, etc. -- Heroinae.

Bravest A! sooner shall the fathers bowels be silent at the sight of his long
unseen son, then posterity forget thy name.

-- Nor shall I rest content, till I bring one grain of incense more to that
great oblation, which I hope the Muses will offer ere long in public to his
memory, thereby to induce Historians, (those Goldsmiths of time) in their
elaborate rings, the Chronicles and Relations of these days, curiously to
enchase this choycer Diamond to the delight and benefit of succeeding ages. Of
Sir I.S.

The worth of worthiness has his whole Globe comprised in his breast.

The gallantry of his mind was plainly legible to every eye that was acquainted
with the characters of virtue.

-- In this man there were such great abilities of wit and understanding, that
into what Climate s^ever his nativity had cast him, he seemed to be able to
command of f^rtune. Bacon.

-- Men, wh^^e Sentiments are Maxims and Oracles to govern the worlds beliefs
and actions. Sir K.D.

-- So well was he studied in the Art of Dying, that by continual watchings,
fastings, prayers, and such like acts of Christian humiliation, his flesh was
rarefied into spirit, and the whole man so fitted for eternal glories, that he
was more then half in heaven, before Death brought his bloody (but triumphant)
Chariot to convey him thither,

His head did bear the Calender of age.

Every man is a vast and spacious Sea: His passions are the winds that swell
him in disturbant waves, etc. Feltham.

A good man is like the day, enlightening and warming all he shines on, and is
always raising upwards to a Region of more constant purity, then that wherein
it finds the object. The bad man is like the night, dark, obtruding fears, and
dimitting unwholesome vapouts upon all that rest beneath.

Envy her self could not detract from his worth; he was learned even to an
example, pious up to a proverb.

-- A person that in the Hurricans of great transactions is serenely pleased to
throw off the public person, and adopt into his tenderness and protection, all
that, unto which worth and letters may make a claim. Mr. Halls Epistle before
Longinus.

Of the K: and his letters intercepted. 1645.
AS a Man, see, but with what sagacity he writes, and with what judgment; see,
but what a clean sense he has of things, which does so overlook all his most
perplexed affairs, that they seem to blush they have no better difficulties.
See, but how far his wisdom looks into men's persons, which does so weigh them
and their actions with the grains and allowance of their unworthy servile ends,
that he seems not more to observe then prophecy. See, but what an even spirit
of Elegancy runs through every line, which beats and leaps as much in the
description of his saddest condition, as of his serenest fortune; Insomuch that
posterity will a little love his misery for her very clothing.

Then, as a Husband, do but observe how kind he is, and withal how chaste? how
full of warm expressions of love, and yet how far from wanton? Do but observe
how he vveighs his own health by his wives Standard, every line bears a Venus
in it, and yet no Doves; and he drives the trade of thoughts between the Q. and
him, with so much eagerness, and yet with so much innocence in all his letters,
as if he meant they should be intercepted.

As a Christian, see, but what a conscience he makes of oaths, esteeming them
(not according to the popular account) as if their ceremony made them the less
sacred, or (as too many use them in the world) as bracelets to their speech,
not (as they are indeed) as chains unto their souls; look but how he startles
at the name of Sacrilege, though never so commodious a sin, etc.

Last of all, as a King, see, but what a constant and true soul he bears to
Justice, which none of his sad infelicities can alter. A soul that would come
off true, were it put to Plato's trial, who said, That for a man to approve
himself a true just man indeed, His virtue must be spoyld of all her
ornaments. Key K. Cabinet.

So many excellent pens have written upon his brave acts, and made them so
well known to all the world, that it were to bring light into day, to go
about to mention them. H. Court.

He is the Pelops of wisdom, and Minos of all good government.

Who has not known or read of that prodigy of wit and fortune, Sir Wa. Ra. a
man unfortunate in nothing, but in the greatness of his wit and advancement,
whose eminent vvorth was such, both in domestic policy, foreign
expeditions and discoveries, in arts and literature, both practick and
contemplative, that it might seem at once to conquer both example and
imitation. Mr. Nath. Carpenter.

-- Man, who contracts in himself all the draughts and works of the Divine
hand, and epitomizeth the whole world in his perfections, and bears the most
animated Character of the living God. H.C.

He is a noble, generous, and vvell-manur'd youth, bears beauties ensigns in
his gracious looks, has that supreme Divinity in his eyes, as sparkleth flames
able to fire all hearts, and the superlative virtue of his mind transcends his
outvvard figure; he is wise, as most mature age, valiant in resolve, as fames
beloved child, reputaon, conjoyns the masculine graces of his soul with lovely
carriage and discreet dicourse, etc. Argalus and Parth.

-- I could say much more of his vvorth, without flattery, did I not fear the
imputation of presumption, and vvithall suspect, that it might befall these
papers of mine, (though the loss were little) as it did the pictures of Q.
Eliz. made by unskilful and common Painters, which by her own commandment
were knocked to pieces, and cast into the fire. For ill Artists, in setting out
the beauty of the external; and weak Writers, in describing the virtues of the
internal, do often leave to posterity of well-formed faces, a deformed memory;
and of the most perfect and Princely minds, a most defective representation.
Sir. Wa. Rawl. in Preface.

He was a man whose brave undaunted Spirit dignified his Family many stories
high in the estimate of Fame.

The excellent endowments of his soul, acknowledged even by Envy, and admired
by Truth, together with his known propension to goodness, invited me to --

I have been possessed with extreme wonder, when I consider the excellency of
those virtues and faculties in him, which the Philosophers call intellectual,
the capacity of his mind comprehending so many, and so great notions, the
faithfulsness of his memory, the swiftness of his apprehension, the penetrati^n
of hi^ judgment, the order and facility of his Eloc^tion. etc. Bacon.

-- He derived many streams from Sidney's great River into hi^ own Channels.

His Countenance (which by nature had no vulgar Air in it) grown lean by
affliction, expressed (in a pale disagreement of colors) that the harmony of
his individuum began its dissolution from the head.

Nature.
NAture is that Spirit or Divine Reason, which is the efficient cause of
natural works, etc.

-- You whom nature has made to be the Load-star of comfort, be not the rock
of shipwreck.

The errors in his nature were excused, by reason of the greenness of his youth.

Nature having done so much for him of nothing, as that it made him Lord of
something.

Nature is the mirror of Art.

-- They wrastled with the disadvantage of single nature, and at last threw it
into rule.

-- Then does Art appear perfect, when she can scarce be distinguished from
Nature it self, and again, nature is ever happy, because she always carries a
hidden Art in her own bosom. Longinus.

Silence and Secrecy.
SIlence is the fermentation of our thoughts. Bacon.

-- Assuring you in the faith of a friend, that you shall deposite it in the
deepest and darkest de^ of silence, never to come to light.

It is hard to be silent, etc. since nature has not made us like Crocodiles,
who are said to have eyes to weep, and not a tongue to complain.

I hope I shall find your ears faithful Treasurers.

I will cover it under the vail of silence.

Silence, in bashful signs, blushed out a dumb reply.

-- till when I lock these projects in the closet of your secrecy.

There followed so deep and unbroken a silence, that midnight seemed thunder,
it compa'rd to it.

Similitudes, see Comparisons, page 58. Sorrow.
SOrrow is a grief or heaviness for things which are done and past, it is the
^^ly friend to solitariness, enemy to company, and heir to desperation.

Though his attached tongue could pay no tribute to his dumb sorrow, yet did
his silent woes show his speaking grief.

O happy Portia! they dead sad woes are all buried in my long lived griefs; and
Hecuba's tears are all drowned in the sea of my sorrow.

Lymbecks were her eyes of tears, a furnace was her breast of scalding sighs,
a constant fever surpised her joints, yet with this did her sweet condition
enforce a smile, (and with this (mixed with a pearly tear) did she beg this
boon of, etc. -- Holy Court.

-- Whereat the ice of his heart dissolved, and began already to evaporate
through his eyes.

He endeavored to speak, but the more he strove, the more the sobs choked up
his words.

-- Assaulted with a furious squadron of remediless dolours.

(Drenched in a Sea of Sorrow. --

Love, jealousy, anger and sorrow divided his heart, and drew strange sighs
from him.

He bare the image of his sorrow in his dejected countenance.

He knew not how to answer her, but with the moist dew of his eyes, which began
to do the office of his lips.

She made the apple of her weeping eyes speak to him in continual prayers.

-- (after the Flood of her tears was grown to an ebb.)

-- After she had bathed the beauty of her eyes in the sorrow of her tears. --

My grief was at the highest before, and now like swelling Nilus it disdaineth
bounds.

That (washing anew her face in the balmy drops of her love-distilling tears)
she began. --

He banished both sleep and food, as enemies to his mourning, which passion
persuaded him was reasonable.

He opened his mouth, as a Floodgate for sorrow.

I had in the furnace of my agonies, this refreshing. --

The breath, almost formed into words, was again stopped by her, and turned into
sighs.

Let the tribute-offer of my tears procure --

-- It deserves of me a further degree of sorrow, then tears.

-- Finding by the pitiful oration of a languishing behavior, and the easily
deciphered-Character of a sorrowful face, that --

-- With a demeanor, where, in the book of beauty, there was nothing to be read
but sorrow, for kindeness was blotted out, and anger was never there.

Suffer not the weakness of sorrow, to conquer the strength of your virtues.

-- His soul drinking up woe with great draughts.

-- Her tears were like, when a few April drops are scattered by a gentle
Zephirus among fine colored flowers.

She painted out the lightsome colors of affection, shaded with the deepest
shadows of sorrow.

-- Suffering her sorrow to melt it self into an abundance of tears, and giving
grief a free dominion.

At length letting her tongue go (as dolourous thoughts guided it) she thus
(with lamentable demeanor) spoke, --

Will thou give my sorrows no truce?

Tears and sighs interrupt my speech, and force me to give my self over to
private sorrow.

Though ^y memory be a continued Record of much sorrow, yet among the many
stories grief hate engraven in me, there is none to be compared with the
disaster of --

-- This said, she wept the rest. But he not daunted at that majesty of sorrow
that sat enthroned in Crystal; nor at her words, that would ^^arm ^^e most
inhumane: but rather whet, then ^efin'd in passion, unloads his lust. -- Her.

-- She, in whom sorrow had swelled it self so high, that rather then break
out, it threatened to break her heart.

-- Appearing in his countenance a doleful Copy of what he would relate.

-- (Able to make an Adamant turn Niobe.

When I am b^reft of thee, in whom all my joys are so wealthily summed up, that
thy loss will make my life my greatest curse, then will I dye in honor, and
think it fitter for my fame, then linger out my life in sorrow. Her.

She was Empress of a mind, unconquered of sin or sorrovv.

It is not the tears of our eyes only, but of our friends also, that do exhaust
the current of our sorrows, which falling into many streams run more peaceably,
and are contented with a narrower channel.

She melts her heart in a sacred Limbeck of love, and distills it out by her
eyes.

They resented his loss with as many griefs, as his desert and their good
nature could produce in them. Arc.

To give over sorrovv I must of necessity give over remembering you, and that
can I not, but with my life.

-- To see her countenance (through which there shined a lovely majesty, even
to the captivating of admiring souls) now altered to a frightful paleness, and
the terrors of a ghastly look. Feltham.

-- These are calamities, which challenge the tribute of a bleeding eye.

-- Tell him I do inwardly dissolve into a dew of bleeding passion for his
loss, and would, to re-invest blessed quiet i^ his heart, act over the scene of
dangers I have passed since I knevv earliest manhood. Arg. and Parth.

-- I am past the thought of grief for this sad fact, and am griefs individual
substance.

-- She poured her self into tears without comfort, as her misery seemed devoid
of remedy.

-- Thy looks upon a sudden are become dismal, thy brow dull as Saturns issue,
thy lips are hung with black, as if thy tongue were to pronounce some
funeral.

Sorrow having closed up all the entries of thy mind.

He made a shady tree his pavillion, with intention to make forgetting sleep
comfort a sorrowful memory.

He gave such tokens of true felt sorrow, as no imagination could conceive
greater.

Compassion procured his eyes with tears to give testimony.

-- He departed, as if he had been the Coffin that carried himself away.

The river of your tears (if not stopped) will soon loose their fountain.

-- Pity my sorrows, which are only mine, because I am extremely yours.

-- Lost in my thoughts, I see my self wandering in various objects, and, for a
height in mysery, I walk in the night of a heart darkened with sadness.

The melancholy complexion of my mind encilnes to hold a sympathy with all
sorrow, that my senses communicate to me.

The remembrance of her former ingratitudes delivered over such feeling
arguments of her sad remorse, as were able to strike the water of tears out of
the stoniest hearts of her beholders: Like the Rod of Moses, which drove water
out of the Rock, etc. Sir To. Math.

-- A subject I confess so full of lamentation and horror, as would require
some Homer to express it, or rather the mind and pen of Heraclitus, to weep and
write together.

Suffer mine eyes to discourse my griefs.

You temporize with sorrow, mine is sincere.

-- Until mine eyes became the sad oblation of a fainting voice.

It is hard to describe with what affection her eyes, big with grief, brought
forth fears. The fair Lady in that Art resembled Aurora in travel of the day.
Her tears much exceeded the morning dew in beauty. Stratonica.

Speech.
SPeech is nothing else but an expression to another man of the images one has
within himself. Sir K. Digby.

Reason is as it were the soul of speech. Ba^on.

Lecture is the aliment of speech.

As houses without Doors are unprofitable: so are men that have no rule of
their speech.

-- The very Order of his speech seemed to be Disorderly: and his disorders
were ranged into a certain kind of order.

-- Though courted with all the blandishments and graces of speech, yet he
could not be persuaded.

Thoughts.
THought, generally is all the imaginations of ^ur brain, which being a
proposed object of the heart, makes it continually revolve, and work upon those
conceits.

Thoughts are but over-flowings of the mind and the tongue is but a servant of
the ^h^ught^.

Speech and Thought are two sisters, the youngest whereof is created, that the
eldest may be known. Philo.

The more I exercise my thoughts, the more they inc^ea^e the appetite of my
desires.

What a paradise of unspotted goodness his filthy though^s sought to defile?

-- (Thinking to set my muti^ous thoughts at peace.)

He made his thoughts more obligatory to her favors; and he fashioned his
favors more complementory to her fortunes.

My thoughts were winged with desire.

You (the Secretary of all my thoughts) --

Distill^ng my active thoughts in a continued study to serve you.

-- My hopes of honor, then which noth^ng but your fair self is so near unto
my thoughts.

She, conjured with this tyranny of complement, with as undistracted words as
could be pumpt from the deepest confusion of thoughts, makes her reply -- Her.

-- His word led by his thought, and followed by his deed.

I could wish you were secretary of my thoughts, or that there were a Crystal
casement in my breast, through which you might espy the inward motions and
palpitations of my heart, then would you be certified of the sincerity of this
protestation.

Pleasing, but too ambitious thoughts! whither do you lead me?

-- Give my long imprisoned thoughts leave to appear in words.

Let truth make up a part in the harmony of your noble thoughts.

Thus when my thoughts are at a stand, and can raise my present happiness no
higher, let me call to mind how --

-- Since you have tied your thoughts in so wilful a knot.

A tumultuous Army of thoughts shall strike up an Alarm to your repose. H.C.

Continually floating in a tempestuous Sea of thoughts, without either finding
bottom or shore.

And after I had run over all the pedigree of my thoughts, new thoughts
possessed me.

Weighing her resolutions by the counterpoise of his own youthful thoughts.

Using his own Bias to bowl near the Mistress of his own thoughts.

Words may be said to be a kind of body to thoughts. Montagu.

My thoughts supplied the place of sacrifices.

My very thoughts, I hope, are winged with innocence.

Vanity.
VAnity at this day opens all her gates to manif^st diverse men to the world,
who should otherwise be buried in obscurity. It makes some app^ar ^y the
luxurious excess of their apparel, as so many ^^le creatures, whose heads
(being high and costly dressed up) go to the market of idle love. Others by the
riches and pomps of the world, others by honors and dignities, others by the
spirit of industry, and others by deeds of arms and policy. Every one sets out
himself to be seen and esteemed in the world. It seems that life is made for
nothing, but to be showed, and that we should always live, for that which makes
us dye. Holy Court.

Virtue.
Virtue (like the clear heaven) is without C^ouds.

He ^^^^me ^er servant by the bonds, which virtue laid upon him.

Vertue^ (if his face be not a false witness) do apparel his mind.

-- Formed by nature and framed by education to the true exercise of virtue.

-- Minds, which neither absolutely climb the ^^^k of virtue, nor fre^ly sink
into the sea of vanity.

-- She, (in whose mind ve^tue governed with the scept^^ of knowledge.) --

-- She, to whose unstained virtue, it has been my unspeakable misery, that my
name should be become a blot. --

(Far engaged to the memory of your virtues.) --

Virtue is the tenure, by which we hold of heaven: without this we are but
Outlaws, that cannot claim protection. Feltham.

Virtue ha^h nothing to do with the vail of untruths to cover it.

Virtue is as the Geometrical Cube, on what side soever it is cast, it always
finds his Basis.

Virtue and grace ^un parallel with heaven.

Women Commended.
WOmen, being of one and the self same substance with man, are what man i^,
only so much more imperfect, as they are created the weaker vessel^.

-- She, whose virtue deserves to be consecrated with a pen of adamant in the
Temple of Eternity, since she is able to dazzle the eyes of the most hardy, to
fill the mouths of the most eloquent, and ravish the minds of those, who
admire no vulgar things. H.C.

A^k Sense what she is: Sense will tell us, Her face is the unclouded welkin in
the infancy of day; her eyes the Sun and Moon that sleep by turns, lest they
should leave the world in darkness: her tongue the harmony of Spheres and
Nature: her breasts heavens milkly way, spangled with azure stars: her arms
Castor and Pollux: her other parts because of ^ower function, are but the
Symmetry of all the beauties of her sex: she is too much first to have any
second, from the third, fourth and fifth form of women, from a million or all
of them, you may take some piece of her, not all, for she her self is the All.

Ask Reason what she is: Reason will tell you, she is her Directress, that she
keeps the elements at peace within us: our fire she confines to religious zeal,
and suffers it not to inflame either to lust or supersti^ion: our watery element
she has designed to quench unlawful flames, etc. --

Ask faith what she is: Faith will tell you, she has yours and mine, and an
hundred other souls in one soul, etc. -- Were there, or were there no night:
yet were she an everlasting day. Were there none bad: yet were she
unparalleledly good. Were there any or none to be compared to her: yet were
she superlative. All of her is an eaven proportion of extremes. Heroinae.

-- Those eyes more eloquent then all Rhetoric, that would raise an Anchoret
from his grave, and turn the Feind Fury, into the Cherubin Pity --

Those white and red Roses (which no rain, but what fell from those heavenly
eyes) could color or sweeten. Those lips that stain the rubies, and make the
roses blush, those lips that command the scarlet colored morn into a cloud to
hide his shame: That breath, which makes us all Chamaelions, should be waste
into unregarded sighs: Those breasts eternally chaste and white as the Aples:
those legs, columns of the fairest Parian ma^ble, columns that support this
monument of all pens, -- her skin, smooth as the face of youth, soft as a bed
of violets, white as the Queen of innocence, sweet as bean blossoms after rain,
etc.

-- She, shaking off those glorious loads of state, retired from the crowding
tumults of the Court, into a solitary and truly happy Country-condition, there
to spin out her thread of life ^^ her homely distaff, where we will leave her a
verier wonder, then the Phoenix in the desert, the alone paragon of all
peerless perfections. Her actions (so above the Criticism of my purblinde
judgment) I am not able to comprehend, much less contradict or controvert. --

You are the beauty of the world, the pride of all joys, the sweetest fruit of
best content, and the highest mark of true loves ambition.

To her alone, it appeared, that heaven with a hand rather prodigal then
liberal, would give what it had of most value in the rich treasury of nature
Stratonica.

Women are Angels, clad in flesh.

The Roman Story (big with variety of wonder) writes Lucretia the female glory.

She was natures fairest paper, not compounded of the rags of common mortality,
but so searsed and refined, that it could receive no impression, but that of
spotless innocence. -- Her.

Where'ere she comes, her presence makes perpetual day.

-- They discovered A. (the rich triumph of nature) and in her as much as the
world could boast of.

Her eyes inviting all eyes, her lips all lips, her face loves banquet, where
she riots in the most luxuriant feast of sense: -- She was the model of divine
perfection.

-- A flock of unspeakable virtues, laid up delightfully in that best builded
fold.

In this, a very good Orator might have a fair field to use eloquence.

Her eyes seemed a Temple, wherein love and beauty were married.

-- So many things united in perfection.

She has an easy melting lip, a speaking eye.

Venus compared to her was but a blowz.

As you are to me a Venus, and strike a warm flame in me, so you are Diana too,
and do infuse a chaste, religious coldness. Amorous war.

I stand before you like stubble before a burning glass, your eyes at every
glance convert me into flame.

Her voice was no less beautiful to his ears, then her goodliness was full of
harmony to his eyes.

Thy heavenly face is my Astronomy, thy sweet virtue, my sweet Philosophy.

You are the Diamond of the world, the chief work of natures workmanship. The
pattern of perfection, and the quintessence of worth.

Your fair forehead is a field where all my fancies fight, and every hair of
your head seems a strong chain that ties me.

You are the ornament of the earth, the vessel of all virtue.

-- With so gracious a countenance, as the goodness of her mind had long
exercised her unto.

-- She, whose many excellencies won as many hearts, as she had beholders,
nature making her beauty and shape, but the most fair Cabinet of a far fai^er
mind.

There Is music in her smiles.

A mart of beauties in her visage meet.

-- A woman in whom virtue was incorporated, goodness (which comes to others by
study) seemed hers by nature.

-- You (the type of my felicity) to whom all hearts, respects, hopes, fears
and homages are sacrificed.

-- Her countenance was too sweet, her speech too proper, her deportments too
candid, to cover so b^ack a mischief.

-- She took hearts captive, and made them do vassalage and homage to ^er will.

-- Where they found A. accompanied with other Ladies, amongst whom her
transcendent beauty and incomparable virtues, made her shine with as much
superiority, as a star of a g^eater magnitude exceeds in splendour the less^^
^^minaries of its own Sphere.

Her hair seemed to stand in competition with the beams of the Sun.

-- She, whose rare qualities, whose courteous behavior without curiosity;
whose comely f^ature, without fault; whose filed speech, without fraud, has
wrapped me in this misfortune. Eupheus.

Nature framed her to be the object of thoughts, The love of hearts, the
admiration of souls.

This is she, who is singularly privileged from heaven with beauties of body,
but incomparably heightened with gifts of the mind. Such is her learning, that
she transcends men in their best faculties.

She, -- this bright morning Star, always bears in the rays thereof, joy,
comfort, etc.

She was able to enthrall a^l hearts with so many supereminent excellencies, as
heaven had conferred upon her.

She had a strong and pleasing spirit, a s^lid piety, an a^akened wisdom, an
incomparable grace to gain ^earts to her devotion. H.C.

Nature in her promises nothing but goodness.

He could not sufficiently admire the vivacity of her spirit, the solidity of
her judgment, the equity ^f her counsels, and the happiness which ordinarily
accompanied her resolutions, H.C.

She gained hearts by sweetness, therein imitating the Sun, which neither
breaks Doors nor Windows to enter into houses; but penetrates very peaceably
with the benignity of his favorable b^ams.

The eye and tongue of this creature mutually divided his heart, at one and the
same instant love surprised him by the eyes and ears.

Endowed with an admirable grace and singular beauty, to serve even as an
Adamant to captivate hearts.

Fair as the Firmament, which we see enamelled with so many stars, that
resplendently shine, as Torches lightened before the Altars of the Omnipotent.

-- ^he who was the Adamant of all loves.

-- A Lady, whose eyes vvil make a Soldier melt, if ^e were composed of
marble, whose very smile has a magnetic force to draw up souls, whose voy^e
will charm a Satyr, and turn a man's prayer into ambition, make a Hermit run
to Hell, etc. Gr. Serve.

-- Whose exquisite beauty was so beautified with rarest virtues, that men
honored Nature as a God in her perfections, and held her more then a Woman in
her veru^s. Par. and Vienna.

-- She whose beauty was far fairer then the evening Star, and whose virtue
was more powerful (...) greatest C^nstellati^n.

The renown of her att^active virtues, and the virtue of her moving per^ections
ha^h so captivated my freest thoughts, that, wondering at her same, I am
wounded with fancy, and my desire is --

I would willingly here draw to the life the Portraiture of this Lady, if my
black Ink were not too unfit a color to set forth a celestial beauty.

You have far more perfections then years, and more inward excellence then
extern beauty, yet so beautiful, as few so fair, though none more virtuous.

She had a mind of excellent composition, a piercing wit void of ostentation,
high erected thoughts, seated in a heart of courtesy, an eloquence as sweet in
the uttering, as slow to come to the uttering, a behavior so noble, as gave a
Majesty to adversity. Arcadia.

-- She Is a Virgin happy in all endowments which a Poet could fancy in his
Mistress, being her self a School of goodness, where chaste maids may learn
(without the aids of foraign principles) by the example of her life and
pureness, to be (as she is) excellent. I but give you a bri^f Epitome of her
virtues, which dilated on at large, and to their merit, would make an ample
story.

Were all her other graces worn in clouds, That eye, that very eye would charm
a Lucrece.

Her name (like some celestial fire) quickens my spirits.

I never knew virtue and beauty meet in a sweeter nature.

Thou art a virgin sweet, so precious in thy frame, that with the cordage of
thy hair, thou might have fettered Kings. Thy voice has marred the beauties of
the night; when thou did^t sing, the quiet stars would wink and fall assee.

I could gaze on her, till my wonder did convert me into marble, and yet my
s^ul would in her self retain a fire, lively, as that which bold Prometheus
stole.

Madam! you are so large a Theme to treat of, and every grace about you off^rs
to me such Copy of language, that I stand doubtful which first to touch at;
if I err (as in my choice I may) let me entreat you, before I offend, to sign
my pa^d^n.

Whither we consider her face or beauty, pleasi^gness (that charms hearts) and
sweet majesty have spent all their riches upon her. Ariana.

She breathes forth nothing but the sweets of love

The eyes are the wonders of the face, and dark figures ^f Divinity; we may
call them too the Dials ^f love, which fastened on the wall of a countenance,
show with the style of their looks, the minutes of hours, either happy or
unhappy to Lovers.

Fame, which is accustomed to increase the desert of every thing it would
commend, has been constrained to diminish yours, being impossible to be
published according to the greatness of it.

It is a mark of great virtue not to be able to endure to be commended.

She was crowned with a garland of odoriferous flowers, and her delicate hair
in tresses, falling upon a neck of snow, did set forth the beauties of this
divine face, whose splendour dazzled men's eyes so, that there was not any one
that could support unwound^d the sight of so many wonders.

Lesser lights borrow beams of radiance from your great^r Orb, which does
illumine and heat our N^rt^ern cly^e with celestial ardors. Ho. Court.

Madam, if the duty (which commands me to serve all Ladies) did not ordain me
this obedience, your birth and so many ^air qualities I see in you, oblige me
to it. Ariana.

-- My eye of contemplation was fixed on this bright Sun, as long as it was
able to endure the radiant beams of it, whose redundant light ve^les the looker
on with a dark mist. Sir K.D.

I esteem, reverence and adore you in the most secret and recluse withdrawings
of my heart.

-- Her face did shine with so great evidence, as it defied the noontide Sun
in its greatest brightness.

Albeit Medea were wicked, yet Penelope was peerless; If Clytemnestra were
naught, yet Alcestes was passing good: If Phaedra were damnable, yet there was
another laudable. Camd. Rem.

-- She had the spirit of a man in a feminine body.

She Is a burning mirror, in which all the beams of beauty are united.

She is the Star, by whom my Fate is led.

-- Modest she was, and so lovely, that whosoever looked but steadfastly upon
her, could not but-soul himself in her. Feltham.

Her eyes, swift, as the shoots of lightning, nimbler then thought, and bright
as the polisht Diamond.

-- She is of so specious a glory, that though she need not the applause of
any, to add to her happiness, yet she attracts the hearts of all that know her,
to love, service, admiration.

To apparel any more in these paper vestments, I should multiply impertinents,
and perhaps displease. For I have ever found face commendation to dye wisdoms
cheeks of a blush-colour.

-- All lips are opened with singular prerogatives in honor of this Lady, and
are all dried up in the abundance of her praises.

In her person alone, a plenitude of all perfections does inhabit. H.C.

In her, all the most delicious attractives of beauty, and the most conspicuous
characters of power, are assembled together.

This Aglae was a Roman Dame of prime quality, having a delicate wit in a
beautiful body, and powerful passions in a great fortune. She had been
married, but becoming a widow in an age, as yet furnished with verdant
freshness, grace and beauty, she had not buried all her affections in the Tomb
of her husband.

After she had a little wiped away the first tears, which nature exacts as
tribute in such like accidents, she quickly played so much the Courtier in her
slight sorrow, that she seemed greatly to desire, as soon as might be, to
finish what she had never well begun. Holy Court.

But by success of time she felt her passion so much enkindled toward him,
that she neither thought, spoke, nor lived, but for him.

The fair Aretaphila inflames all hearts with the music of her voice; myriads
of joys are in her looks, her eyes are natures richest Diamonds, set in foils
of polisht Ebony, her breath expires Odors more sweet then issued from the
trees of Balm in Paradise, Argal. and Parth.

-- She -- upon whose meanest thought the Art of memory's grounded, and
inspires each Organ of our meditating sense with their perfections merit. Ibid.

She, in whom the sum and abridge of all sorts of excellencies are met, like
paralels in their proper center. Herb. Travails.

-- Whose listening ears were well pleased with the sweet harmony of her
well-tuned words, and whose liking eyes were ravished with the sight of her
perfections.

-- She -- the ornament of the earth, the model of heaven, the triumph of
Nature, the life of beauty, the Queen of love.

Her action was beautified by nature, and apparelled with skill; her gesture
gave such a way unto her speech, through the rugged wilderness of his
imaginations, that --

Her voice represented the heavenly seven-sphear'd harmony.

Such an extraordinary Majesty shines in all her actions, as surely either
Fortune by parentage, or Nature in creation has made her --

Pilgrims, who come from the remotest confines of the world, cannot see any
thing in all the affluent wealth thereof, comparable to her. Insomuch that I
wish all the members of my body were changed into tongue, and that I were
naught but voice, to be throughout the whole Universe, the trumpet of her
praises. H.C.

Her gracious soul has more Antidote in it, then all the world has poison,
which will therefore in her affliction make her like the Sun, which shows his
greatest countenance in his lowest declension, and bring her out of it, lik^
gold out of the fire, refined, not consumed. Lost. Sh.

My prayer shall be, That your Fortune may surmount your greatness, and your
virtue your fortune; that your greatness may be above envy, your goodness
above detraction: that your illustrious example may darken the ages past, and
lighten them to come; that you may live beloved, and die lamented, lamented by
earth, but joy'd by heaven, etc.

She suffered no mutiny of passions against reason, nor of reason against God.

She resolved to work with perspective Glasses, of d^fferent, yea and even
c^ntrary kinds; for when she described her own v^rtues, she served he^self^ of
a Diminishing Glass, which made them seem so little, as to be no more th^n a
kind of nothing, But on the other side, when she gave account of her
imperfections, she would by no means know them, by any other name then of Vices
and Sins, because she took a Multiplying glass to her self, lest else those
Mole-hils should not seem mountains. Sir Tob. Mat. in his preface to S.
Teresa's life.

You must give me leave to adjourn you (for more ample satisfaction of this
expectation) to those drops, which I may perhaps both be able and willing to
derive and draw out of the Sea of her perfections, etc. Ib.

I shall only say in very few words (by way (as it were) of antepast, till the
Feast come in) that she had a heart as open as day, in the exercise of bounty;
But above all things, she was so perfect a lover of Truth, that she would no
more have even so much as but disguised it, and much less varied from it in
the least kind, then she would have sold her self for a slave, etc. Ib.

I Will assure you this Elogium has no more in it, of the Panegyric, then of the
just praise; I am rather her debtor then her creditor herein.

She puts that in execution, which turns nature into admiration.

-- She, whose two eyes were the Suns that ruled my day, and to whom only her
absence did make night; she whose mild virtue and beauteous looks, were a soft,
visible music, which entranced the lookers ^n, and struck harmonious raptures
into every chaft soul, and instilled pure fires into every unchaste, etc. Amor.
War.

A pretty smile made a kind of daybreak in her face.

She is wholly made of charm.

-- She is the star that rules my faculties.

Women discommended.
LOose Women are whoups, proud birds, which have nothing but crest, and
naturally delight in ordure; they are Bats which cannot endure one little ray
of light, but seek to hide themselves under the mantle of night; they are
Horseleeches, which draw blood from the veins of a House and State, where they
exercise their power. They are Sirens of the earth, which cause shipwracks
without water. They are Lamiae, who have Hosteries of cutthroats, that kill
men under pretext of good usage. They are Harpies, who surprise even from
Altars, and in the end become envenomed Dipsades, which enforce an enraged
thirst upon those, whom they have once bitten. Ho. Court.

A woman without devotion is like a Be without a sting, which will make
neither honey nor wax; is a case covered with precious stones, to preserve a
dunghill.

The tongues of women are like the bells of the Forest Dodona, which make a
prodigious jangling*

O God! What a dangerous beast is the spirit of a woman! It is able to create
as many monsters in essence, as fantasy can form in painting.

No Owl will live in Creet: In Rhodes no Eagle will build her nest* no wit
spring in the will of women.

It is an infinite simplicity to commit secrets to a woman, whose heart is as
fit to keep what it out to conceal, as a Sieve to hold water.

-- As well may I collect the scattered wind into a bag, or from the watery
surface scrape the guilt reflections of the Sun, as bring her heart within the
quiet list of wives that will obey and love.

Incestuous strumpet! more wanton then Lamia, more lascivious then Lais, and
more shameless th^n Pasophane; whose life as it has been shadowed with painted
holiness, so has it been full of pestilent villainies.

Her Carcass (a better name I can hardly afford her outside) was the inside of
a Sepulcher, her head was unth^cht as an old Parsonage, her eyes (like lights
at the last snuff, when the extinguisher is ready to make their Epitaphs) sunk
low into their Candlesticks; her ears, now deaf, now happy, (such was her
tongue) they have lost their sense, her nose worm'd like a piece of Homer of
the first bind, offended with her breath, bowed to her chin to dam it up; her
cheeks hol'd, as the earth in Dog*days drowth; her lips fit to be kissed by none
but themselves; her teeth rotten as her soul, hollow as her heart, loose as the
shingles of an old silenced steeple, scragged as a disparked pale, stood at
that distance one could not bite another; her tongue, so weakly guarded, scolds
like the Alarm of a clock; her chin was down'd with a China beard of twenty
hairs, her breast lank as a quicksand, wasted as an hourglasse at the eleventh
use; one arm, one leg, one foot she doff'd with day, and, as a resurrection,
don'd with the morrow; her bones (pithless as a stallion for seven posterities)
the slightest fears might now make rattle in her skin; her body (wasted to no
waist, blasted with lust, as an Oak with lightning) was as familiar with
diseases as a Physician: To conclude, she is odious beyond all comparison: one
sight of her would make the heat of youth recoyl into an infant continence.
Heroinae.

The look of a lascivious woman is like that of a Basili^k, which kills Chastity
by beholding it.

Diogenes snarled bitterly, when (walking with another) he spyed two women
talking, and said, See, the Viper and the Asp are changing poison. Feltham.

No Weathercock under heaven is so variable as an inconstant woman: Every
breath of wind forces her to a various shape: As if her mind were so near a kin
to air, as it must with every motion, be in a perpetual change. Idem.

Women are feathers blown in the bluster of their own loose passions, and are
merely the dalliance of the flying winds.

There are that account women only as Seedplots for posterity: others worse,
as only quench for their fires.

Our daily experience teaches us, that there are women very crafty, and such
as under a pure and delicate skin, with a tongue distilling honey, often hide
the heart of a Panther, all spotted over with subtilty, as the skin of this
beast with diversity of colors. H. Court.

-- Women are more inconstant then light Whirlwinds; trust the Sea with
feathers, or March winds with dust rather, and let their words, oaths, tears,
vows pass* as words in water writ or slippery glass. Arg. and Parth.

No Hell so low which lust and women cannot lead unto.

Her tongue is like the sting of a Scorpion.

A Woman is the unnecessary Parenthesis of Nature.

World.
THis word ( World) called in Greek (...) signifi^s as much as ornament, or a
well dispos^d order of things.

The exterior luster of the world, is but a cloud in painting, a petty vapor
of water, a Fable of Time, a Dial, etc.

He that will nowadays live in the world, must have a veil over his eyes, a
key on his ear, a compass on his lips.

This world is a chain, which setters men to the ^ivel^; but rep^ntance is the
hand which lifts (...) up to God.

He that is enamored of the world, is like one that enters into the sea; for if
he escape perils, men will say he is fortunate, but if he perish, they will say
he is wilfully deceived.

If it be needful to show your self to the world, (...) then known by your
virtues, which are Characters of the Divinity. Let men know you by your good
examples, which are the seeds of eternity, and of all fair actions. Sir B B.

I have ever thought the prosperity of the world was a current of ^resh water,
which looks not back on any thing, but hastens to pour it self into the salt
sea. H.C.

The world's a Theater of theft, great rivers rob the smaller brooks, and them
the Ocean.

Youth.
I Have thoroughly sifted the disposition of youth, wherein I have found more
bran then meal, more dough then leven, more rage then reason. Eup.

Wine, Love, Play, Rashness were the Chariot which drew his youth to downfall.

-- Constrained to obey the transport of youthful fancies.

Let me call to mind all the violent pleasures of my heady youth: let me sum up
their extent, according to those deceitful measures I then rated happiness by:
let me in my fancy chew over again the excessive good I then fondly imagined in
them: And to all this let me add as much more joy and felicity, as, in my weak
thoughts I am able to fadom, or but aim at; and then let me say, (and with
rigorous truth I shall say it) all this excess of bliss will be resumed, will
be enjoyed to the full in one indivisible moment, of that bliss, which a well
passed life in this world, shall bring me to in the next. Sir K.D. in his
Treatise of Bodies.

-- So as whosoever he be, to whom Fortune has been a servant, and the time
a friend, let him but take the account of his memory (for we have no other
keeper of our pleasures past) and truly examine what it has reserved either
of beauty or youth, or fore gone delights; what it has saved, that it might
last, of his dearest affection, or of vvhat-ever else the amorous springtime
gave his thoughts of contentment, then unvaluable; and he shall find that all
the Art, which his elder years have, can draw no other vapors out of these
dissolutions, then heavy, secret, and sad sighs.

He shall find nothing remaining but those sorrows which grow up after our
fast-springing youth, overtake it, when it is at a stand, and overtop it
utterly, when it begins to wither, etc. S. Walt. Rawl. in Preface.

The harvest of his sins yielded him now more increase of vvoes, then the lusts
of his youth afforded him pleasures.

Formulae Minores, OR, LITTLE FORMS For Style or Speech.
-- HE, having waded thus far into the depth of his awaked intentions, thought
good to sound the Foord at full, by --

He took opportunity by the forepart, and (imprisoning his worthy resolution
within the Closet of his secret thought^) did --

He summoned his wits together, and set them all on the Rack of Invention.

Violent streams being once run out, the mud will appear in the bottom

-- Doubt (the Hearse of my desires) --

To Seal the Deed of my purchased favor, is the Gordian knot I most wish to
unloose.

-- Who (during these tempestuous storms) lay at anchor in his own priv^t
harbor.

To weave the web of his own woe, and spin the thread of his own thraldom.

I vvish he would repair hither, that the sight of him might mitigate some
part of my martyrdom.

Assure your self I Will be your finger next your thumb.

He erected Trophies of his own dishonor, and covered his ulcer with a golden
veil.

-- Like Elia's Chariot, all flaming with glory.

O that the Odors of my Sacrifices might ascend even to thy Altars!

Your mind's a shop, where all good resolutions are forged.

Our understanding is the steel and our will the flint-stone: as soon as they
touch one another, we see the sparks of holy affection fly out.

-- It bloometh in the eyes, that it may at leisure blossom in the heart

That I may see some sparkles of hope glimmer in my affairs.

To gnaw the bridle of your impatience.

He felt fiery arrow^ fly from her eyes, so sharp, that they transfixed his
heart with compassion.

Love, anger, jealousy, suspicion, drew him with four horses.

-- As innocently spoken, as treacherously interpreted.

They murmured as do the waves of a mutinous Sea.

Exercise the vivacity of your wit.

In a vast Ocean of affairs, he has lived as fishes, who keep silence within
the loud noise of waves, and preserve their plump substance fresh in the
brackish waters.

He sheltred himself with subtilties, as a Hedge hog with his quils.

To behold, (as in the glass of a bright mirror) on the one side -- on the
other --

As soon as break of day drew the Curtain of Heaven --

Virginity is as redolent Balm, which ascends to Heaven in a perpetual
sacrifice.

Religion is the hive where the honey of good Doctrine is made.

He put them in the furnace of tribulation to purify them.

O what may not depraved love do, since sincere amity cannot avoid suspicion?

-- Comforted with the sweet rays of this bright daybreak.

-- Which has been sufficiently declared by the sequel of his deportments.

She had not so much honey, but withal a sting.

-- He so breathed the air of ambition, that --

To as little purpose as to cast chains into the Sea, to tie the Ocean in
fetters.

It was but dust he bare in his hands, blown away by the wind of presumpti^n.

She sent it as an earnest of her command.

-- He returned amply laden with victorious palms.

-- He went daily hunting after change, in the infinity of forbidden loves.

I shall offer my homage at your Altar.

Ponds that are seldom scoured, will easily gather mud; So --

Your heart is the Altar of love, and seat of friendship.

Upon my Virgin heart I Will build a flaming Altar to offer up a thankful
sacrifice for his return.

My heart shall know no other love but his.

Let Venus speed his plow.

He received it at her hands with more content then Paphos Queen did the golden
fruit.

Let patience conduct thee out of this stormy sea into a more quiet Port.

How can thou be a stranger to my purposes, that art the Treasurer of my
secrets?

That I may disperse those terrifying clouds, that threa^en shipwreck to my
desires.

To ^east his eyes, and to paradise his heart with the beloved sight of his
all-admired and affected mistress.

His muddy-clouded affection eclipsed the Sunshine of her far more glorious
worth.

Casting his eye (the Messenger of his heart) upon --

See not thou these Trophies erected in his honor, and his honor shining in
these Trophies?

In vain it is to water the plant, the root being perished: or to --

I here vow repay to the debt of my error, with the interest of all my
endeavors.

-- I will not adventure my fortune upon the rock of this hazard.

My business ( Lady) is your will; my suit, your service; your service, my
chief desire; and my desire, your favorable contenance.

Your suit shall not be non*suit.

They knit two hearts in one, and parted one will in two, and so departed.

During these Halcion days, --

^e ^ailed in a ship without a stern.

Happy in my self, because happy in you.

-- Sailing with as many contrary thoughts, as E^lus sent out winds upon the
Trojan Fl^et.

He saw the cloud a far off, before the storm fell.

She (great with child with the expectation of her friends welfare) longed to
be delivered with the notice of his health.

I cannot use many words, where every word wounds me with a new careful
conceit, and every conceit kills me with a fearful doubt.

He set up the main sail of his obscured glory, in the wind of her mill.

Who (smoothing the angry furrows of his discontment) seemed --

She gave fire to his fancy.

What ominous cloud shadows the brightness of this second Sun, that she
appears not in her all-admired glory.

-- His wasted words died in their own sound, and all his hopes were utterly
shipwrack'd.

-- She gave fuel to his enraged will, and blew the coals of his displeasure.

Her restraint is (I fear) like fire raked up in embers, that covertly will
kindle, and openly burst forth into a flame.

-- He (whose senses held now a Synod) was driven to such an exigent, that
(not knowing how to avoid the Check without a Mate) was perforce forced to --

My Fortunes admit of no such Sovereignty.

Who, swelling with irefull disdain (like the disturbed Ocean) breathed out
dire^ull rerenge.

-- He craved pardon till the infancy of his weak merit were grown stronger in
better deserts.

That I write to thee, may be thy glory, and that I love thee, let it be thy
happiness.

If thou will live like the King of Bees, seek h^ny at my hive.

-- Drowning the late flowing streams of his gotten glory in the full Sea of
his preterhand haps.

His unwished presence gave my tale a conclusion, before it had a beginning.

I would her injury could blot out mine affection, or mine affection could
forget her injury.

Reverence and desire did so divide him, that he did at one instant both blush
and quake.

-- Unsealing his long silent lips --

Happy in wanting little, because not desirous of much.

His countenance with silent eloquence, desired it modestly.

Beyond the degree of ridiculous.

-- But I fear I have given your ears too great a sur^et with the gross
discourse of that --

Restraint of liberty causes more increase of that evil, for which they are
so kept under, then otherwise: See whether a Dog grow not fiercer with tying.

There is nothing so certain as our continual incertainty.

While there is hope left, let not the weakness of sorrow, make the strength of
it languish.

More determinate to do, then skillful how-to*doe.

Under the leave of your better judgment, I must say thus much --

About the time that Candles begin to inherit the Suns office. --

So^times he thought one thing, sometimes another; but the more he thought the
more he knew not what to think, armies of objections rising against any
accepted opinion.

-- Actions worthy to be registered in the Rolls of Fame.

Occasions tried him, and all occasions were but steps for him to climb fame by.

-- To loose the reins to his own motions.

-- My self am witness against my self of my own imperfections, and
therefore will not defend them in me.

To a heart fully resolute, counsel is tedious, but reprehension is loathsome.

-- And thus have you heard my Comedy, acted by my self.

To you will I repair, because as my fortune either ebbs or flows, amends or
impairs, I may declare it unto you.

-- Time at one instant seeming both short and long, short in the pleasingness
in calling to mind, long in the stay of his desires.

He talked with such vehemence of passion, as though his heart would climb up
into his mouth to take his tongues office.

Upon what Briers the Fruits he labored for, grew.

Idleness is an Ant-heap of sins.

But alas, how can speech produce belief in him, whom sight cannot persuade?

I refuse not to make my life a sacrifice to your wrath.

Exercise your indignation upon me.

If your occasions can make use of my best endeavors, the employment shall be
a favor.

The have of the bearer, admits no further liberty to proceed.

Your desire is with me an absolute command.

Thus far re has your command and my duty led me.

There is no man can better witness it then my self, whose experience is
grounded upon trial.

I have left nothing unsaid, which enquiry could make me know, or your command
required of my duty.

Give me leave to digress a little.

I offer my weak and imperfect lines at the Altar of your favor.

-- Rapt with the wonder of your virtues.

-- Under the shadow of your favor.

Silent admiration was the sole Orator of my affection.

How much those lines (sweetened with your Character) have transported me, my
endearest thoughts cannot impart unto you.

Be it your goodness to believe me, I will sooner cease to live, then --

-- Him, who will hold himself unworthy of that life, which shall not be
employed to serve you.

Your zeal to goodness assures me.

No line can limit my love; no distance divide my heart.

-- she appeared an Adamant to my fancy.

As those easy errors (which too deservingly bred your distaste) may be
redeemed by a fuller surplusage of content.

Be it your piety to have mercy.

Thou bring herbs to Jarak. i. Coals to Newcastle.

Lines cannot blush; so as modesty admits a freedom to my pen, which would be
taxed immodesty being delivered by the tongue.

She made me (though most unworthy) the master of her desires, that was, and
still am, a servant to her will.

-- He (whose smallest sails of hope, the least winds did blow.) --

After he had stretched and tentred his wit, and set all possibilities on the
rack of his invention.

And longer may not I enjoy what I now possess, then you shall find my promises
full laden with rich performances.

And as I only breath by your favor, and live through your love; so will I
ever owe you sealty for the one, and still do you homage for the other.

He read her coffeehouse in the deep Characters of her face.

The angry Ocean swelled not, as he seemed to storm.

The Imperious Mistres of my enthralled heart.

To imprison in silence.

How great soever my business be, it shall wilingly yield to so noble a cause.

At that time (when he thought the ship of his good fortune sailed with a
prosperous wind toward the desired Port) a contrary chance raised up in this
calm Sea, such a tempestuous storm, that he feared a thousand times to see it
sunk.

-- She who till then seemed to be a miracle of beauty, did now appear to be a
monster of ugliness.

If you will raise me to that height of happiness.

They gave him the Parabien of his safe arrival.

Vouchsafe me your pardon for presuming, and your patience in accepting at my
hands this -- -- This partly (if the great arrerage of duty and thankfulness
which I ow you, do not challenge priority) has moved me to present --

I dare not give sail into the Ocean of your vast soul, which is capable of
all things from the highest to the lowest in perfection.

Like a man whose heart disdained all desires but one

Which authority (too great a sail for so small a Boat) did --

He made his eyes quick Messengers to his mind.

Betwixt her breasts (which sweetly rose up like two fair mountainers in the
pleasant vale of Tempe) ^ere hung --

At which the Clouds of my thoughts quite vanished.

Blushing like a fair morning in May.

Do you not see that this is a sallet of wormwood, while mine eyes feed upon
the Ambrosia of your beauty?

Here I make a full point of a hearty sigh.

This promise bound him Prentice.

He thought so much of, -- that all other matters were but digressions unto him.

(Not spoken by Ceremony, but by truth) --

I am too unfit a vessel, in whom so high thoughts should be engraven.

Thus was the riches of the time spent.

Despair is the bellows of my affection.

-- As if his motions were chained to her look.

-- Whose name was sweetened by your breath.

Most blessed paper, which shall kiss that hand, vvhereto all blessedness is
in nature a servant, do not --

(Beautifying her face with a sweet smile.)

-- Humbly besought her to keep her speech for a while within the paradise of
her mind.

If in my desire I wish, or in my hopes aspire, or in my imagination feign to
my self any thing --

-- With all the conjuring words vvhi^h desire could endite, and authority
utter.

(A new swarm of thoughts stinging her mind) --

Vouchsafe (only height of my hope) to --

I desire that my desire may be weighed in the balances of Honor, and let
Virtue hold them.

-- More or less according as the Ague of her passion, was either in the fit
or intermission.

His sports were such as carried riches of knowledge upon the stream of
delight.

Then she began to display the storehouse of her desires.

-- Perceiving the flood of her fury began to ebb, he thought it policy to take
the first of the tide, --

-- (Making vehement countenances the Ushers of his speech) began --

Hide my fault in your mercy.

I Will centinell your safety.

Your words to me are Acts, your promises are Deeds.

You wrap me up with wonder.

Can your belief lay hold on such a miracle?

Her mind (being an apt matter to receive what form his amplifying speeches
would lay upon it) danced so pretty a measure to his false music, that --

-- Clouded with passion --

Never did pen more quakingly perform his Office, never was paper more doubly
moistened with ink and tears, never words m^re slowly married together --

Fearing how to end, before he had re^ol^ed how to begin. --

-- Having the cold ashes of care cast upon the coals of his desire.

-- House. The seat Nature bestowed, but Art gave the building.

It was hard to say, whether pity of the one, or r^venge against the other,
held as then the sovereignty in his passions.

-- 'Twas a Magnes stone to his courage.

His arm no oftener gave blows, then the blows gave wounds, then the wounds gave
death.

-- Her hand (one of the chiefest of Cupids firebrands) --

By the foolish Idolatry of affection. --

(When the morning had won the field of darkness)

I Will sooner trust a Sinon.

It Is now about the noon of night.

(Too mean a Shrine for such a Relic.) --

-- Carried by the tide of his imaginations --

But when her breath broke the prison of her fair lips, and brought memory
(with his servant senses) to his natural office, then --

I pray God make my memory able to contain the treasure of this wise speech --

Her arms and her tongue (Rivals in kindness) embracing --

Whilst the Roses of his lips made a Flower of affection with the Lilies of her
hands.

Your will (directress of my destiny) is to me a Law, yea an Oracle.

She incorporated her hand with his.

Then (as after a great tempest) the sky of her countenance cleared.

As in a clear mirror of sincere good will, he saw a liv^ly picture of his own
gladness.

-- In my mind; as yet a Prentice in the painful mystery of passions, brought
me into a n^w traverse of my thoughts.

I have not language enough to fadom the d^pth of your virtues

I Will rear a Pyramid to your memory.

My want of power to satisfy so great a debt, makes me accuse my fortunes.

Such endearments will too much impoverish my gratitude.

How can I commit a sacrilege against the sweet Saint that lives in my inmost
Temple?

I am too weak a band to tie so heavenly a knot.

The greatness of the benefit goes beyond all measure of thanks.

While she spoke, the quintescence of each word distilled down into his
affected soul.

Departing, he bequeathed by a will of words, sealed with many kisses, a full
gift of all his love and life to --

Having with a pretty palenesse (which left milky lines upon her Rosy cheeks)
paid a little duty to humane fear. --

-- You, whom I have cause to hate, before I have means to know.

I will not die in debt to mine own duty.

-- She, in whom nature has accomplished so much, that --

Imagine, vouchsafe to imagine --

His fault found an easy pardon at the Tribunal he appealed to. --

O my Dear, --! said she, and then kissed him, as loath to leave so perfect a
sentence without a Comma.

-- Dearly purchasing the little ease of my body with the afflictions of my
mind.

I am not Oedipus enough to understand you.

All things lie level to your wishes.

They began to imp the wings of time, with the Feathers of several recreations.

-- When my wishes be at anchor in so secure a haven.

You are the Life and Being of what I only esteem happy.

(For the Heavens had made this the Rendezvous where his misfortunes should
meet)

-- It is a fit soil for praise to dwell upon.

Thus great with child to speak --

You (the secretary of all my thoughts)

-- Which (as the Pole Star) is ever in motion, but never sets.

-- This is no Benefice, but a Malefice, a golden snare, a Carcanet of Medaea,
a Trojan Horse, which will produce Arms --

He went like a Torrent, whither passion transported him, and where the blast,
of Ambition breathed.

-- More fruitful in strong imaginations, then Religious in choice of words,
and polished in periods.

Your words are full of cunning, your cunning of promises, your promises of
wind.

He is a Phaeton of pride.

I Will bosom what I think.

She was the object of his thoughts, the entertainment of his discourse, the
contentment of his heart.

My happiness being in the wane, or my misfortune growing toward the full.

From a Window he sent his soul unto me by his eyes --

I remain impossibilited to do otherwise then --

That so I may be raised from the ground of my misery to the heaven of my
desire.

-- Esteeming more this instant of glory which I enjoy in seeing you, then any
other happiness saving that which is eternal.

To deny me this favor, and give me my death, is one and the same thing,

To wander in the America and untravelled parts of truth.

He led our expectation into thoughts of great relief.

Whetting his tender wit upon the sandy stone of her edging importunity --

Let purpose be made servant to more apt opportunity.

-- Him, with whom compared, I am less then a shadow.

-- If I should expatiate upon this subject, I could not be held a flatterer,
but rather a Suffragan to Truth,

The only Quint-essence, that hitherto the Alchymie of wit could draw out of
--

-- But then, as though he had been suddenly ravished with divine afflation,
and struck into a transport, he swears --

We utterly conde^n and renounce (as Atalanta's Apple, which retards the Race)
that unseasonable and childish humor of accelerating early pledges of new
works. Bacon.

-- Rendered in an equal felicity of expression, to --

It comes in, but Ex obliquo --

-- He died ( Sicca morte) his own natural death.

-- Forcibly carried away (I know not by what Fate, against the bent of my own
Genius) to --

Fortune has somewhat of the nature of a woman, that if she be too much wooed,
she is the further off.

You out-shot me in my own Bow.

Many strange and absurd imaginations cam^ into his mind, and peopled his brain.

Pardon my rude expressions, extorted from me by the nature of the matter.

-- This is indeed a service, whereunto I acknowledge my self able to b^ing
more zeal and good affection, then any other abilities.

(Till these late years of frenzy) --

So we may both redime the fault passed, and with the same diligence provide
against future inconveniences.

That every one may understand, I seek not to balk any thing by silence, or to
cloud any thing by words. Bacon.

Your bounty (like a new Spring) has revived the Autumn of my years.

-- It took me up little more time, then Nature uses to bestow in the
production of a Mushrome, a day and a night --

-- When this succeeded not, I traveled in my mind over.

Thus like Noah's Dove, vvearying my self with flying up and down, and finding
no rest for the sole of my foot, I was at last forced to -- Cressy.

What a world of inavoidable inconveniences did presently throng into my
understanding!

To bury a Fly in a Sepulcher of Amber.

My desire to see, took away my sight, as it fares with those who are suddenly
taken with a killing beauty, or gaze upon the Sun, Herb. Travels.

-- I plead guilty to unworthiness, and all the imperfections you can throw
upon youth or have.

None can think so ill of me, as I do of my self, the rather that your pardon
may flow freely, and work a kind of miracle upon me, in raising my dead
thoughts to life.

-- Discovering my self nakedly, to my very thoughts.

Be pleased therefore with your natural benignity, to admit into your peaceful
solitude this --; a blessing which the Author (alas!) dares not promise to
himself, since by himself he is judged unworthy, and by others incapable of it.
Cressy.

I Will rather doubt an Oracle, then question what you deliver.

I will lead you through no more extravagancies, lest your entreated patience
turn into exotic passion. Herb. Trav.

You have endeavored to make A. the Foil, that should set off your
brightness, and yet you prove but the cloud that darkens his light.

To sail in the Aegean Sea. i. to be encumbered with difficulties.

He (being a man of an early, as well as an implacable malice) did --

A. was an Actor in that Tragedy, yet laid the blame on B. as the Cuckoo lays
her brood in other nests.

I will at length put an end to this tedious (but that it is so necessary) a
discourse --

This (if passion and interest do not interpose) will satisfy --

In the strength of this wel-meaning, and holy kind of Error, which he incurred
(if any error may well deserve so indulgent a name) he did --

-- Driven too too hastily on by the impulse of a kind of inordinate humility.
Sir. Tob. Mat. Preface.

This which I promise shall be performed (upon the price of being otherwise
accounted an Infidel) --

Let me thrive as my intents are honest.

When I compared that kind of descant with my plain song, I found --

Such who have been cast overboard from Grace, into the storm and tempest of a
sinful life, may yet, etc.

Intellectuals and morals, I count but as the simples of the soul.

-- To such (if any be) I heartily wish a procul it^.

In these times (wherein the Tongue and Press assume so luxurious a latitude)
--

He came (as the Italian says) a buona luna, in a good hour, or happy time.

A Cavallo a Cavallo. In post have.

Give me leave to fear (and I heartily wish, that it may be a causlesse and
mistaken fear) that such --

For divisions (I speak it with depth of sadness) he need not --

-- Taking this result of -- as an opiate to allay the fumes of all our
distempers. Montagu.

-- Carried away with the Whirlwind of Ambition --

It did (after the manner of the Tartars bow) shoot back from whence it came.
Bacon.

The amazed Sun hid his face behind a mask of clouds.

Be not too indulgent to your folly.

I cannot cloth my thoughts in better language.

The nights black mantle overspreads the sky.

Your language is more dubious then an Oracle.

-- Then, when the Morns fair cheek had not yet lost her tears.

Words are airy shades, they are deeds that please.

Your heart is not confederate with your tongue.

Night clad in black, mourns for the loss of day.

The face is the Index of the mind.

I am but coffin to my cares.

As not by my assent, so neither by my silence, must I have any hand in the
Midwifery of so monstrous productions.

I will out-toyl the day for your content.

I liftned for that string, and you have touched it -- (Affairs being drawn to
the very dregs of malice) --

They are divided to so high a rivalry, as --

By exquisite methods of cunning and cruelty, I must be compelled first to
follow the Funerals of my honor, and then be destroyed. Icon. Basil.

I am content so much of my heart should be discovered to the world, without
any of those dresses or popular captations, which some men use in their
Speeches and Expresses.

The highest tide of success set me not above a treaty, nor the lowest ebb
below a fight.

A little leven of new distaste, does commonly sour the whole lump of former
merits. Bacon Hen. 7.

These lines (the weak and feminine issue of my sick and distempered age) --
Bp. Londons Legacy.

But above all remember (and let this be still rivited in your thoughts) the
time --

A Christian man's care ought to begin and end in the circle of himself. Tu tibi
primus and ultimus.

Give me leave to unbreast the secrets of my thoughts to you.

He undertakes to correct Magnificat.

-- The Fates of whose House they seem with great affection to espouse, and
think with their bladders to buoy up his sinking ship. Nahash redivivus.

With unblushing importunity.

Sooner shall the Seas ebbing and flowing forsake the Moons course, then --

But (the better to enliven our discourse with examples)

My understanding's not so fraught with prejudice, nor acquainted with uncoth
evasions, as to --

-- The trees are widowed of their leaves.

-- That Ember-week-fa^e of thine.

Passed over, like great King Xerxes in a Sculler Thou bring straw to
Aphraim.

To doubt of -- is an effeminacy of belief.

Ex abundanti amoris, out of the surplusage of love.

-- Sucking her sweet breath, determined in himself there had been no life to a
Camelions, if he might be suffered to enjoy that food.

A little wealth shall suffice to put me in -- safeguard against the accidents
^f a necessitous life. (Surfeting in the pride of his (...) content)

If I satisfy you I satisfy my self, desiring the one, because I wish for
the other.

The promise is great, but the performance shall be no less.

His rudeness was interpreted plainness, though there be great difference
between them.

I will not leave a mark in my self of an unredeemable trespass.

I with as much confidence as necessity, fly to you, who have always had your
determinations bounded with equity.

The abortive issue of my wit. --

-- That moves not within the Zodiac of my expectation.

It has turned my cordials into corrasives.

-- Seeing the glory of this sun to obscure the lesser lamp of his reputation.

-- Which alone was the center of her felicity.

-- Sealed by your solemn protestation, which is the non ultra of assurance.

This is a syllogism of the fourth figure, absurd and ridiculous.

Get thee to bed, the casements of thine eyes are shut, imprisoning their dear
light.

Heaven has made your memory too humble thus to record your creatures service.

-- Protesting that the period of his obedience should be the end of his life.

-- Which the unseasonable sins of these seasons, make so seasonable.

-- Men, who leave the fountains of the living waters, and take themselves to
cisterns of their own digging.

I have by diligent search found ou^ Ariadne's thread, to wind you out of the
perplexed mazes of a subtle Daedalus.

-- Your eyes (though now perhaps dimmed with ignorance, or bloud-shorten with
passion) shall plainly discern --

-- He left the rude lump of his begun projects to be licked over with the
industry of --

I have sacred this offertory of my thoughts to you.

-- Persons, whom the conscience of their guilt hurries on to despair.

If the happy Demon of Ulysses direct not the wandering Planet of my wit within
the decent orb of wisdom (my stammering pen seeming far overgone with
superfluity of phrase) yet --

-- As delightful as the delays of parting Lovers. Gond.

Many months are now past, since my heart has increased the number of your
vassals. Strat.

I speak this, but en passant.

To finish the Sacrifice of your intemperate cruelty.

-- My pen has been redundant, as to due measure, but very scanty as to the
matter.

When corruption of manners had ravished away the worlds virginity, and turned
men from fervently devour in to a churlish and penurious tepidity; then was it.
--

Though your goodness rejects no emanation of a great affection, yet --

-- Which are the Passe-temps of your severest hours.

-- I had rather your virtue should blush, then my unthankfulness make me
ashamed. D. Tailor.

I^structions for writing and addressing LETTERS,
IN writing of Letters there may be four things regarded, the Invention; the
Fashion, or inditing (as we call it); the Handwriting, and the Orthography;
though the two first are most considerable.

Invention arises from your business, whereof there can be no Rules of more
c^rtainty, or precepts of better direction given, then conjecture may lay down
of the several occasions of all men's particular lives and vocations. But
sometimes men make business of kindness; As, I could not satisfy my self, till
I had discharged my remembrance, and charged my Letters with commendations to
you. My business is no other but to testify my love to you, and to put you in
mind of my willingness to do you any service: Or, have you leisure to descend
to the remembrance of that assurance you have long had in me; and upon your
next opportunity to make me happy with any employment, you shall assign me,
etc. or such like words, which go a begging for some meaning, and labor to be
delivered of the great Burden, Nothing.

When you have invented, if your business be matter, and not bare form, not
mere ceremony, but of some concern, Then you are to proceed to the ordering it,
and digesting the parts, which is sought out of two circumstances: One is the
understanding of the reasons to whom you write; the other is the coherence of
the matter; for men's capacity and delight, you are to weigh what will be
apprehended first with greatest attention and pleasure, what next regarded and
longed for especially, and what last will leave most satisfaction, and as it
were the sweetest relish and memorial of all that is past in his understanding
to whom you write.

For the consequence of sentences, you must see that every clause do as it were
give the cue to the other and seem to be bespoken ere it come, order and
coherence in writing being that fire of Prom^theus, without which all our works
would appear inanimate.

Now for Fashion, it consists in four qualities of your Style. The first is
Brevity; For Letters must not be Treatises or d^scourses, except it be amongst
learned men, and even amongst them there is a kind of thrift and saving of
words. You are therefore to examine the clearest passages of your
understanding, and through them to convey the sweetest and most significant
English words you can devise, that you may the easier teach them the readiest
way to another man's fancy, and to pen it fully, smoothly, and distinctly; so as
the Reader may not think a second view cast away upon your Letters. In effect,
the goodness of words is, as the foundation of all Eloquence; and he said well,
who compared them to garments, that were invented for necessity, yet did also
serve for ornament.

But though respect be a part after this, yet must I here remember it. If you
write to a person, with whose condition and humor you are well acquainted, you
may be the bolder to set a ^ask to his brain. If to your superior, you are
bound to measure in him three further points; First, your Interest in him;
secondly, his capacity of your Letters; thirdly, his leisure to peruse them.
For your interest, or favor with him, you are to be the shorter or longer,
more familiar or submiss, as he will afford you time. For his Capacity, you are
to be quainter, or fuller of those reaches or glances of wit or learning,
according to his comprehension; For his leisure, you are commanded to the
greater brevity, as his place is of greater discharges and cares. With your
betters, you are not to put Riddles of wit, by being too niggardly of your
words, nor to cause the trouble of making Breviats, by writing too copiously,
or wastingly.

Brevity is attained upon the matter, by avoiding idle complements, prefaces,
protestations, long Parentheses, supplications, wanton circuits of Figures, and
digressions, by composition, omitting conjunctions, Not only but also, the one
and the other, whereby it comes to pass, etc. and such like particles, that
have no great business in a serious Letter; By breaking off sentences; as
oftentimes a short journey is made long by many baits. But as Quintilian says,
There is a briefness of the parts sometimes, that makes the whole long; As, I
came to the stairs, I took a pair of Oars, they lanched out, rowed apace, I
landed at Westminster, I paid my Fare, went to the Parliament House, asked for
a Member, I was admitted. All this is, but I went to Westminster, and spoke
with my friend.

Under this Notion somewhat may be said of Periods, which ought not to be too
long, nor yet too short, QVO MAGIS VIRTUES, EO MAGIS MEDIETAS. All virtue
consists in a certain Geometrical mediocrity, equally distant from excess and
default. Some Writers have prescribed a Period not to exceed that length which
a man may well pronounce in a breath. There ought likewise to be a special
regard had to the cadence of the words, that the whole contexture of the Period
may yield a certain kind of harmony to the ear; for Longinus says, The true
sounds and tones of Periods may be compared to a great Feast made up of many
dishes,

The next property of Epistolary Style, is, Perspicuity, which is not seldom
endangered by the former quality. Brevity oftentimes by affectation of some
wit, or ostentation of some hidden terms of Art, is ill angled for; few words
darken speech, and so do too many; as well too much light hurts the eyes, as
too little; and a long Bill of Chancery confounds the understanding as much as
the shortest note. Therefore let not your letter be penned like an English
Statute, and be sure to avoid fungous words, and empty inflations; which may
best be done by considering your business, and distinctly understanding your
self; and this will be much furthered by examining your thoughts, and exposing
them as well to the light and judgment of your own outward senses, as to the
censure of other men's ears. It Is for want of this consideration that many good
Scholars speak but faltringly, like a rich man that for want of particular note
and difference, can bring you no ware readily out of his shop. By this means
talkative shallow men sometimes content the hearers more then the wise. But
this may find a speedier redress in writing, where all comes under the last
examination of the Eyes. First, mind it well, then pen it, then examine it,
then amend it, and you may be in the better hope of writing accurately.

Under this virtue may come Plainness, which is, not to be too curious in the
order; as to answer a Letter, as if you were to answer Interrogatories, To the
first, first, to the second, secondly; But in the method, to use as Ladies do
in their attire, a diligent kind of negligence; NON ENIM ELOQVENTIAM EX
ARTIFICIO, SED ARTIFICIVM EX ELOQVENTIA NATVM, says Cicero. And Longinus has
this excellent observation, That Art does then appear perfect, when she can
scarce be distinguished from Nature her self. And though with some men you are
not to jest, or practice capricio's of wit; yet the delivery of the most
weighty and important matter, may be carried with such an easy grace, as it
may tickle the fancy of the Reader, and yield a recreation to the Writer, as
Plato observes, lib. 6. de Legib.

There must be variety, but not excess of terms, as if you are to name store,
sometimes you may call it choice, sometimes plenty, sometimes copy, or
variety, But ever so, as the word that comes in. lieu, have no such difference
of meaning, as to put the sense in hazard to be mistaken.

You are not to cast a ring for the perfumed moding terms of the time; as to
acquiesce, to espouse an interest, to cajole, to incommode, to have a pique
against one, etc. but use them properly in their places, as others; matter and
substance being preferra^le before words or form: For as a modern French Author
says, the most excellent words without solidity of matter, are no more
considerable, then the burst of a Cannon without Ball, which makes a great
noise, but does no execution. Besides, a vain curiosity of words has so much
scandalized some Philosophers, that Seneca (in one of his Epistles) says, Had
it been possible to make himself understood by signs, he would rather serve
himself of them, then of discourse, to the end he might the ^etter avoid all
manner of affectation. Whereunto may pertinently be subjoyned those excellent
lines of Mr. Hobbs (in his answer to Sir Will. Davenants Preface) in these
words: As the sense we have of bodies, consists in-change and varity of
impression; so also does the sense of language in variety and changeable use of
words: I mean not in the affectation of words newly brought home from travel,
but in the new (and withal significant) translation to our purposes, of those
that be already received, and in far-fetched (but withal apt, instructive and
comely) similitudes.

There follows Life, which is the strength and sinews (as it were) of your
style, by pretty sayings, similitudes and conceits, allusions, some known
history or other Commonplace, such as are in the second book of Tully, de
Oratore. And (if we may credit Hermogenes) a moderate interlacing of verse
among prose, is not without its gentilesse.

But too great a mixture of other languages in your style, some (and those of
the more learned) have compared to a party colored coat, made up of several
pieces of stuff; others to Anacr^ons Swan, which had neither blood, flesh, nor
bone.

The fourth is Respect, to discern what befits your self, him to whom you
write, and the matter you treat of, which is a quality fit to conclude the
rest, because it does include the rest; and that must proceed from ripeness of
judgment, which (as an Author truly says) is gotten by four ways, by the gift
of God, by Nature, diligence, and conversation; serve the first well, and the
rest will serve you.

In the close of your letter you must by all means endeavor to come off
handsomely, by avoiding those trite and over-worn conclusions, Thus I rest, So I
remain, Thus I take my leave, and the like; and by taking rise from the next
precedent matter of your letter, make your subscription appendent thereto.

For the Handwriting, if you attain not to perfection, it ought at least to be
legible, and the matter fairly written, and truly pointed, with Comma (,) Colon
(:) Semicolon (;) Period (.) Parentheses ( Interrogation (?) and Admiration (!)
points, as the matter requires.

The last is the Orthography, or true writing of words, which (though not much
valued by some, yet) I hold a quality so incident to a good Penman, that he
cannot be said to be perfect in that faculty, without it; nor do I believe that
one of ten, even among Scholars, are well skild therein. And of this
Orthography, as it were too long to be here treated of, so may I happily give you
hereafter some observations thereupon.

LETTERS.
I. A Letter to revive Freindship in the Son, by remembrance of the Fathers
love.
SIR,
AS worth is not confined to place; so not the affection of friends to
presence: your excellent deserts command my respects where ever, your absence
draws these following salutes, as the testimonies of my esteems and
well-wishes. In your noble Father I lost a worthy friend, in you I find him
again: you no less inherit his goodness, then estate; this entitles me your
neighbor, that makes his loves lineall and sure; and as neither with decrease,
so both to the augmentation of my acknowledgements; The power of my friend is a
shelter and joy, his faithfulness my security, yet I love for worth,
not-profit. This name of Friendship I grant is spreadly appellative, but the
thing it self as rare in experience, as loud in vogue. Your fathers love I
enjoyed in calm times; I prove yours in the tempests of Fortune: My confidence
assures me he would not have faild the Test, my trial proves you do not; a
certainty that precludes doubt, and no less obliges my proportioned gratitude.
It were easy now (Sir) to say, were you under my Stars, I would be the same I
find you; I would so, nay should hate my self, did I feel but an inclination to
the contrary. Yet all this evinces no more, then what you please to believe;
Professions and Performances are not the same; what I would be, will not
surmount conjecture; your nobleness shows it self in effects irrefragable. I
know nothing can make me truly miserable, but my self; and as well I know and
feel in lowering times, how consolatory is the countenance of a real friend;
such your best self, to whom I shall always subsign my self

Sir, A most humble servant, D.W.

LETTER II.
SIR,
A Great Philosopher complained, that the Fabric of man's body was defective;
For (said he) Nature should have made a window in the Breast, by which we might
look into the bottom of his heart, to see, when he speaks, whether his words be
conform to the dictates of his heart, and whether that which we see without,
have an uniform relation to that within. Trust me (Sir) though I quarrel not
with Nature in this kind, yet I wish my Breast transparent, that you might see
in what deep characters your affection is engraven in my heart, and how really
I am (what you ^ave made me)

Sir, Your most faithful servant, T. B.

III. A Letter of Acknowledgement.
SIR,
I Have long studied an acknowledgment in some sort answerable to your many
favors, but Fortune has deal^ so sparingly with me, that ^ (who have most
desire) a^ least able to show my remerciaments otherwi^^, (...) a course paper
present; yet I wish I (...) some ^a^ing monument, that might (...) my
engagements, w^ereby (...) might know, that though I had no^ (...) to (...),
yet I had a heart to be thankful, which shall always pronounce me

Sir, Your most obliged friend and servant, T. B.

IV. Another.
THough my acquaintance with you, for time and conversation, has had the
misfortune to be but small: yet is my experience of your excellent worths both
full and satisfied, even to admiration. With some natures, I confess, much
salt is to be eaten, before judgment can be prudentially settled; Others like
the Sun, or Light, have power to blazon themselves in a moment: This excellency
seems to shine in your nobler constitution; and this commands my so sudden
esteem and affections. Sir, you have then a servant, but he wants power to
express how much he is so; If I say, all I am, is at your devotion, it is not
all I am ready to perform, because desire and readiness surpass in me my too
much limited abilities. You see then your creature and instrument expects but
your pleasure for operation, as far as he is apt, yet some offices he will
undertake uncommanded, (viz,) his daily oraisons for your good, chiefly that
which is sovereign; In which to make him more active, your consent and call,
shall be the welcom^st employment the world can lay upon him. Future occasions
may enlarge my expressions; I shall now content my self, that I have presumed
to salute you with these generals, wh^m I have devoted my self to honor in
all particulars. Now let me thank you for all received favors, for those
immerited regards that began my obligations and continue my gratitude; for your
late kind token, which was of multiplied value drawn from the sender^^lf these
find acceptance, and their presumption pardon, 'twill animate him hereafter not
to be silent, that shall live by being, if he may be (as he would)

Sir, Entirely yours, D.W.

V. A Letter to excuse silence.
Madam,
MY teeming hopes have been fed even with an assurance, that London should e're
this have been made happy with your presence, else I had not thus long hazarded
the loss of your good opinion by my silence; since I confess to owe a debt to
your goodness, which all the respect and service my poor abilities are able to
perform, can never thoroughly satisfy. I beg, at present, but a continuance of
your favors toward me; and (because I know you just) shall only expect them
hereafter according to the measure of my services, which I have faithfully
devoted to your best sell, in quality of,

Madam, Your virtues humble honourer, T. B.

VI. A Letter from a Gentleman banished the Lines of Communication, to a Lady
in London.
Madam,
IF I could decline the thought of a necessity of being here, and believe this
Banishment to be a voluntary retirement, I should account my self extremely
happy; for here we freely enjoy those felicities so much sought for in London,
the fresh air, and singing of the Nightingale; yet I must confess I begin to
be satiated with these solitary pleasures, not so suitable with my disposition,
as the conversation of my friends; and could willingly exchange the company of
Birds and Beasts, for the society of men. But, pardon me ( Madam) it was not my
intention to trouble you with what I do or suffer, or to wish you where I would
not be my self; but to beseech you to retain a memory of me, till I am restored
to the honor of kissing your hands, a happiness daily desired by

Madam, The humblest of your servants.

VII. A second Letter of salutation, upon the miscarriage of a former.
SIR,
I Have addressed my salutes before, but hear they miscarried. The labor to
repeat them is not burthensom, yet lest their loss might bring you into
susp^tion, that I was as silent as their miscarriage makes me seem, I add these
to try better fortune; in which, if more happy, they know their errand, to
present me and my loves to your devotion. If they stammer in the delivery, they
best e^press my self, whose expression (surcharged by your deserts) must
conceive more obligation, smother more affection, then I can utter. You can
mend both by the clearness of a candid interpretation, till both are able to
be more articulate and plain; None can better expound gratitude, then he who
most merits it. Sir, I forget not the delights of your ingenious conversations,
those sweet (but too short) moments of my contents. I remember your ready
favors, your real endearments, I remember all, and for all am thankful. Will
you have more? More then this you cannot, I am (what I am)

Very much yours. D.W.

VIII. An Answer to a Letter of kindness.
Most honored Cosen,
THe great measure of content I received at your being here, and since that,
the favor to be the unworthy object of your remembrance, makes me even proud
of my own happiness. The truth is, I wish no other heaven upon earth, then
always to enjoy your presence, that the influence of your many virtues may
create in me some kind of goodness. But since there must needs be a separation,
excuse it I beseech you if in this homely manner, I present you with the
service and best affection of him that is,

Most happy in your acknowledgment, T B.

IX. A passionate letter of affection.
Madam,
SInce that very hour, wherein Fortune made me happy in your knowledge, next
under God I neither have love, care, hope, nor contentment, but for you: The
day yields up all my thoughts, as a tribute to your memory, and the night
(which was made to arrest the agitations of Spirit) never removes the
remembrance of you from my heart; over which, as you have already gained an
absolute dominion, so shall it yield you a constant sacrifice of an affection
which shall be permanent, as the Being of

Madam, Your most devoted servant, T. B.

X. A Letter from a Commander in war to his Mistress.
Madam,
THough I have lately been brought even to the confines of Deaths Kingdom, yet
I retain so much strength, as to tell you I am alive; and must crawe leave to
renew that ^ protestation, which I have heretofore so often made, not to be
willing to live but for your service. The scars of war in some sort resemble
the wounds of love, since those which I received, have not at all diminished
the desire I had to serve my Religion, and these, which you gave me, have
increased that passion to honor you which reigns within my soul. My hand has
not strength eno^gh to write more, and its weakness may serve as a proof of my
affection, which shall be always greater then my power, as the effects of my
obedience shall ever be less, then my devotion to serve you, all days of my
life, in quality of

Madam, The dearest lover of your best self, T. B.

XI. A Consolatory Letter.
Noble Madam,
I Have received your gracious lines, of which I make a Jewel; because both in
themselves good, as also because I take them not to be common. For these are
the conditions, that upon most things set a value; But could those be wanting,
yet would they not want a high rate, had they no other virtue, then the coming
from you; If their kindness to me had bin accompanied with the characters of
your own more wished Fortunes, they had by far, been more contentfull: whereas
now, as they tell me, I have a friend, they at the same view add, she is far
less happy then I could wish her; Thus the same syllables make the same
thoughts at once, both hapless and fortunate. But, Madam, as the news general,
and your particular, share both in malignity, because both bad; so I hope yours
at least is at the worst, and by sequel upon amendment; and hopes of better is
always a fair point of good fortune, which to make more sure, you to your self
will not (I hope) be wanting. There was a Philosopher said, that each one is
the framer of his own Fate; and I am partly of his Sect, at least so far as I
believe no fate so bad, but it is in the power of the sufferer to make it (if
not good) better. And so Madam (I hope) will both your wisdom and virtue
endeavor; and this by solid grounds and ways, without which the rest will be
labor in vain. The task you have set me to this end (to wit) my prayers, I
both daily have, do, and will perform; and if a partner in misfortunes might
lessen the burden, as some have thought, I I cannot be without my part in
yours. Nor, were in my power, should your Ladyship be a moment without better
comforts. But I leave this sad strain till fitter opportunity, and rest,

Madam, Your Ladyships humble servant, D.W.

XII. A passionate Letter of affection.
My inestimable Jewel,
THe long continuance of all things (my infinite love to you excepted) does by
little and little decay them; but it is my pride, that each gray hair time adds
to the affection I bear you (which again I pronounce infinite) brings an
inclination to a second infinity, and remains the only excusable dotage now
extant, turning my present solitary life to one of much business; for always to
think of you I esteem my business, my faith, my every thing. Your constancy can
never find out a greater then mine; for it is a vast one, and shall outlast all
things about it; Therefore look that yours be as true marble, as you will
otherwise answer the utter undoing of

Madam, Your truly, truly, truly, constant servant.

XII. To a Landlord in behalf of his Tenants.
Most honored Sir,
TO move you to justice were in some sort to conclude you guilty of injustice,
and to request your pity in hehalf of your poor and long oppressed Tenants,
were to proclaim you hard-hearted against them; but experience tells me you are
free from both, and your own works pronounce your worth. Only thus much I am
bold to beg of you, that the false informations of A.B.C.D. and others of
broken credits, as well as Estates, may not take place against these bearers,
men of honor and good fortunes, and such as I dare presume will inform you of
nothing but truth. In confidence whereof I assume the liberty to subsubscribe
my self,

Sir, Your very humble servant.

XIV. A second Letter, upon a late acquaintance.
SIR,
AFter one Letter (long since sent) and often inquiries, I have, at last, had
the happiness to hear your safety and health. The Relator had an accidental
view of you, and I a real comfort. I was once made fortunate by opportunity to
enjoy your obliging conversation, and engaged by your noble endearments, but
this lost, almost as soon as gained; so vanishing the chief enjoyances of this
fickle life, so unlasting those contents we esteem most ingenious and innocent.
Sir, I have many ties to be yours, and not fewer misfortunes, that I may not be
so as much as I would. But this is a world of crosses, such as, though it has
pulled many down, yet has it set others up in the stead. And this must be so,
since without a cross we cannot arrive our Crown. However, neither distance of
place, nor intervall of time can change those respects to your noble self, that
took both root and date from our first enterview. Affection grounded on virtue,
must parallel it in content, or be injurious. Your true worth engaged me in
ever-honoring esteems, and these I must be unworthy if I recall. Nor are our
immortal souls so mensurated to place, but they can meet; though our duller
clay be confined to the accident of commensuration; what they cannot perform by
presence, by operation they can; remain where they live, and be where they
love; in the circumference be dis-joyned, yet united in the center of hearts,
which is their life and Being; and this is God. Here (Sir) was our first union,
and here, I hope, nothing shall separate: yea each flying moment of time draws
to a more embosoming neerness. Sir, when we parted you enjoined me to continue
you in my best thoughts, This not to remember, I account to forget my self.
That I am not banished your memory, one word from your pen, would not only
cherish and confirm, but honor and oblige,

Sir, Your most devoted and humble servant, D.W.

XV. A Letter to excuse silence, etc.
SIR,
What to you I know not, but to me it seems long, since my pen presented my
respects. It Is true, I wrote last, but this will not excuse. Gratitude makes my
addresses due; when you salute, your salutes are pure favors: still oblige,
never incur obligation. If then I have been too remiss, I fly to the Asyle
of your pardon; and to render me more capable of it, give me leave to add this
qualif^cation: That not neglect, but fear to be troublesome, caused the
intervall. Est modus in rebus -- I would observe duty, I hate to be
unseasonable: He that can light on the Mean, attains the accomplishment of
Office; he that misses, may mean well, but is guilty of some defection toward
an extreme. But as that moral Decorum is the beauty of humane life; so a
precise niceness with friends, has too much of scruple. Seemliness should not
be transgrest, yet Friendship is not stern in her Laws. I may be bold with my
self, and next with my friend. Whom endearment makes mutual, love intitles to
a latitude of honest action. o Sir, that I bear the style of your Friend, is
the greatest adjunct the world can make me happy in; I desire no more splendour
of honor, no relation to me is so precious. My request is, it may continue; my
endeavor shall be to deserve the continuance; not that I presume I can deserve
it, but rather, that I hope, not by a voluntary guilt, to forfeit what you
freely confer. Nor will you easily (your goodness is too constant) reject,
whom you have (with so much condescence) adopted. My resolve is unchangeable,
and that is, to be

Sir, Ever and most entirely your devoted servant, D.W.

XVI. To a Mother.
Madam,
THis short time of absence make me sensible of that great good which Nature
gave me, when she ordained you to be the Parent and me the child; for now I
feel my self deprived of those joys, which your presence was wont to afford
me; now I want those lovefull aspects, wherewith your indulgent eye was wont to
solace me. In a word, I want all things, which an affectionate mother did ever
bestow upon an undeserving, yet dutiful child, for such is

T. B.

XVII. A Letter to beg acquaintance.
Sir,
YOu may wonder at this boldness: but your worth animates it, and the same, I
hope, will pardon what it causes. I have often heard of you, and once I saw
you; and by the conversation of a few words, I perceived plentiful evidence,
that what I have heard of your merits, was answered in the truth. This your
humility may reply was too short a time for experience. I grant it: but not to
confirm what both the Good and Wise by report had made credible: the senses
should not be deceived in their proper objects; and Hearing is a sense as well
as Seeing: and (if it follow the right Rules) perhaps as little erring; chiefly
if a rational hearing, to which I have some title by essence. Report the
subject; that you are deserving, the reported; this aver'd by wise men and good
men, yea by all men that know you; which I must either believe or be
irrational. Sir, the truth is, I am so fully persuaded of this verity, that I
am truly ambitious of your more acquaintance; and that this may be by pen, till
more joined aboads afford a presentiall intercourse. If your thoughts answer,
no greater obligation can be laid upon

Sir, Your most faithful servant, D.W.

XVIII. In answer to a Letter of Complement.
Sir,
THat I live (though absent) thus fresh in your memory, I count my glory, and
that you write to me, my happiness; which favors, that I may seem in some
measure to deserve, I address these, not as satisfactory Acquittances (for such
my weak merit, does not aim at) but as respective acknowledgements, which your
greater goodness commands from me. I have now thoroughly both seen and felt the
Bath, and as I find my self nothing ameliorated in complexion of face, or
temperature of body; so is the disposition of my mind to serve you nothing
lessened, but does adequately increase, with the obligations of

Sir, Your unalterable servant, T. B.

XIX. A facetious letter upon sending a Christmas Pie to a Friend.
Sir,
I Salute you with a poor token, a pastry Bak'd-meat, as a recognition of my
gratitude for your noble entertainments; and not entertainments only, but even
harbor in a push of necessity, which I construe to have multiplied the
courtesy to many degrees of height. These to requite I confess my self unable,
and to forget as unwilling. The mean of both I undertake, that is to greet you
with my grateful and remembering respects: which if you please to entertain in
my sense, it shall be interpreted a new added favor, and speak me thankful.
Grateful minds can acknowledge what they cannot retribute, and this is both my
fortune and meaning. Sir, that I may be some imperfect Index, or like the
Westminster Tomb-shewer, tell who or what lies here: You have or shall find in
the center, a Neats Tongue, empanched by a Goose; next both tongue and Goose,
like the Isle of Candia, swallowed up by the Turk; Round these, some few other
Volatils, as lookers on, and though not main Partisans, yet not unimbroyl'd in
the danger, for their curiosity. At last comes fierce General Cook, and
fortifies all (as he hopes) with a strong line of Circumvallation, and having
perfected his works, sends the besieged captive to your best appetite, whereto
they are left for triumph and conquest. Sir, now were it not for fear of making
this our Post-paste over tedious, and coming too near the heels of time, I
could so compare these Animals, or their corpse, that there might rise upon
their conditions both Emblems and Morals. But this saceteness I will leave to
your self and good company, to recreate and abetter your digestion with. What I
chiefly desire to hear in this point, is, that you have been merry in parting
the fray, friendly accepted what was cordially meant: That you have vanquished
the cruel Turk, the peevish Goose, the betrayi^g Tongue, the wild Pouline, the
long-nos'd Woodcocks; yea that you have raz^d the very proud outworks to the
ground. This done, I pray, you may conquer your worse enemies, and number me in
the Alb^ of

Your humble servants, D.W.

XX. A Letter to excuse silence, and acknowledge past favors.
Sir,
I Have long done you the service, not to trouble you with my lines, but durst
no longer pursue this method, lest it might degenerate into the semblance of
neglect. It ver^ue (for her better practice) be enthroned twixt two extremes,
writing (as an act of virtue) must also keep due distance with them; neither
lean to importune frequency without leave, nor be benumbed by the Lethargy of
Omission. And you, whose favors have always engaged me yours, will believe my
aims have no other end, then to be so, as well in forbearances as actions;
provided I fail not as your votary; a crime I should hate my self to think I
could be wicked enough to commit; and am sure I never yet was. Sir, you have, I
know, received my former Letter, and dained the civility of receiving from it
my humble gratitudes, for the liberalities it acknowledged. This will not so far
encroach upon the Office of my better expressions, as to repent that duty, but
must again and again pronounce me

Sir, Your grateful servant, D.W.

XXI. A Letter of thanks, etc.
Honored Sir,
I Have received your friendly Letter, and (by Proxy) your bounty: I am
obliged by both, yet am by you debarred, by pen, to answer either. You fetter me
in the limits of ten lines, and these too must be silent of your self, the best
subject; I could observe your number, and yet be tedious, did I write short
hand, or would I imitate the Lawyers length of a Chancery Bill. But I will not
force a double sense on your sincerity; What you will not have in paper, shall
warm my br^ast, those grateful thoughts, and unfeigned devotions, that vow and
maintain me

Sir, Your ever most affectionate servant, D.W.

XXII. To a Lady upon her weaving hair-bracelets.
Madam,
LAst night when I found you in a pretty harmless employment, weaving
hair-bracelets, you commanded me to make you some Poesies for that purpose,
which I told you was a work fitter for Poets and men of wit, then for me, whose
Cabinet enshrineth no such Treasure; yet (Madam) that you may see what a
supremacy of power you have over all my faculties, I send you these enclosed;
if any of which prove worth your use, the composure must be ascribed to the
virtue of your commands, rather then to any skill of mine, which as I disclaim
to have, out of a just sense of my own imperfections; so must I always
subscribe my self (out of a like sense of your worth)

Madam, Your most devoted servant, T. B.
Qui est tout de Coeur; n'a point de langue.
Qui dedit: se dedit. (Nec fallit nec fallitur.
A se convertitur in se. (Vnus: una: unum.
Wear this (dear heart) and prove as true
In faith to me, as I to you.
This gift shall tell you, that I do
Love you alone, and none but you.
No heart more true,
Then mine to you.
Cupid has bound me by this band,
To be your servant at command.
I find it true, since you are gone,
That Love makes perfect union.


XXIII. A Letter complaining of Absence.
Madam,
IF I could find out words to express the language of my heart, I should then
be able to demonstrate how little I enjoy my self, whilst I am absent from you,
in whom all my joys and all my felicities are so wealthily sum'd up; that as I
live by none but you; so, were it as much in my power as desires, I should
never be absent from you; But since Fate has thus decreed a separation, I
beseech you let nothing make you forget him, who always remembers you, in
quality of

Madam, Your greatest admirer, T. B.

XXIV. In answer to one that congratulated an arrival in the Country.
Sir,
THat you congratulated our well-coming to G. was so necessary for us, and so
great a mark of goodness in you, that I believe without your good wishes, we
had taken up our quarters on Saturday night in the Forest, where we were
benighted (a sad thing to think on) and lost our way; But being (as I say)
arrived here, by the help of God, and your good wishes, I find little subject
for envy in our enjoyments, not a Deer being left in the Park, nor a Kid in
season, (unless a wooden one) nor a Walk dry enough for a Spanish-leather
shoe; and I am sure you will not envy us a little fresh air, since we have
paid so dear for it, by the fatigues of a long journey. Trust me (Sir) these
things (however you value them) bend my thoughts toward London, and the
rather, in respect of your dear self, to whom I am (by manifold obligations)

An affectionate humble servant, T. B.

XXV. Upon the late Commotions.
SIR,
HAd not Pithagoras excepted our Terrestrial Orb, when he asserted the Orbs
harmonious; this Age had clearly confuted him. For how musical soever those
higher are; this I am sure sounds nothing but harsh Discords: and so loud; that
we cannot but hear them; so unpleasant, that the dinne discomposes quiet
minds. The way to ease our selves is hard, yet not impossible: but what is it?
it is this, To elevate our abode: To Compose our own interior. He that enjoyes
in time Peace, is not open to extern broiles: they may beat the out side, but
cannot enter; batter the walls of flesh and blood, but the Citadell of reason
is safe; and if reason sway, we fly up to mansions indisturbd. We are all
Citizens of the lower World, I grant, must wish it is good; may deplore it is
evils; Yet our own private welfare, ought to be to us most precious. This were
a Paradox with Politicians (if not well glossed) and so I allow it (each part
was made for the whole.) But our Placite still stands: and stands in this: each
mortal is nearest to himself. My own preservation, lessens not my contribution
to the Public* must I be, or I cannot be able? I must be able, or I cannot
aid it. Of Aides, there is more then one sort. All were not framed for the same
function, or influence. The Martial blade, and bullet has it is office; so
policy military; these we leave to the sons of Mars. Yet we have our duty too,
and this is piety. Piety first calmes it is own lares; then becomes
isntrumental to others reconcilement. When heaven sees me at peace within, I
am approved, fit to pacify. To complain of exterior commotions, and my self to
be torn by the disorder of my own Passions, is an improper address, a mediation
ineffectuall. It was well dreamed by Scipio, when he said; as the intelligences
guided (by a regular Order) the upper Spheres; so ought our intellectual
powers govern our own little World. Where the superior portion of the soul
obeys the divine Laws, and the part irrational acquiesces to the mind; (in
the mind (and all man) resounds a harmony far surpassing Pithagorean accents.
Ah! (my friend) were mental and private tumults appeased, the civil would
cease, and whilst these (with you and I) are settled, the civil cannot annoy
us. A composed soul miseries may try, cannot disorder. Whilst others, then
fight for earth, and purple it with native blood; let us aspire higher
enterprises: pray for their peace, secure our own. Let us fix our thoughts
where ambition reaches not, where War embroiles not, where tranquillity
eternally triumphs. Thus shall we offer our selves a piacular sacrifice before
the high Altar of God, in our own condition acceptable, in alien behoof not
despised. The incessant vows, of

Sir, Your most devoted servant, W.D.

XXVI. ANSWER.
SIR,
YOu have given us, (who are indeed Terrestrial Cosmopolites) most excellent
prescriptions, for the composure and regiment of the inward man in these times
of fluctuation, whereby those that are at War within themselves, may know how
to seek, and where to find a lasting peace, a peace with truth and endless
repose, and those that are at peace may learn how to settle the souls Militia
in an unconquerable posture of defense against the Common enemy; In a word
there is a volume of rich Apothegmes abridg'd into the compendium of your
letter; heavens make my breast a fit repository for such treasure. But in
conclusion you evidence the virtue of self-abnegation to be one part of the
Cargazon of your ship; For you still work with the old Perspectives, by serving
your self of a diminishing Glass, when you mention your own perfections, and
of one, that multiplies, when you make the mole hills of your friends qualities
(if any were) to seem mountains. Alas! what is my plain song, if compared with
your heavenly descant; Majores majora canunt- It must content me to
contemplate you in a higher Orb, whilst I ly mudling here below, even

Sir, The humblest of your servants, T. B.

XXVII. To a Lady, upon her leaving the City.
Madam,
EVer since you left London, all joys and good fortune have left us, the
heavens have not ceased to shed continual It was a time of great rain.
tears for your absence, and Mars has frownd upon all our undertakings, nor
can we hope to receive good news or enjoy fair weather, till the rays and
virtue of your presence return hither, to uncloud the watery element and
uncharm the fortune of War. Whilst in this sadness, I was studying what might
render my lines worthy your acceptance, the enclosed arrives with the much
wished for news of -- And if this prove in any measure an Antidote to prevent
the contagion of sadder thoughts, which these times are apt to administer, I
shall enjoy the height of my ambition, which holds no title in competition with
that of

Madam, Your humble servant, T. B.

XXVIII. To excuse the not taking leave, and to acknowledge received favors.
SIR.
BEfore I left London I did endeavor to have given my personal attendance
upon your noble self, with an address of thankfulness for your generous favors,
and free entertainments; But this devoir (by your absenting occasions) being
frustrate; I am forced upon pen-supply. Wherein yet the most I can express to
the purpose, is ingeniously to avow, I owe more to your bounties than I can
express; more expressions to your high Worths, then I can make legible. Which
defect of Language (I humbly yet conceive) you of all (Sir,) have most reason
to indulge; since your great merits of me, and your own self-nobleness, has
most put it to silence. Be then above my feeble Oratory, as your endearments
transcend my deserts; it is praise enough, as you aim not at empty Epithets, so
your real perfections are abundant and natively clear to be their own
encomiums. I with admiring gratitude will remember what I cannot utter. Yet
(Sir) take this unfeigned image of my thoughts; that from the first hour I
received the honor of your acquaintance, I have singularly honored your self;
and since you have bin pleased to rank me in the albe of your servants, and
privilege me not only with your friendly familiarities, but also signal
favors, I confess my self bound for requital of all, as to yield to none in
my respect, so to be ever (as I profess I am obliged)

Sir, Your servant and votary. D.W.

XXIX. A Ladies Answer to her servants first letter.
SIR,
THat upon so small acquaintance, you should make me such friendly and
passionate expressions, I cannot but take as a civility, being apt to make the
best construction of every ones actions; yet ( Sir) that so many months should
pass in silence, since I saw you, is enough to make me believe your letter
merely complementall; For these times afford many of your sex, whose pens or
tongues can speak one language, and their hearts another When I shall find
cause to believe your professions real, I shall set a greater value upon your
respect: Mean time civility invites me to subscribe my self

Sir, Your humble servant, V.T.

XXX. A Complementall Address from one Lady to another.
Madam,
I Have not so much vanity to think to make a return, worthy the honor I have
recieved, nor do I bear so little justice to my own gratitude, as not to witness
my resentment, though great, yet in huge disproportion to your merit, whose
virtues and goodness I hold in equal value with those of Demigods: I receive
the new assurances of your Ladyships favor, as a blessing sent me from
heaven, which bids me cherish it and live, since I can relish no felicity
without it. Indeed ( Madam) I know not what Sacrifice to offer you for such a
bounty; All hearts are made tributary to your Commands; yet none with so much
obligation, as that of

August. Madam, Your servant, E.D.

XXXI. The Answer.
Madam,
YOu may say of me, as a Cavalier once said of the late Synod, that they had
sat long and at length hatched a Monster (meaning the Directory:) So have I
bin long in answering yours, and at length my dull Genius produces this
ill-shapd letter: Madam, if the faculty of my pen were correspondent to the
devotion of my heart, I could say much, when as now I must be silent; Yet not
silent neither; For every cast of my eye upon your lines begets a wonder and
wonder makes me break silence; I have always had your sweet person and
virtues in a reverentiall esteem, and now the charms of your pen have hurld
me into new admirations; yet not so, as to forget the old, nor at any time to
be lesset he^

October, Madam, The most humble of your Devotes, A.T.

XXXII. A letter from the Author of a book to the approver, Sir, N. B.
SIR,
THis hand which has stood so long before your Bar, comes now to accuse it
self of a fault by which the Judge must needs have suffered much from the
offender, since the soulnesse of the Copy, is like to have tried your patience,
more then the worth of the cause can hope to have recompencd your pains;
Wherefore these lines come before you to offer satisfaction at least to your
civility, if they fail of giving it to your judgment, and the course of my life
qualifies me better for civil discharges, then for litterate satisfactions;
You shall then Sir, receive by this a return of much sense of your fair and
obliging carriage toward me in the examination of my papers; wherein I must
desire you to consider the whole design, which aims solely at moral
regulations, and does rather decline then accept any inducements to
controversiall doctrines; if there be any point so incident to the subjects,
as my opinion must needs appear in some dark light, this may well be connived
at by so ingenious a Judge, as your self, who cannot expect I should dissemble
my Principles, though in discretion I was forbid to declaime upon them; So that
I conceive your abilities, will make a due difference, between what may
critically be sifted out, and what does literally profess it self; and of
this last sort, I presume you will find nothing in the whole work, that has an
open face of contention or offense; Wherefore upon your animad versions, I have
changed the looks of such places, as had any apparent features of enmity, and
have offered you such satisfaction upon the other points, I have not altered,
as I hope your candor and dispassionate temper may admit; Upon the opinion
whereof, I shall conclude, that if you have found, in these my meditations,
more matter promising good influencies upon the affections of our Country, then
projecting any dangerous infusions, you will allow them your contribution to
that effect I have singly proposed in them; In order whereunto my prayers shall
intend the suppliment of my pens deficiency; which the less worthy it is of
this exposure to the World, the more must it owe your patience and civility for
your favor to

Your most affectionate servant W.M.

XXXIII. Upon the New-year.
SIR.
MY present Theme is, to give you the ceremonies (in real wishes) of a happy
New-year. Nor shall I doubt the effect, since I cannot your Piety or Prudence.
No revolution of time can be inauspicious, where these fair pair of
twin-virtues are fixed, and in action. Time tells our hours, produces change,
but our happiness, or infortunes only from our selves. It Is vain then to accuse
deaf fate, when we are our own destiny, or at least it in our arbitrament.
Prudence, (the eye of our life) foresees, disposes our affairs; Piety, our
selves. That discharges our devoirs, This guides all events (prosperous or
adverse) to our eternal (if it cannot temporal) felicity. Hence we have a
method either to prevent misery, or of turning it into better luck, by being
unhappy. Cross chances I grant, are but sower friends, rather to be entertained
then invited; yet it is too visible none are more wretched, then those that most
court fortune. Give me Indifferency and I Will be fortunes fate, and fortunate,
maugre her despite. As to time it self, the best description of it, is to
employ it well. It Is a thing of so swift an Essence, that it is gone before we
can think what it is. It Is the measure of sublunary beings, and proclaims to
us, (by its height) how fast we our selves fade, and dwindle away. The past is
no more ours, then frugall usage* has made it so. The future is not; and so,
uncertain whether 'twill ever be in our power. What of it we can own is only
the present, and this so coy, that if not taken by the soretop, it is vanished,
like a Ghost* and leaves us nothing, but cause to repent and gaze. Ah! my
friend, how precious our moments; on these short Instances depends our whole
Eternity. Temporal existence is as fickle as temporal happiness; both
participate of the nature of time, are fleeting^ In this casualty then, let us
fix on what is truly durable: above floating* incertainties, beyond temporal
lastingnesse. Whilst our minutes fly from us, our selves speed faster toward
unchangeable permanency, so we do in natural tendency; but let us by virtue's
vigours. Each hour posts away with it is length of our life; The old year is
gone, if ou^ imperfections with it, 'twas well spent; if not, there is the more
ne^d we spend the New better* And lest we live not to the end, let us take
advantage of the beginning: make that our own that is so. Thrift of our days is
the only end to make our selves in time eternally happy. But I fear by this
rude Rhapsody of the initiate year, I have wasted your hourglass too much,
rendering my prayer of your prosperous future, your present Damage; But pardon,
because my subject ( time) as well as my distracted capacity failed me. Suffice
it, I wish you more then I can utter or need perscribe you the way to; and
whilst you are blessed, I patrake

31 December. Sir Your happy friend and joy'd servant. W.D.

XXXIV. To a Lady, residing in a Town that had lately bin besiegd.
Madam,
AFter the disquiet of your late Alarms, I am bold to congratulate the
re-enjoyment of your wonted repose, which (had I bin General) no cause nor
quarrel should have made me hazard; since in all things I value your content
above my own; My regard to your safety had bin in such case motive enough with
me, to have suspended the chastisment of that mutinous City. Madam, If (as I
hope and pray) you are now both free from dis^uietude and from fear; I have my
hearts wish; desiring (as you know) nothing more, then by continued devotion to
your self and service; to purchase at length the esteem of

Madam, Your most faithful servant, T.B.

XXXV. To his Lady Mri^, complaining of her cruelty.
Madam,
TYranny as ill becomes a subject as a Prince, and cruelty is the natural issue
of that Monster; To say your Ladyship is guilty of both in some kind, is a
truth undeniable: For ever since fortune made me happy in your knowledge, my
affection has had no Center, but your breast; my faith, no fellow; and my
constancy such as can never admit a change; yet my sighs are unpittied, my
love unregarded, my faith and constancy answered with nothing, but your
disproportionate denialls; Nor can I, without wonder, consider, that your
Ladyship should be (...) all the world so perfectly charitable, to me so
cruel, unles 'twere ordained by fate, That the first fruits of my love (which
should be the first step to happiness) must be made abortive by your
incompassion. Madam, the more you deny, the more fuel you add to those flames,
which (if not suddenly allai'd by your pity) will consume my very being into
ashes of mortality; These are Madam, the real dictates of a heart, that is
wholly ben^

To serve you, T. B.

XXXVI. A consolatory letter to a Mother upon the death of her first born
Honored Madam,
THe sad need a Comforter, and a Soul, in desolation, requires to be assisted
with reasons to bear the cause of its griefs. That you are both sad and
grieved, I can no more doubt, then I can be without a share in your passions.
That you have many comforters, because friends, many solid considerations from
your own piety and pious wisdom to salve your sorrows, I am as confident;
Yet as none more tenders your happiness then my self, so could not I alone be
silent in this motive of your tears; what I would say is, Dearest Madam, be
comforted, and this (were it in my power) I would effect. The reason of your
sable thoughts, the spring that streams your cheeks, rise I know from the sad
accident of your child's death. It was I confess the first image of your
likeness, the first bless^^g that heaven honored your body with, the first
pledge of nature, the first title you had to be a Mother. And to be deprived
of this, almost as soon as 'twas given, could not but find and afford matter
both for tears and grief, in a disposition so natural and good. But Madam,
there is a time for all, and a mean also. What could not be denied to your
sweetness, must be moderated by your discretion. It Is true, that sweet infant
was yours, 'twas your first, 'twas dear, and you suffered many dolours, to give
it life; But withal you consider, as 'twas yours, so given you by God; as the
first, so more due to him; as dear, yet could it not be too dear for him that
has it; Although of painful birth; yet that your throws brought forth a
Saint, that your dolours were endured, so soon to enthrone a part of your self
among the Angels; these dolours, these throws, happily suffered. Those whom
God makes Parents, he makes but Nurses of his own children, he lends them to be
brought up for heaven: and if he has so soon discharged you of this
obligation, it is not so much a cross, as a blessing; Had it lived to mature age,
perhaps he saw danger both to It and you: it might have been more cause of
grief to you, more loss to it self; it might have been unfortunate in life, in
death unhappy; It Is not the being children of either good or great extract,
that makes them always either good or happy. And this perhaps God (that
provident Parent of all) foresaw. Be it so, or not, certain it is, the bodies
but the souls prison, wherein it is no sooner breathed from Heaven, but it is
maculated by this corrupt Earth: and in this, as it longer sojournes, so is it
not only debarred of its true happiness and welfare, but also offends its great
Creator; and consequently is miserable. Therefore would God make the cradle of
yours, its death bed, that he might hasten its bliss. As he breathed a pure
soul into it, so would he again take it before defiled by the actual blemishes
of sin. Had it lived, it could have afforded no comfort to your piety, but
being in health, prosperity, and pious; and can it be more pious, then in
heaven, more prosperous, then in heavens joys, more healthful then in the
enjoyance of immortality. O consider, it is now past all danger, it is freed from
all misery, it is blessed in blessedness, it prays for you. And can there be
any sorrow so great that these considerations cannot consolate? O what more
happy then to be so happy a Mother; no sooner a Mother, then a Mother to
heaven. Nor doubt (dear Madam,) but he that gave you this dear pledge of his
love, will give you more, and, as he took this to his own joys, so will he
leave in its stead more to your comfort. This he took to give it as soon
happiness as being, and therein to try your virtue and resignation to his will:
this as I doubt not but he will find, so may you be confident he will be
bountiful: a sure rewarder, of your patience, a prosperer of your soul, body,
and its fruitfulness. But pardon (most honored Madam) my loves redousness; and
if in this unpolishd Consolatory I have errd, let it be as it is loves fault, a
fault that your nobleness I am certain will remit. Thus with humblest respects
he takes his leave that will no longer be, then be yours, the daily Petitioner
to heaven for your most wished comforts of both Worlds.

Madam, Your humble and most affectionate servant, D.W.

XXXVII. To excuse the not answering a letter.
SIR,
THat I have committed so great a Solaecisme in good manners, as to receive two
letters from you, without giving you humble thanks for either; I beseech you
ascribe not to any want of zeal to your service; for in earnest you cannot make
me more happy, then in vouch safing me the honor of your commands, which
shall always find as ready an obedience in me, as any thing that most
concerns my own interest; In the assurance ^^ereof I give you the humble
respects of

Sir, Yours ad nutum, T. B.

XXXVIII. Upon a Motion of marriage.
Dear Sir,
I Give you many humble thanks, for your tendering me a wife, and your good
advise in that affair; I well remember the Counsel of a prudent friend was,
not to marry till I were 30 years of age, and then to have a wife ten years
younger then my self; because women (especially teeming ones) sooner decay,
then men. I have also read, that there are 3 principal motives to a wedded
life; Procreatio Prolis: Conservatio Domus: and Consolatio vitae. Now the
gentlewoman you write of, in stead of being ten years younger, I believe is ten
years elder, then my self; and so may be in danger to frustrate the two first
motives, by being issue-less. Yet if she have so many filled baggs as you
mention, it may be a shrewd temptation: But in marriage, Love (as you well
observe) is most preferrable, provided there be a competency of fuel (which is
riches) to keep it warm* Now it is like I might love the Lady you motion me
unto, with an ordinary conjugall love, but perhaps not with an eminent dear
affection, and on this subject I remember to have read these old but well
meaning verses.

Who makes the object of his fancy, gold,
Grows cold-in fancy, when his money's told:
And she who faines to love, to live a Lady,
Is honors fawn, I know not what she may be.
Examples are too frequent in this age of the infelicity of those Matches,
which are merely concluded for wealth, without love: Therefore in this (as a
choice, whereon the happiness of my whole life depends) I shall be very
deliberate in resolving, yet ever glad to receive your advise, as being

Sir, Your most respective nephew and humble servant.

XXXIX. The first address to his Mistress.
Madam,
THat fear is an individual companion to sincere affection, and that the
heartiest devotions, are brokenly expressed, are Maxims in humanity, and
however Errors, yet venial; The discreetest love is seldom without some
annexed passion, which oft-times fetters the faculties and leads understanding
captive; that which did and justly might deter, does now animate; The moon in
her farthest distance from the Sun, and greatest opposition, receives most
light; The poorer they be to whom charity is extended, the greater the merit;
Worth gains most honor by enobling unworthiness; Nature never ordaind two
Suns to shine in one firmament. I list not to expatiate in this kind. In the
description of your worth this short expression shall suffice; That would
Earths Monarch pay his devotions before perfections Altar, he need seek no
further then your breast. To express my devoted affection by deep protests and
multiplied vows does nothing please, my Motto is, rather in deed then in word.
Till matters be maturely discussed, and the advice of friends on both sides
had, I aim no higher then to be enstil'd your servant; Deliberation (if in any
case) in this most necessary. I honor you too much to wish you the smallest
amiss, though the sum of my earthly felicity depended thereon. My affection is
no frenzy; if my Stars mean me not the enjoying of such happiness, I must
frame a content. For conclusion, I will only add, that though you may have your
choice of many in all points more accomplishd, yet none that shall so truly
love you; My lines are confused like my thoughts; your milder censure he
persumes on, who truly honors your worth and rests

Solely devoted to your virtues. T. B.

LX. In answer to an expostulatory letter.
SIR,
THe receipt of yours brought with it some amazement to see my self almost
ship-wrackt in your good opinion, when my own Vessel was full fraught with
respect, which I intended to di-simbark at your haven. I am first to thank you,
for your plainness and ingenuity in my charge, and shall assume the same
freedom in my own acquitall. The story told you by Mr. W. from Mris. P. a
woman's discourse (for those I suppose the parties mentioned in yours) I deny to
have been either Author or Promulgator of, and must assure you, that such like,
with other volatile reports were here before my return; yet I must tell you
(since it so much concerns me) that I had Commission to make some inquisition
in the Country upon a preconceived neglect in you, and other rumors, but do
assure you, what I said was with such modesty, and so short of what common fame
delivered, nay with such regret to have said any thing at all, that it will
hereafter appear, I have been so far from being disaffected to this your
service, that I have run my self into an Oblique opinion elsewhere, for
promoting it, and I am confident the young Lady (when you shall be felicitated
with her enjoyment) will assure you as much, nor indeed could I possibly have
said less, in performance of that trust which was reposed in me. Sir, if this
give you not satisfaction, I shall be glad to know what may, because I profess
to owe you much service, and the more in order to that approaching happiness,
which your Stars have assigned you, whereto no wishes of a happy confarreation
shall more readily concur, then those of

Sir, Your very humble servant, T. B.

XLI. A REPLY.
Lady,
TIll I was blessed with the happy sight of yours I labored in a strange
perplexity, believing that either the attempt of mine had purchased your
disfavour, or otherwise (by some harder fate) I had suffered in your good
opinion, then which Peru is to me of less value. These fears I must confess
withheld me till now from a second address of service, though not from
offering continual thoughts of respect to your merit, and of perfect obedience
to your commands, nor shall I longer live, then breath the air of such
devotion, being professedly.

Lady, Yours in firm affection, T. B.

XLII. IN ANSWER.
SIR,
I Am (as you say) indeed always pleased to accept, what time permits you to
write. Your lines please, and cannot choose, being full of erudition, full of
love, and guided by a judgment not vulgar; And, what ever your time is, your
men^all store ^ailes not: what others with many a sc^atched brow cannot invent,
you with facility dictate, and as copiously pen; Then for my acceptance,
there is, no benignity required, but gratitude, and gratitude not common, but
such as ought to quadre with merits impararelld. That you daigne to entertain
mine but with a superficial view, adds honor and value, adds courage and
alacrity. We see many things carry price, not from innate worth, but the
esteemers fancy: So Jewels and other rarities, which humane estimate and not
nature, have made precious: The rule is Opinion; and if any man's approbation
could make my lines accurate (that is, what they are not) sooner to yours
should I yield the efficiency, and with much reason; for there is none I approve
more. Whilst I am jejune and empty, you are polite, and even upon my
deficiencies, raise Trophies to your own Genius; Thus what I am not my self, I
make you, by accident; So increases a black spot the candor of a blanchd
vesture; So gloomy shades seem to augment the Phaebean radiances, and so are
your perfections set off by the foiles of

Sir, Your servant, W.D.

XLIII. A conceited letter of thanks for favors.
SIR.
YOu know that I (with friendship and affection my sureties) stand already
bound to you in an obligation, for requital of a larger sum of favors, then
my poor abilities can any ways satisfy, yet now you make a large addition to
the principal debt by -- Till fortune better enable me, I much beg your
acceptance of thankfulness, which I design in liew of interest, and (for you
better security) my Bond renewed for the rest, with the addition of another
surety, my service, sealed with the privy signet of my love, attested by two
witnesses, gratitude and acknowledgment, and subscribed by

Sir, Your faithful servant, T. B.

XLIV. In answer to a letter from a dear friend.
SIR,
OF late my many evocations render me, as, inconstant in residency, so in my
letters and addresses both various and uncertain; Hence have proceeded (and a
while I fear must) the languishment of my lines, the alteration of my weeks;
Yet with this added disadvantage, that the more time may seem given me to
write, the less I have to be accurate. I received your last abroad, and am
never yet more at home, then where they find me, or I them. A virtue that
(with me) accompanies yours, and yours only. And being it wants a name, let it
be a Sympathy: a Sympathy 'twixt you and me, so charming, that by reading your
characters, I draw in my own Idea's (but abettered and so fall, by an
introversion, into my self. By this you may guess how much you endear your
friend; by so expressing your self his, to make him (even in the midst of
distractions, and fatigues) his own; and yet only to own him, to be more yours
and Gods. Know then, I am yet free from misfortune, nor enfeebled by any
mortal malady, that is sensible; Some grudgings of a Caduque being, and the
unwholesome seasons effects if I feel, they are but the antecedents of what I am
sure at last must follow. But since you style my sickness, your infirmity, my
infortunes, your mishapps, I would be well, to increase your Vigours; fortunate
to lessen your least bad events. The Heavens influence and their interpreting
Predictions now we hear begin to work in your clime; and as the operation
bodens stupendous revolutions, so are we tickled with curiosity to know your
changes, and ^y what steps, the main Designs are ascended to? and what you
conceive will be the sequels, chiefly of nearest connection? In the mean we will
hope and fear; Two passions that will blend all the fore-casts of humane life.
Be careful of your health that you may enjoy your self in a distracted Age: So
shall you be safe in the guards of your own virtues; and in the innocence of
your life, with comfort consolate your friends. Amongst whom not the least
dependent, is ever,

21 April 1653. Dear Sir, Your entirely affectionate D.W.

XLV. Upon a promise to write to one.
SIR,
THe inconsiderate promise I made to render you my thoughts in writing during
this absence, was grounded upon a just sense of my obligations, without the
least reflection upon my disabilities for any such performance; And in this
respect I might justly have been disobliged without breach of faith, but that
(seriously) I had rather discover my imperfections in this kind, then be any
ways wanting in my remerciaments, which are much indebted to your many
favors: And therefore I send this small tribute, as an earnest of the much
greater affection of

Sir Your cosen and servant, T. B.

XLVI.
Dear Cosen,
AMong the various contentments, which the Country yields in this season, I
have met with none equal to that which the receipt of your letter affords me;
for (trust me) I am so ravished with the contents, that whenever I perceive
that sadness to invade me, which the want of your sweet presence often begets,
I have instantly recourse to your letter for cure. Thus do I honor the lines
for your dear sake that sent them, nor shall I ever cease to acknowledge your
numberless favors, whilst I have breath but to pronounce me

Your most affectionate Cosen and servant, T. B.

XLVII. In Answer to an elegant letter.
Sir,
WHen I observe the equal facility and felicity of your expression, I loath
the rudenes and indigestion of mine, and when I consider the pith and plenitude
of your lines, I look upon the emptines and inainty of my own with much
indignation: yet though I were not born a Cicero for Eloquence, I am and must
be another Achates for affection. If there be any thing in this World can
deserve the name of good, it is really in the fruition of you; in and by whom I
am so perfectly beatified, that I count my self in a Paradise, when I am
gathering the fruits of your presence. Fortune (in other things less liberal)
has given me many friends, and Correspondents, yet none so real, none so
learned, as your self; I never made so happy a bargain (if I may so rudely
style it) as when I contracted this intertrafique of love, I never hear from
you or see you, but I make an infinite purchase of piety, and knowledge, from
your weighty lines and solid discourse; But above all, I have gained (yet blush
to think with how little desert) in you a friend, whose bosom is an Archive,
fit to treasure up the greatest secret, and in whose hands I can repose my
life, nay (which is dearer) my soul; O happiness; happiness said I? it is beyond
the degree of common happiness; Such pious condescendings (where you give pure
Gold and receive nothing but dross in exchange) argue a goodness in you, beyond
the reach of my pen to delineate, which I must content my self, to admire. Sir,
you have here the real dictates of my inmost thoughts, though wrapped up in a
homely dress; for I am as yet hardly entered into the Suburbs of good Language,
yet do but pardon these my rude expressions, and I may hope (by your conduct)
in time to enter that City, where you, by due merit, command in chief. To
morrow I am bound for the frigid Zone, yet will assure you, that no change of
Climate shall have power to alter or frigidify the affections of

Sir, Your devoted servant, and therein most happy. T. B.

XLVIII. REPLY.
SIR,
YOurs, as a sudden joy, have surprised me. So accort your style, so
pathetike your love, that I am both rapt and enflamed: you could never in
better time have made your friendly addresses. They came as cordialls to
refresh my exhausted Spirits. I was even spent in dispatches, distracted with
unexpected visits of friends. From these, as a reviving refrigeration, I cast
my eyes and thoughts on your emphatick strains. In which I am lost; Can wonder
but not reply. In short I am so variously divided this day; and chiefly for the
moments of the Messengers stay, that I have not respite of reply. Before you
direct your course, toward the North Pole, I hope to get so much pause, as to
be my own, that I may make some suppletory addition. Pardon these
extemporaries: what in sense and language is deficient, that affection
supplies, which really ever styles me

Sir, Yours, D.W.

XLIX. A further reply.
SIR,
MY hestern note answered yours, with apology, that I wanted time to answer
them; I promised also to be more responsary, and now repent it. My leasure's as
interrupted, and second revisings of your accurate lines disanimate. What is
most delightful to view, is as hard to parallel. Sir, the flote of your
Eloquence runs high, and where (by the Art of self-annihilation,) you would
seem to depress your sufficiency, there you most rise; And indeed skill cannot
but by skill be hid, nor perspicuous abilities better blazond, then when most
curiously mantled by arted invelopings. You are no Cicero born, it is confessd,
yet I think born to be an English Cicero; of this, nature has given ripe
specimens, and industry as fast polishes, judgment matures. In one letter I
trace you flourishing in various figures; in the property and store of words
choice, in c^mposure count; in sense acute. Trust me, I admire, yet cannot
envy; For whilst an Achates in affection, your embellishments are mine. The
Accessory (you know) in Law follows the Principal, and love makes all common.
If then by this inviolable tie we are one, your endowments entitle me joinct
owner; a riches, I prepone to Monarchies. Sir, I were happy did I rightly own
the least degree in the litterary attributes you please to give me; those of
endeared passion I do; those of reality I cannot refuse. It is indispensably
your claim; what e're I am or shall be (that is commendable) is dedicated to
your loyal friendship; honor me with belief till I fail. My breast (as long
as the harbor of a heart) shall be a safe repository; I was never by
ingenerate disposition futile and porous, and with so prudent and embosom'd a
friend, I shall not sure begin. Upon secrets I do not wittingly encroach, yet
if (by freedom of a friend) committed, the ghastly terrors of death unlock them
not; He that wants this guist has no challenge to Amities sacred interest. But
I am now interturb'd, and my pen (dear friend) is snatched off, yet first take
these votary wishes; Propitious be your guiding Stars; inspiring the Muses; a
safe journey; fortunately our expeditions, and a speedy circuit to your City
entertainments and suspir'd retires; It is almost your peculiar felicity, that,
where others are chiefly scattered, you can find or make an improving secess;
An evidence as you are studious; so you can be, in all places, the commander of
your self and hours. Well! my loves, longings and prayers shall accompany this
forcd vagary, and with as much joy welcome you home. Interstices local may
divide bodies and abodes; vinted minds know no separation. Hence wherever I, in
my better part, am with you concommitant, and lastingly

Oxford 29 Sept. Sir, Yours, D.W.

L. ANSWER.
SIR,
HItherto I have been in a superlative degree, both felicitated by the riches
of your presence and enriched by the wealth of your lines; But I have learnt
there is nothing permanent in this world, otherwise 3 weeks absence from the one
and deprivement of the other, would be more afflictive, then words can express;
For in earnest you are to me that fire of Prometheus, without which all my
actions seem inanimate, detain but the food of your favors from me and I am
a mere nothing. Though I am now bound (as you know) for the North, yet believe
it my daily best thoughts shall steer Westward, where (how far soever distant
in person) I leave the hearty affections of

Sir, Your faithful servant, T.B.

LI. Answer to a quaint Letter.
SIR.
WHen will your treasury of choice words be exhausted, when will your fountain
of Eloquence be drawn dry, when will your Magazin of rich matter be emptied?
never; I now plainly see the more you write, the more you have to write, and
may (with reverence) not ineptly compare your Cranium to the holy Chrismatory
of France; you still take out, yet leave it without the least diminution;
Prodigy of nature! It fares much otherwise with me; I (if at any time big with
words) fall into a painful labor, and after many throws, am always by
abortion diliver'd of a thing like a Bear's whelp, which I can lick into no
form. Every Bucket drawn from mine own Well, goes nearer the bottom, the
reason is, there is no springs for repletion of that store; yet in earnest the
influence of your teeming Muse has (me thinks) in some measure fertilis'd my
siccaneous and Barren soil. But whether rove I? Now for News (which is the
primum quaerite of these days) I must tell you, thus -- Sir, the length of my
letter and this shortest of days do not well quadre; This is the winter
Solstice, So is it also the station both of my invention and paper, the first
is at a non p^us ultra of matter, the last only affords me room to subscribe
my self

13 Decembr. 1652. Sir, Your vowed servant, T.B.

LII. To a Brother.
Dear brother,
YOurs equally full of love and good Council came to my hands with no small
contentment, since I perceive you interesse your self (as a very kind friend)
in all things that concern my good, which as I can never forget, so do I ever
account my self most happy, when I hear of your progress in all perfections
and good qualities, wherewith to see you accomplished is the passionate desire
of

Your most affectionate brother, T.B.

LIII. To Mr. G.
SIR,
THis is only to give you many humble thanks for the favor you did me to the
D: If I live not to be able to strike Taleys with you, yet I shall always
record your kindness with a thankful reminiscence: And though I am blunt in my
expression, yet believe it, I shall most willingly in- Gage in any service that
may approve me

Sir, Your faithful servant, T.B.

LIVE. Another to him in Fustian.
SIR,
MY last was from Dunstable, and (though I am in person removed thence yet) I
fear the matter of this may come from thence too, being not as yet sufficiently
rudimented, in your Accademy for such susceptions. I must tell you (with some
regret) that I find, not an Academick (except the noble Brittan) in all our
voisinage; so that if we converse at all, it must be with Labradors and such
out of whose hebetudinous cerebrosity, we may as soon extract A^rum potabile,
as the Elixer of any knowledge; Their querilous outcry is, that the continual
siccity of this season, has inusted all their herbiferous grounds, which mny
happily breed a dearth of Aliment, as there is already of litterature in these
parts. Thus much ex obliquo, now to the purpose, I hope your late obstreperous
Alarmes, have not interturbed the procedure of our noble Authors Miscelany,
which is a principal point in my Card. Sir, believe it without some Missive of
Consolation from you, the Country will soon put me into a Chagrin, therefore be
no longer costive, as you love

10 Aug. Your servant, T.B.

LV. ANSWER.
SIR,
HAving by the enclosed given you some few serious lines, let me now answer
your facetious letter (of 10 August) with a joculatory line or two; And first
by way of allauding your acuminous Exordium; but withal of showing, you
imediately mistake the word susception, if you think it can stand in a sober
sense for understanding, however in a way of Raillery it may pass. Again
rudimented for taught is harsh; so is hebetudinous cerebrosity. Documented for
taught may pass in a serious Line, and plumbious, better then hebetudinous; for
inusted, you should say exusted; so for herbiferous, frugiferous; because
herbs and plants are the less principal children of the Earth; whereas Corn
and all sorts of grain are the most principal for Man's use; for so you must
mean by the word ( aliment) that follows in the text of your letter.

And by this you see there is a kind of Elegance to be observed in a fustian
phrase; nay I say more, the lepid lines of fustian are lost, when it is not
genuine but strained; And trust me ( Sir) I hold it a piece of greater Art to
line a letter with proper fustian, then with silken language, especially when
friends resolve to be merry by distantiall salutes, your French Chagrin and
Spanish Labrador may pass as apposite, because proper to the sense, and nothing
strained; So the missive of Consolation you desire, by way of an amicable
observation upon the Text of yours; And this is what I can sport away, who must
rest

17 Aug. Sir, Your fustianizing friend, G.G.

LVI. REPLY.
SIR,
THis brings you humble thanks both for your news and your Criticismes, and
though mine of the 10 of August were but panis speusticus, a doghbak'd piece of
fustian, wherein I intended nothing ad amussim, yet you must give me leave to
make some defense. For Susception I have Rider for my warrant in that sense;
Rudimented I hold to be good and (according to the new mode of converting
Nounes into Verbs) I purposely avoided plumbeous cerebrosity (not plumbious as
you write it) as trite and thread bare; But for your exception to herbiferous,
in that you mistake the sense, for the season has bin of late very good for
Corn and grain, which frugiferous includes, and as bad for grass, the Sun
having in some places not only burnt the very roots of it, but has also made
strange clefts and impressions in the Earth, therefore I used inusted, a word
which though not so usual, as exusted, or adusted yet in this sense I think no
less proper, if not in a genuine, at least in a metaphorical way, and Cattle,
that are fed by grass and hay, are a considerable part of our aliment, etc.

Sed me reprimo, not at all persuming to enter the Cirque with you in Logomachy
or the pugnacity of such disputes, but with submission in all things to your
greater judgment, whence I must confess to have received in these my junior
years; a great increment to my smaller portion of knowledge, both by these and
other your documentall redargutions, which I always receive with a
reverentiall respect, answerable to your merit and the obligation of

24 Aug. Sir, Your very humble servant, T.B.

LVII. Rejoinder.
Sir,
I Do hugely allaud your endeavor to abonar what I had vitiated in my last;
For it is a sign you are Master of what you do, when you can avow it ab ipsis
primis principiis, and thereby show you are as far from being conscious of
error, as you are from being inscious how far you may use the latitude of
^ustianising, without exceeding the limits of modest avowment, per modum
inculpatae tutelae, Macte animo mi Thoma, and perge eo quo cepisti pede, etc.
Trust me Sir, I shall (without a blush) easily yield you the advantage of me in
logomachy, as often times deep divines do to Logitians in point of reducing
Syllogismes to all their possible variations into several Moodes and figures;
because the one is actually conversant in that particular, whereas the other
depends only upon the habitual use of such figures, without retaining the rule
that leads to the rectitude thereof; So men speak true Latin, without being
able to give rule for it, and by this means some times are peccant against the
Rule, which every schoolboy can correct them in. And truly in this particular
of Logomachy you may and will be able to read Lectures to the deepest of men,
because you laudably make it your professed study and consequently will make a
world of men obliged to you, as well as

2 Sept. Sir, Your servant, G.G.

LVIII. An Answer from one sick.
SIR,
SUch my persent condition, that I receive your letters as sick men do visits,
am grateful, yet cannot return the courtesy, but by feeble thanks; In this
nature I have now been 3 weeks a decumbent; This the cause I have already faild
in my wonted intercourse, and the same continuate disability must render these,
of my own complexion, infirm and faint, yet I beg you will not interrupt your
turns; For though I am not responsible, yet your lines are much solace and no
small divertisement from the sense of my weakness: What was before but a
friendly corespondence, will (till it please God I mend) be an office of
endearing charity, extended toward him, who is

Entirely yours, D.W.

LIX. To his Mris, after a long Journey.
My dearest friend,
I Have bin a long and sad journey, which seemed so much the longer and so much
the sadder, by how much I was farther distanced from your sweet abode, nor had
the sadness of this forced vagary any solace at all, saving that of near 300
miles, I passed no one, without making a Relic of your memory, which had
still the virtue to renew all joys in me, and expel the mists of melancholy,
almost with equal force (so strong was my imagination) as if I had bin really
in your presence; If you have but bestowed one thought on me for every hundred
I have dedicated to you, I am satisfied, believing that no love can come within
so many degrees of mine, nor that there is any state so happy, as that of being

Your devoted servant, T.B.

LX. Another to the same.
My only dear,
THat you may see I forget you not at any time nor in any place, I present you
these, and if I seem importune by my frequent addresses, you must pardon me,
since I profess to receive no solace in this absence, but what the comfortable
entertainment of thoughts on you affords me, and should I but as often put such
thoughts in writing, as my heart presents them to my memory, I should be no
day, even no hour without a pen in my hand; And I may well hope, from the
excellency of your nature, that you will not leave such faith, such affection,
without a just retribution, nor can I despair of your remembrance of me in some
propor^^on answerable to mine of you; so may happiness in the end crown both,
and I live eternally

Yours, as at first, unalterable, T.B.

LXI. In answer to a friend, ill of a cold.
Sir,
THe next degree to the happiness of not having evils, is to have had them:
which imports, though not our immunity, yet riddance: and to have overcome
annoiance may be better, then not to have suffered it. This since you say, you
have bin almost dead of a Cold, congratulates your almost Resurrection: and
hopes to find your short-windednes turned into free respiration. It Is a vulgar
Problem, whether this malady may be called a disease, or Physic. You I
believe found it trouble some; but will not repent, if it prove medicinal. I
imagine (allured by Aprils forward Sun) you slipped too early into your Summer
Aparell; which, though it proved too thin to defend you, yet not unable, to
make you take a warier choice of your Wardrobe next Spring. Gondamar was of
opinion, as there were in England many seasons of the year in one day; so a man
had need of several suits: My fancy is, if you will not always be shifting,
it is best not to shift till you see nature in her best Green gown: whose
fashion you may harmlesly follow. Sir, you see by my spinning out this one
Clause of your letter, I want matter; Yet you may see too, there is nothing
drops so raw from you, but affords subject. Nor must you blame me, if your
indisposition busy my Pen, since your (...) is the Copy of it, and my own
best constitution. Hence you have a double care lies upon your preservation;
your love to your self, and indulgence to

Sir, Your servant, W.D.

LXIII. In answer to a letter of Commends, etc.
SIR.
I Never looked awry (pardon the phraise) upon any of yours till now, and now
(were not our mutual loves united with many a dear link) jealousy (that
Canker of affection) would corrode my heart, I should, and can yet hardly
forbear to) judge, that you had some more deserving object in your mind, when
you fancied me with such high commends, as hold no proportion with my merit. I
know you never wrote, but your heart and pen were coitinerants, yet (pardon
me, if) I assure you that in this (and perhaps in this alone) love has
pourblinded your (otherwise much discerning) judgment; should I believe all
your write of me, I might quickly be wasted into a Fools Paradise and so
become a Ludibry; I Will rathet characterise my self, then own the least of your
attributes, take it thus bluntly, yet with truth and candor, for I have studied
that Sentence, which was engraven upon the gate of Apollo's Temple at Delphos
(viz) (...). I was born under the dull planet Saturn, so that Mercury had no
influence on my production, hence I am so far from being a Lynceus of nature, a
Pelops of wisdom or Cicero of Eloquence, that I never pretended to any of
those virtues, which beget admiration, nor to have my mind embroidered with any
studied ornaments of learning, I only claim some small title to those
qualities, which stir affection, As truth of word, sincerity of heart, etc.
Having thus ingenuously premised, I now send you an inhibition from the Court
of love, not to treat any more of that subject, but to redargue my Errors and
show me the flats both of my pen and judgment, that what I write hereafter may
merit this only Elogium; As here is no Elegance, so likewise no incongruity or
affectation; I aim no higher; for in earnest if it were possible any thing of
yours could nauseate me, the way were to send me a Laudatory Epistle, instead
of a redargutory letter; But I have another task therefore it is high time to put
Omega to this, by subscribing my self

Sir, Your humblest servant, T.B.

LXIII. THE REPLY.
SIR,
MY fancied excess in your praise, now recoiles upon my self; you are, I see,
your Arts Master: and what you could not divert, by a just disclaim; you can
stop, by an exaggerated retorsion. You may expect, I should now imitate your
shame-fac'd modesty; right this paper, with renouncing the abilities you heap
upon me. But, I will not; should I, We should still dwell in one Theme, and by
the Nauseous tautologie, both impair, what ere we both merit. I dare not
vendicate to my self, a perfect self-knowledge; nay, I avoid the reflex
glances, that should tell me what I am; lest, what I am, might cast me into a
dejection; and so, hinder amendment. Pusill animity, never yet attained an
eminence. Do you cease your own undervaluings, and I shall my more adjusted
expressions. I can let your worths be their own blazons, would you so let them;
but, if you will wrong you self, justice calls me, to your vindication. Nor,
must the Legists Maxim, here sway; volenti non fit injuria. Neither of us
(pardon the parallel) are so accomplished but we ought to thrive in
imbellishments. Whether our souls came Aristotle's Tabula rasa; or written with
Plato's Idea's into our earth; in our earth, they have either forgot much, or
learnt little. The fault, doubtless, ours. For, by what we know, we know we
might, and may, know more. Nature, has made us capable; that we become not
better Proficients, our own truant inertie, the obstacle. I, am not so much a
Scotist, as to confess a substantial difference, in souls: nor yet, such an
Abcedary Philosopher, as to deny the Organs must be fitted, where the operation
is to be excellent. You, and I should be ingrate, did we not assert, God has
been liberal enough. To asperse his bounty with our wants, were a petty
blasphemy in Philosophy it self. Let us both confess, our respective
ignorance, and our ignorance to be only ours. This done: we are not to center
in old dullness, but from the remorse of lost time, vigorously employ the
future. It imports the Vulgar rout, more to be good, than sagacious: We, are
molded for higher action: yet must join Virtue to knowledge. Reason's brutish,
where the will's incult. The Pattern, we were effigiated to, was infinitely
Knowing, infinitely good; in both, we are bound to imitate: bound to be the
Representatives, of both, or, we forfeit our Orginall, and our similitude, too.
Man's a little world; his mind the Heaven; the two great Lights those splendid
faculties, his Intellect, and Will: the lesser Stars, are the other powers:
the intellect the Sun of all: all borrow his brightness, all must Cooperate
with his rays, by adding their proper virtues. Thus shall our Microcosme be
resplendent and fruitful, and gloriously rich: thus, we wise, and good, and
thus nor good nor wise, I am.

Sir, Yours, D.W.

LXIV. The Rejoinder.
Sir,
I Quarreled your last in hope you would have retracted your transcendent
elogicall conmends, which whilst you seem to intend in this, you have by a
Rhetorical Artifice, added more fuel to that fire; So that I perceive
whether I write or be silent, complain or acquiesce, I am every way dilemma'd;
I must confess to have nor wit nor language enough, to fadome the depth of your
abilities, and by consequence am rendered impossibilited to pay you in your own
coin, which is of such allay, that I may well say, you have truly found out
the Philosophers stone, since you are able to convert any gross matter into the
gold of fine language; your prosaick lines are (for excellency) like those
metricall ones of Homer, which as they excel in other points, so they seem to
have an easy native slide in them, and to be conducted by a happy Genius. If I
had abilitys to expatiate upon this subject, I could not be held a Patelin, but
rather a suffragran to truth; what I want words to express, silent admiration
shall speak in the thoughts of

Sir, Your obliged servant, T.B.

LXV. An Answer.
Sir,
It Is well you are, as you are, the Rendevouz where all perfections meet,
otherwise I should in this intercourse have one (and one only) advantage of
you; For whilst you at every return of the Tabellary, have your Theme to seek,
and yet no sooner sought but found (such is the magazin of your invention) I
have a plentiful subject always ready at hand, If I had answerable abilitys
to make my election, and to word it accordingly and that is news, news which
whilst there are men, will never cease to be in vogue; And since this week
affords that which is somewhat palaticall, I shall no longer tantalize you with
a proletarious Exordium. Then know, etc. -- I humbly kiss your hands and remain.

Sir, Your faithful servant, T.B.

LXVI. REPLY.
SIR,
I Am assaulted by your Martial metaphors, yet with this favor, that where
others erect their engines, to ruin, your level aims to strengthen the weak
fort you direct against; your continued Elogies at last mean to persuade me ( I
see) into some Ability, and could you infuse what you commend (in stead of
blush) your Rhetorique would make me doubtless eloquent. I will not say with
that keen Satyrist recuso Euge tuum and Belle. No I will with a modest guilt of
non-desert embrace them, to profit, and that nec te quaesiveris extra (of the
same Poet) was a good Monition. But our Muse is not so stoicall.

Quis enim virtutem amplectitur ipsam,

Praemia si tollas -- Sir, honor is the reward of Arts and fame the tongue of
honor, nor are either honor or fame more the guerdons, then the incentives of
Proficience. Do you see (my friend) how I hug your attributions? My vanity yet
(in it) may be your lesson; not to be vain but ingenuous, Be not so squeamish,
hence forward: Accept your Baies offered, or merit it conferred. What praise
finds not answerable, let it incite to answer. I know my insufficiencies, but
utterly despair not amendment; If by your encouragement I amend not, I shall
confess my Brutish nature, to be past cure. If I grant you an advantage over
me, it is but what you have asserted: I answer the same Post, and to many
besides yours; But what is this? (my both matter, and the couching shows it)
to be suddenly slight and rude, an odd perfection, and but suitable to both my
leisure and me; you have a ready subject for your pen, and how gratefully and
ably you paint it forth, give me leave to be the Judge, that receive the
delight: and I must keep it to my self, for you are as coy to receive the
titles of your worth, as I am conscious they are due. Be then still higher then
words can express you; so I may still be

Sir, Excessively yours, W.D.

LXVII. The first Address to his Mistress.
Most honored Lady,
IN a cause whereon the felicity of my whole life depends, and wherein I have
most will, I find least power to unbosome the secrets of my heart, such force
has love to captivate my faculties; Hence it is I rather chose this, then that
other way of verbal delivery; For though in either I should discover my own
imperfections, yet in these lines my guiltles blushes will pass unseen.
Hitherto I have only appeared a servant to your affairs, and in that quality
had continued, if the excellency of your personal endowments had not (by some
kind of heavenly impulse) driven me on to more aspiring thoughts; Thoughts,
which (with truth I speak it) were engendered by the only object of your
goodness, without any adulterate commixture of estate, which (however valued by
others) is not of weight sufficient to turn the balance of my scale, if not
otherwise well laden with pure and unbiased affection, which I profess to owe
to none but you; and to you all things, even the being of

Your most faithful and devoted servant, T.B.

LXVIII. Another to the same.
My inestimable Jewel,
IF the fumes of those corrosives you gave me last night from other hands, had
not been qualified with the sweet odors of your own cordialls, I had
(unfeignedly speaking) wholly sacrifiz'd the ensuing night to the vigils of a
disquiet mind; But as your goodness had not the will only, but the power to
raise me from a hell of tormenting thoughts, to a Paradise of expected
comfort, so does it multiply my endeared affections, which no misfortune shall
have power to alienate, nor shall any thing but death determine. I am with much
solicitude setting all my imaginations upon the tenter, in order to the
removal of those Rocks, which seem (and but seem) to threaten Shipwreck to our
approaching happiness, whereto your utmost contribution is (by all the ties of
true love) most earnestly implored, together with the continuance of him in
your best thoughts, who is

Your own, beyond expresses, T.B.

LXIX. ANOTHER.
Dear pledge of my soul.
AMong all the obloquies, which the unrelenting malice of mine (and by
consequence your) enemies has cast upon me, none appears so ghastly in my
thoughts, as that pretended want of love toward you, which (the heavens will
witness) was never imbreasted in any mortal with more purity and plenitude;
For it is the foundation, whereon I intend (by divine assistance) to build a
frame of mutual and interminable happiness; a happiness that will be admired by
some, but envied by others. Please to remember that you are now filia
emancipata (as divines term you) at your own dispose, and that you have of me
a servant, who only breathes by your favor and lives through your love, who
will ever owe you fealty for the one, and still do you homage for the other; a
servant, who with unwearied expectation only waits for the happy hour, wherein
that ( fiat) shall be by you pronounced, which will in an instant (
Elixar-like) turn all my drossy cares and anxieties into true contentments, and
make me live eternally

Yours without change, T.B.

LXX. ANOTHER.
My happy Choice,
IF a more pressing occasion had not detained me, I should have thought the
foulness of the weather but an easy penance, in respect of the solace, which
the sweets of your presence would have afforded me; for the enjoyment whereof I
must (with much regret) adjourn my expectation till to morrow; Mean time I send
you the promised pictures, if the sight of which do at any time erect your
thoughts to heavenward, even then remember him, who on earth desires no
greater happiness, then to live and die loving (and beloved by) you, in quality
of

Your second self, T.B.

LXXI. To excuse the not taking leave of a Lady of quality.
Madam,
THough it be held a readier way to gain pardon, by acknowledging then excusing
a fault, yet the Eminency of your Ladyships person does so aggravate it in me,
that I must beg leave to lessen, though, I cannot hope to have it wholly
remitted, in saying the justness of your Ladyships cause of stay, made me
presume none had so little compassion as to deny it; and that I might expect
the being freed from my ague, without danger of losing the opportunity of
presenting my humble thanks for so many singall favors, undeservedly conferred
on me; but since that happiness with many others is lost by your Ladyships
absence, honor this paper so far I beseech you, as to suffer it to supply my
defects herein, and testify how ambitious I shall be, by my future observance,
to merit the title of

Madam, Your most humble servant, A.B.

LXXII. Upon the death of a fair Lady.
Sir,
AMong other impartments, your last tells me, you were to usher a fair Lady to
her grave; A Corporal work of Mercy, it is to bury the Dead, I grant; but to
interr so great a Beauty ^e^ms to entrench on Pity and blast the Spring. Had
she lived till Autumn or even Midsommer, the funerals of many flowers, had
lamented her Urne: yea if but till they had been blown, they would have lost
their lives to adorn her Hearse; and have been ambitious (like those Savages)
to have been buried quick with their Lady Paragon, for her attendance in the
other World. But she has inverted Nature, and the Season too; the flower of
beauty died, when the beauty of flowers should spring; and so has not only
left a withered World, but dismayed the Blowth of what should garnish it.
Flowers are disheartened to open their fragrant Colors, since their Pattern is
so early Cropped: and seem to intend (being she is entombed under the Earths
surface) to keep themselves under Earth to accompany her dust; yet I will free
you of cruelty in this fate; you had no hand (I am sure) in her death, though
you helped her to her Grave. And who should be a fitter Mourner at the exequies
of a fair Lady, than so complete a servant of Ladies? Sir, I see what grace you
are entertained with by them: they not only love you living, but are loath to
part with you, dead: will carry you as for as they can toward the other life,
when they go. That if they may not have your company quite through (which were
a wrong to Survivors) they may your funeral tears, sighs, or prayers for
their Vltime Vale: you preface a happy imprimis, to this sad discourse, and say
having (first) done all that might tend to her future happiness. Happy News!
and it ownes you, I believe, an instrument of good effects and offices. Had all
fair Ladies such faithful servants, More Idols of beauty would receive
impression of the divine Image, and become the servants of God. And she had
much reason to desire your care of her bodies enterrment, that had first aided
her soul, with a saving Viaticum for heaven. Long may you live the Author or
helper of such good deeds. In the interim, as here was a double work of mercy
(Corporal and Spiritual) exploited; so you, I am confident, have made your
useful application of the Accident; beheld in the blasting of this flower, the
fate of Fairness, the frailties of the fairest Clay, that feature, and white
and red could embelish. If she were not Superlative in Beauty, in beauty she
had many inferiors; if in fortunes, not the favorite of fortune; yet, she has
had her smiles. Many Beauties have fallen sooner, many may sooner fade; yet in
her all beauties, all fortunes, have expressed, what fortunes and beauties are;
what is the Exit of the Fable of this temporary life: to wit, ugly death,
eternal deprivation, the cold Tomb, and deformed dust. Fortunate life! that so
contemplates mortal condition, as to be indifferent and ready to change; that
frail incertainties, and vain glitter may be motives to assure and fix on
lasting good, that by others death learnes to live, and lives the life that
fears not death: that so accompanies others funerals, as in that sable
equipage, to behold the mournful Pomp of the Worlds farewell, and their own
destiny: that reads in that earthy bed of death (the Grave of others) their own
Motto, we are dust, and all mortal things Momentary. Sir, pardon this long
slip of my pen: you see how a fair Ladies death and your living piety,
entrances me, to the forgetfulness of other subjects, I confess I am also now
in a dull Mood, not apt as to expression. Thanks for your News on which, the
only present comment shall be; that I am for ever

Sir, Your thankful servant, D.W.

LXXIII. The Reply, relating the particulers of that Ladies death.
Sir,
SInce you have been pleased to sing so sweet a dirge, and to make so excellent
a comment upon our late funerous text, I cannot think the particulers of that
sad subject (how confusedly soever I deliver them) will be unacceptable to you;
This Lady was 3 months continually dying, without any hope of recovery, and
this occasioned by an ulcer in her throat, it was my good fortune (though
others had assai'd it) to gain her first assent to bring a spiritual Physician
to her. Dr. G. was next at hand, and did act his part exceedingly well; after 2
or 3 effective visits, the Patient (through the comfort and ease of the
spiritual Cataplasmes and emplaisters, which the Doctor applied) was so rapt
and piously enamored of him, as she even embraced him at every appearance. When
she drew near the confines of deaths kingdom, she did usually ejaculate not
only most pious but even eloquent or rather diviniloquent expressions, as this
(amongst many others) which heaven grant I may never forget. I have (said she)
lived long in the vanity of this World, for which God has placed me in this
bed of sorrow; Were it his holy pleasure, I should act over one of them again,
and the choice left to me, I would ( by the Grace of Jesus) rather chose the
torments of this bed, and malady, then have any thing to do with the Worlds
vanities, etc Besides nothing did so much trouble her, as that she had lived
(as she said) for fear of Worldly endamagement) some years in an outward
profession that contradicted her inward persuasion; The Doctor was no less
taken with his Patient, then she with him, for I heard him say he was never
more satisfied with the manner of any persons death; And I confess her exit did
more tristitiate me, then did that of my own Sister, the manner of it, not a
little both mortifying and edifying me; For to see her picture in the
Antichamber, and then go in and look upon the original, was subject enough
for mortification, the one being so incomparable beautiful, the other so
ghastly; In a word, the last breath she drew was Je-and in pronouncing- sus she
expired. So that we may conclude, as she was a great beauty living, she was a
greater dead; For whereas corporal beauty in others dies with the body, hers
did not so, but by a secret transition passed into the soul. Thus have you
heard the brief (but sad) story of this good Ladies end, and that from

Sir, Your humble servant, T.B.

LXXIV. LETTER.
Sir,
THe punishment that Apollo inflicts of reading Guicciardine is a light one,
compared to this that you impose upon your self, and yet you will only here
play the Stoic in not acknowledging you are in pain; Nothing can justify me,
but obedience, for persuming to offer this tedious Romance to those eyes that
should only look upon Iliads; I give verses as Galenists do Physic, which
clogs the stomach more then the disease; I must confess we may view Cities
taken, kingdoms ruined, and new worlds discovered in less room; It is a Poem
that has neither height nor profundity, yet it has length; it overflowes but
swells not; it wearies without ascents, as Promenades do upon a flat; In a
word, I shall think, if you do not find fault with it and reprehend me, it is
because you are angry and will do nothing in Passion; however it is a trust I
recommend to your secrecy, for follies are not things of the least consequence
to trust a friend with. And having now performed my promise with you, I expect
you should do the like with

Sir, Your affectionate servant, J.C.

LXXV. Upon the New year.
Sir,
AS all things sublunary owe their being to the revolution of the upper
Spheres, so their change; And it is just, they should submit to their essential
Guides. Amongst other novelties, the first mover had brought about the point of
Circular motion, that has began us a New year: and promises many unwonted
effects. Whilst these appear, let us be the same we were, constant old friends
to God, heaven and our selves. Change, though to the better, argues
imperfection, yet not to change to the better, were the worst of imperfections.
As restles rivers have to their Ocean, so ought we to ours, which is God, that
Ocean of bliss, repose, and Center of aeternity; Till here arrived, we are in
flux and variety: Let us be so, but hold the right way.

As Grace is elder then Nature, so she first begins her year; Astronomers
commence theirs with the springs vigor, when the Sun's in Aries, the Church is
content with Capricorn; When her Sun's in the Cradle, that Orient of Justice
and mercy, the Son of God, The signs melancholy; yet the forerunner of more
propitious. So let our sorrows shorten with the nights, our joys with the
days lengthen. This solstice (if we follow the conduct of the right Star) will
fairly move to a brighter height, a nearer approach; dispell our mists, warm
our hearts, ravish our eyes.

This rambling prologue, is but to bring in the prayer that wishes you a happy
New year, and that regard of times winged Cariers, which in running moments may
take hold of the steadfast point of eternity. This is the Center of
circumference; In which who truly fix, may be moved but not from it. Then, as
time whirles away the measure of our mortal being, it will ha^ten that, which
shall know no alteration, but to be invariable. Sir, my complex^on suits the
dead season at present, and yields me but a languishing health: Hence my pen's
as dull. You know when the bodies out of order, the spirits cannot but flag. I
must suffer the one, you will pardon the other. And so to affairs that require
no politure, but what your patience shall give them, etc.

2 January. W.D.

LXXVI. ANSWER.
SIR
YOurs I have received, read, and read again, and the more I read it, the more
I have a a mind to read it, such are the incentives of your heaven-inspired
lines, which as they clearly demonstrate the truth of that Maxim of a modern
Author, that Eternity is the Port and Sabbath of all humane Contemplations: So,
since my more earthy Soul and less heavenly cogitations are not able in due
manner to comprehend them; I wrap my self in this your learned sheet and say to
it (with equal wonder) As Aristotle once did to Euripus, Q^uia ego non capio
te, tu capias me

T B.

LXXVII. A letter to a friend upon his marriage.
SIR.
I Have of late with held from you the Characters of my hand, though not the
welwishes of my heart, conceiving you as close in the pursuit of your fair
Daphne, as Phabus was of his, when the breath of his mouth disordered her
dissheiveld hair: For I perceive you have now ran so, as happily to take the
Virgin-prize; may you be ever mutually happy. There now only remains the
metamorphosis (not into the Beast with two backs, which the knavish Shakespeare
speaks of) but of that more ingenious, two into one, unus, una, into unum,
which you have hinted so modestly in yours. Your Daphne I hope (before the
arrival of this paper) will be converted not only into Bays, but Rosemary,
which is one fragrancy, due to her perfections (if you have (as I doubt not)
given her a true Character) more then the Poet gave Apollo's Mistress; Let this
therefore suffice to give you both the parabien of Hymen's honors and
felicities, and to let you know I shall both expect and be ambitious to wear a
sprig in honor of her, nor will I fail heartily to commend you both to the
great President of the wedding of Cana in Galilee, that he may turn the bitter
Waters of your long expectation into the Wine of a happy and contented life,
made up with the blessing of a good and pious posterity. In which devotion I
affectionately rest

Sir, Your humble servant, H.T.

Superscriptions FOR LETTERS, to be addressed to all sorts of persons,
according to the usage of the present times.
If to a Duke,

TO the most Noble (and some times) Excellent or illustrious Prince.

And in discourse we style him Grace

If to a Marquess,

To the right Noble or right honorable.

And in discourse his attribute is, Lordship or Honor.

If to an Earl, Viscount or Baron

To the right honorable.

And to begin a Letter, we, either say

May it please your Honor or Lordship

Right honorable

My Lord.

Which last is used only by Lords to Lords, or by Gentlemen of some quality,
otherwise it is held too familiar.

If to a Baronet, or Knight of the Bath, we say

To the honorable or much honored.

And his attribute (in the beginning of a letter may be Much honored Sir.

The like may be given to a Colonel.

The usual attribute of a Knight was of old

Right Worshipful.

And of an Esquire

Worshipful.

But these are much disused, unles it be by persons of inferior rank.

We say (writing to a Knight)

To my noble or to my much honored friend,

Sir A.B. Knight, these present.

To an Esquire we say

To my much honored or most worthy friend T.G. Esquire.

Observe that (when you write to an Esquire) you be sure not to say Master T.G. Esquire
for the (Master) is ridiculous, the Esquire including it.

So if you write to a Doctor of Divinity, a Doctor of the Civil Law, or Doctor
of Physic, you must not say Mr. Doctor T.G. nor Doctor T.G. Esquire; for Doctor
both comprehends Master and Esquire, and of these the Divine has first place,
the Civilian next, and the Physician last.

To an ordinary Gentleman thus,

To my approved friend

To my most esteemed friend

To my much valued friend

To my very much respected friend

To my worthy good friend, or the like.

Note that all the younger Sons of Dukes and Marquesses are Lords for their
lives only, and are called Lord John, or Lord William, etc. by their Christian
names.

The eldest Son of an Earl is a Lord by birth, so is not a Viscounts Son, till
his Father be dead.

The youngest Sons of Viscounts and Barons are but Esquires, yet are honorable,
and take place of all Baronets and Knights.

The eldest Son of a Baron is but an Esquire during his Fathers life.

Esquire (comes from the French Escuier, in latin Armiger or Scutifer i. a
bearer of Arms, or of a Shield, and) is that Degree of Gentry, which is next
to a Knight; It is conceived that at the first these Esquires were bearers of
Arms to Lords and Knights, and thereby had their name and dignity: Now to be
true Esquires according to the Law of Arms, they must either be Lords younger
Sons, Baronets or Knights eldest Sons, members of Parliament, Sheriffs, Justices
of the Peace, Sergeants at Law, Barristers at Law (yet the late Earl Marshall
would not allow Barristers to be Esquires, but in the Act for Polemoney they
were ranked by the then Parliament as Esquires and paid as Esquire) or of some
ancient family that has it by being heir to a Knight in the right line; Though
now a days (I know not by what warrant) all Gentlemen that have but some
considerable Estate in Lands, take that title upon them, when as the Estate
(though never so great) adds no title. And that the title of Esquire should descend
from Father to Son (as the Estate of Gentry does) is mere fabulous, says Mr.
Herne in his Glory of Generosity, p. 100.

Ladies have (for the most part) the same attributes as their husbands.

Both in Letter and discourse, we give a Duchess the title Grace.

But to a Marchioness, Countess, Viscountess or Baroness, right honorable and
in discourse your honor, and among their equals, or in more familiar
discourse, Madam.

If you write to any of these, the title Madam, is very moding, both at the
beginning and end of your Letter, But if the person writing be of much lower
Rank, then the Lady written unto, it will be decent to say.

May it please your honor, or Right honorable!

All the daughters of Dukes, Marquesses and Earls are Ladies by birth, and are
called Lady Anne, Lady Mary, etc.

But the daughters of a Viscount or Baron are but Mistress, yet are honorable;
And their Addition (being named in instruments of Law or Conveyances) is no
more then a Yeomans daughter has, and that is Spinster, wherein there seems to
be some title wanting.

And for the better understanding the point of precedence, I have thought fit
to transcribe an abstract of two Decrees made by King James touching the same,
in the 10 and 14 years of his reign, which you may read more at large in Mr.
Seldens, Titles of honor, Page 906.

That the younger Sons of Viscounts and Barons shall take place and precedence
before all Baronets.

That such Bannerets (as shall be made by the Kings Majesty, his heirs and
Successors, or by Henry now Prince of Wales, under his or their Standard
displayed in an Army Royal in open war, and the King or Prince personally
present) for their lives only, and no longer, shall for ever in all places
take place and precedence, as well before all other Bannerets whatsoever, as
likewise before the younger Sons of Viscounts and Barons, and before all
Baronets.

The younger Sons of Viscounts and Barons, and all Baronets, shall take place
before all Bannerets whatsoever, other then such as shall be made by the King
as aforesaid.

That the Knights of the Garter, Privy Counselors to the King, the Master of
the Court of Wards and Liveries, the Chancellor and under Treasurer of the
Exchequer, Chanceller of the Duchy, the chief Justice of the Kings Bench, the
Master of the Rolls, The chief Justice of the Common Pleas, the chief Baron of
the Exchequer, and all other the Judges and Barons of the degree of the Coif of
the said Courts, shall have place before the younger sons of Viscounts and
Barons, and before all Baronets.

That Baronets and their heirs Males shall always have place next unto the
younger Sons of Viscounts and Barons, and their wives shall take place
accordingly.

And in another Decree, 14 Jacobi.
That the eldest sons of Baronets and their wives as well during their
husbands lives, as after; And the daughters of the same Baronets following next
after the said wives of the eldest sons of Baronets, shall have place and
precedence before the eldest son and the wife of the eldest son of any Knight
of what Order soever, And likewise the younger sons of such Baronets and
their wives shall take place accordingly before the younger Sons of any
Knights, etc.

ERRATA
PAge 3. l. 19. r Matter. p. 11. l. 10. r Proleptoton. p. 38. l. 15. r Jocus.
p. 43. l. 16. r Periphrasis. p. 44. l. 35. r continuance. p. 49. l. 19. r my
Soul. and l. 20, refresh. p. 61. l. 10. r astonish. p. 63. l. 18. r in Bac. p.
70. l. 15. dele the same. p. 71. l. 3. dele in. p. 72. l. 18. r hardest. p. 69.
l. 27. r enclines. p. 79. l. 8. r forth tears. p. 107. l. 34. r a sleep. p.
112. l. 9. r her own. p. 124. l. 3. r preterhard p. 128. l. 11. r there. p.
134. l. 22. r over. p. 138. l. 15. dele -- p. 142. l 2. r form. p. 153. l. 16.
r best self. p. 170. l. 11.12. r intime. p. 197. l. 17. r gift. and l. 31. r
united.

FINIS.

