Advertisements.
THE Author has received two other Answers, but thinks them not worth
Answering; and being resolved to expose that Irrational Doctrine, and the
weakness of the pretended Justifiers thereof, (but that the World may say that
they have a fair Adversary to deal with, who is not willing to expose their
Persons, but only their Folly, least some Persons might know their hands) does
promise to leave the true and exact Copies of those Letters at Mr. Harrison's
the Bookseller in Cornhil, where any Gentleman that desires it, may see them.

The Anatomy of an Arbitrary Prince, or King James the Second set forth in his
proper Colors, and what England may Expect from such an one: Wherein is set
forth his Unlawful Actions when King of England, and his first Speech which he
made to the Council Feb. 6. 1684. and the Heads of several other Speeches, with
many of his Actions in Ireland since his Arrival there. Written for the
Information and Satisfaction of all the Grumbletonians in their Majesty's
Dominions, but especially of the poorer sort. Price 1 d. They are to be Sold at
Mr. Harrison's.

Bloody News from Devonshire: Being a True though Lamentable Relation of Four
Barbarous and Horrid Murders, committed by an Inhuman Father upon the Bodies of
his Son and Three Daughters, at a Village near Comb in the County of Devon, on
the 30th. of March, 1694. by beating out their Brains with a Mattock, whilst
they were on their knees beging for their Lives; And how afterward through
Remorse and Reluctance of Mind, he attempted to Hang himself, but was prevented
by the timely coming in of some Neighbors: Also the deplorable Condition his
Wife is in, whom he pursued with an intent to Murder. Together with his
Confession before a Justice of Peace, and Commitment to Exon Jayl, as it was
Communicated by a Letter from an Eminent Dealer in Comb, to a Worthy Citizen
in London.
A Person, whose Name (for his Relations sake, which are very Considerable) we
omit, as not thinking it convenient to add sorrow to affliction, living in a
Village near Comb in the County of Devon, having a considerable time since
Married a handsome young Woman, with a considerable Fortune; they in the
beginning of their Marriage state lived together both very happy and
comfortably, and had diverse hopeful Children, which were brought up with Care
and good Education, their Parents providing very plentifully for them, and by
the Blessing of God, upon their endeavors, the Substance still increased;
insomuch, that they had what they could desire to render a happy satisfaction
in temporal things; but in the height of these Enjoyments and Possession, the
Devil put in to overturn their peace and quiet, and so far exerted his powerful
Temptations, that he utterly unhinged their felicity, in stirring up Jealousies
and Mistrusts between the Man and his Wife, so that heart-burnings and
Animosities brought in quarrels and strife, etc.

Upon Notice of this sudden Alteration in a Family which had so long lived
peaceably, some honest Neighbors undertoook the good Office of reconciling
them to their former good understanding, but it continued not long, e're the
Fire that seemed to glimmer in the Embers, broke out again into a violent
Flame, whether caused by the unhappy Husband's being jealous of his handsome
Wife, (perhaps without a cause) unexpected Loss, or disappointments in
business, since it yet remains in the dark, we determine not, but certain it
is, Coming home on Friday the 30th. of March last, sooner than his Wife
expected, she upon viewing his Countenance fiery, stern and furious more than
usual, dreading the fatal Consequence, started up and fled out of his reach,
being too nimble for him, though he was not slow in pursuing her a considerable
way, but she getting shelter in a Neighbors house, he declined his pursuit and
went home, raging and storming in an extraordinary discomposed manner.

This disorder made some of the Neigbours follow him at a distance, in hopes to
pacify him when the heat of his fury was a little abated, as they having been
formerly acquainted with his temper. But now the Power of Darkness was stronger
with him than ever, for in his return, meeting his only Son (a Lad about 12.
years of Age) who came out of the House, with uplifted hands and tears, to
entreat him to be pacified, and not to kill or beat his Mother; he putting off
all bowels of Pity and Compassion, snatched up a Mattock, an Instrument used in
felling Trees, and Barbarously at one Forcible Blow Clove his Head in sunder,
whilst the Lad (perceiving his revengeful intent) kneeled before his Inhuman
Father to beg his pity, Entreating him to spare his Life.

This appeased not his Diabolick Fury, but smeered with the Blood and Brains
which dashed in his Face upon the stroke to upbraid his Impiety, he went into
his house with the bloody Instrument in his hand, and there finding his three
Daughters (the Eldest not exceeding 9. years) crying at the danger they
supposed their Mother in, he made furiously toward them, which caused them to
fly into an inner room, but without any remorse pursuing them, he, whilst they
were on their knees, with uplifted hands, Crying Father, Father, pray don't
kill us, and we will be good Children, beat out (which I tremble to relate)
their brains, with the bloody Instrument he had killed their Brother with, a
little before,

Immediately upon this, the Divine Power struck him with remorse, as he has
since Confessed, so that he stood fixed, confounded, and amazed, viewing the
bloody ruins his fury and despair had prompted him to make on the Bodies of
the Children of his bowels; which forced a flood of tears from his Eyes;
whereupon he fell to taring his hair, and his clothes, Cursing the day he was
born, as in a kind of a distraction and despair, and the temptation urging
him, espying a Rope, he snatched it up, and sought for a place to fix it to and
hang himself; but in the mean time, the Neighbors who had seen at a distance
the first tragical act, came rustling in and prevented it. His Wife likewise
dreading the Fatal Consequence, came hastily after them, and seeing her
Children weltring in their blood, and shreiking out in a Lamentable manner, She
sunk down on their dying Bodies in a deadly Swoon, but with much chafing was
recovered, but at the coming away of this Relation, she remained speechless,
distracted, and in little likelihood of living long.

The Bloody Husband being carried before a Justice of Peace, in a Raving, and
Distracted manner, Confessed the the several Murders, and said, The Devil had
tempted him to Murder his Fanily, and at that time he could not resist the
temptation, but now was sorry for it with a bleeding heart and wished it undone.

Upon this Confession, and the Circumstances of the inhuman and Unnatural
Murders, he was committed to Exeter Jayl in Order to his Trial, where he
remains in a very Disordered Condition, under great Horrors and Dissturbance of
Mind, and as one in Despair.

This Acc^unt came in a Letter from an Eminent Person in Comb, to a Worthy
Citizen in London, the Letter being now in the Hands of the Publisher of this
Paper, from whom any person, inquisitive as to the Premises, may be fully
satisfied of the Truth of this Lamentable and Deplorable Relation.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor near Amen Corner, 1694.


