THE BLOODY LOVER: OR, Barbarous Nevvs FROM GLOUCESTER.

A full and true Relation how an Inhumane Villain Named William Hall, did on
the 16th. of October last, most cruelly Murder a Maid, whose Name was Sarah
Butt, that was his Sweetheart, as she was Milking, cleaving her skull in three
places with a Hedging-bill, cutting off one of her hands, and giving her
several other mortal Wounds.

As also how he endeavored to have killed a little Child that was with her,
and formerly attempted to Murder both her and her Mother, wounding the latter
in several places.

If monstrous Love such bloody scenes create,
What Tragedies may we expect from Hate?
Printed for P. Brooksby, 1673.

THE Bloody Lover, etc.
IT is a sad, yet wholesome Speculation to consider into what a woeful condition
the disobedience of our First Parents has plunged their unhappy Posterity; Man's
whole estate (by Nature) being too truly um'd up by the sacred Historian in
this miserable total Evil, wholly Evil, and that Continually; our
understandings mufled up in thick gloomy Clouds of ignorance or Error, our
Judgments blearey'd and depraved, our wills headstrong and false-biased
infinitely more ready to follow the destructive Allurements of vice, than the
sober Dictates of Virtue, all our Senses but so many Traitorous inlets of Sin,
and our imaginations Seed-plots of vanity and wickedness, Reason designed by
Heaven, as King to moderate the Extravagancies of the inferior faculties, is
utterly dethroned by rebellious Passions, and unruly Affections, so that
Exorbitant desires hurry us to the ruin of our selves and others, and we are
led Captives at the Devils pleasure, by the Tyranny of every domineering Lust;
hence the world becomes embrewed with blood, and each day alarms us with
Deplorable Relations of some mischievous and Tragical Events.

Love is certainly the noblest of our Passions, the Bond of the Universe, the
Business of Heaven, and the Glory of Earth, yet this too suffers in the general
Depravity, whilst each Kitchinstuff-flame, and brutish Irregular heat usurps
its Livery, and shrouds its own deformity under the covert of that Illustrious
Name, as unhappily it happened in our present case, which (without amusing the
greedy Reader with further Preamble) was briefly and plainly thus.

There was an ordinary Servant to Husdandry came some years since to live with
a sufficient Yeoman at a place called Bishops-Norton in Glocestershire, and not
far from Gloucester City: He was a fellow of very poor obscure birth, and worse
conditions; a sullen surly temper, Choleric, and revengeful, very sparing of
his speech, but of a humor close and covetous; his Master had then a Daughter
named Sarah, a young Maid, very handsome, and sweet-conditioned, of about
eighteen years of Age, and on whom he intended to bestow a considerable
Portion, which invited several young men of equal rank thereabouts to Court
her: amongst the rest, this poor Servant of her Fathers must needs be hers, and
pretends a great Love for her, whether it were her good Conditions, (which we
scarce believe, since few men now adays regard them) or her beauty (which is
most probable) the hopes of her money (which all adore) that was the Ground of
his good will we know not, but in short time being in the same House with her,
he easily found an opportunity to declare his mind to her, who having an equal
a version to his person and quality, at first answered him with a flat denial,
and afterward endeavored to Check his insolence by a deserved contempt and
disdain, but finding that she should still be persecuted with his foolish
importunities, though she had often given him warning to desist his vain
Addresses; concluded she had no way to be rid of them, but by acquainting her
Parents; who very Gravely checked him for his boldness, and told him that not
only their care for their daughters future welfare, but her own inclinations
did forbid him to entertain any thoughts of ever being her Husband. To this he
answers little at present, but falls into a sullen melancholy, (the fittest
Ground in Nature for the Devil to sow his Tares in) and taking counsel of Hell;
resolves since she would not accept of his Love she should feel the effects of
his Hate, whereupon taking his advantage he rushes into the house one day soon
after with a Pitch-fork in his hand, with an intent (as is beleiev'd) to
murder both her and her Mother, but the Maid being then happily on some
occasion in another Room, he falls first on the Good woman wounding her in the
Arm, who crying out and othrr Servants coming in, immediately they at that
time prevented his bloody purpose. This caused much disturbance, but the fellow
pretending himself very sorry for what he had done, and laying all the blame on
his passionate affection, which he said had transported him almost to phrenzy,
they willing to be quit of him, took no further course to punish him but only
dismissed him their service, who promised very solemnly never more to trouble
them or their daughter, and accordingly being gone, to color his black designs;
soon after he courted another person, and married her: in whose embraces no
body could doubt but he would have buried all thoughts of his former Mistress,
who some time afterward being willing to see somewhat more of the world than
she could learn by being always at home with her parents, voluntarily put her
self to service.

But our monstrous Love's rage is not yet over, the Devil and he have made a
bargain together, that nothing shall satisfy his revenge but her Blood: For
the effecting of which premeditated villary as this poor harmless Maid on the
twenty sixth of October. last, was a Milking some fields off from her Masters
house, unaccompanied by any but a Child of her Masters about nine years old,
and her own Innocent thoughts, this inhumane bruit (waiting his opportunity)
meets her, and violently taking her by the arm, with a look ghastly as Death,
and voice terrible, as that of Thunder, thus accosts her: Now you proud
Huswife, I will be even with you for all your scorns, your disdains shall cost
you your Life, and your Blood answer my revenge. Saying thus (or words to that
effect) with a Hedging-bill he had in his hand he strikes at her Head, but the
first stroke missing, gave her opportunity to fall on her knees, begging of him
for Christ's sake to spare her life, but he more barbarous than the wild Savages
continues deaf to her Cries, and repeating his blow, at the next stroke cuts
her into the skull, when seeing the little child standing at some distance,
amazed at his Cruelty, he resolves to dispatch him too, but the dying Maid
crying out: Run Child for thy Life, for he has Murdered me, The Child betook
himself to his Heels so nimbly that the Murderer that pursued him a good way
could not overtake him, but turning back that he might be sure to complete his
Hellish Work, falls afresh a hacking the poor Maid, cutting her twice more into
the skull, and giving her several other mortal wounds, and so betook himself to
flight, leaving his bloody weapon upon the place.

The Child being got home, first with his Ghastly looks, and afterward with his
Tongue, soon as his lost breath and fright would give him leave, declares the
bloody news, which alaraming the family, they instantly repair to the place,
where they find (a sight that would melt the most flinty heart into tears) the
poor mangled Creature weltring in her Virgin Blood, and filling the Air with
dying Groans, when they arrived she was ready to expire, and only continued so
long a live, as with her fainting voice to declare the name of her barbarous
Murderer.

Strict search was forthwith made, and Hue and Cry sent forth to all parts for
apprehending the Author of this horrid fact. But as if the black Prince of
Darkness that hurried him on to so Wicked a Deed had assisted him too in his
escape, he cannot as yet be heard of: But we doubt not but the most Just and
Blood-revenging providence of Heaven (that never suffers Murders to go
unpunished) will in due time bring him to light, and that punishment which is
most due to all that perpetuate such Cruel and Bloody Villainies.

Sera sed certa vindicta dei. Though Heaven seems slow in such offenders Dooms,
Its stroke is sure, and dreadful when it comes.

FINIS.

