NOO-LEXIKON: A Law-Dictionary.

Interpreting such difficult and obscure WORDS and TERMS, As are found either
in Our Common or Statute, Ancient or Modern LAWS.

WITH REFERENCES to the several Statutes, Records, Registers, Law Books,
Charters, Ancient Deeds, and Manuscripts, wherein the Words are used: And
Etymologies, where they properly occur.

Coke on Littl. fol. 68. b. Ad recte docendum oportet primum inquirere Nomina;
quia rerum cognitio a nominibus rerum dependet.

By THOMAS BLOVNT of the Inner, Temple, Esquire

In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for John Martin and Henry Herringman,
at the Sign of the Bell in S. Paul's Churchyard, and a little without
Temple Bar, and in the New Exchange. 1670.

To the Right Honorable Sir Orlando Bridgeman Knight and Baronet, Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal of England; Sir John Kelynge Knight, Lord Chief Justice of
His Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, and Sir John Vaughan Knight, Lord Chief
Justice of His Majesty's Court of Common Plea^.
MY LORDS,
AS it is certainly my bounden duty to offer, and submit these my timorous and
bashful endeavors to your great Judgments; so it is my Interest to implore the
benignity of your auspicious Patronage of them. For the publishing these
Papers, I had only two Motives: The first and principal to erect a small
Monument of that vast respect and deference, which I have for your Lordships,
who are not only the Oracles of our Law, and Grand Exemplars of Justice; but
the glory and ornament of that Honorable Society, whereof (however unworthy) I
boast my self a Member, and which at present justly claims the pre-eminence
above the rest, by producing more persons, dignified with the Judiciary scarlet
Robe, then the other Three, and filling up, by due merit, the most eminent
Seats of Judicature in the Nation. The other, to gratify an ambitious
inclination of my own, of leaving behind me somewhat (how inconsiderable
soever) that may, in some measure, excuse me to posterity, from having been a
truantly and useless Member of that Learned and Active Body. If your Honors
shall allow me, to have fulfilled my duty in the one, and obtained my design in
the other, I have the desired effect of my Labors: Nor has my greatest
ambition any thing higher to aim at, then that I may, with your Lordships
permission, subscribe my self

My Lords, Your most humble and obedient Servant THO. BLOUNT.
Inner Temple, 20 June. 1670.
Preface.
SOme will perhaps wonder, why I took so much pains to write this Book; and
object, that we have two good Ones of this kind extant; Cowels Interpreter, and
Terms of the Law, nay happily thrust in Leighs Phylological Commentary, as a
third: I answer, though it is not my design to raise the reputation of this
Work, by disvaluing Those, yet it may be allowable modestly to declare their
Defects, that my undertaking this may not appear unnecessary.

Doctor Cowel was certainly a Learned Man, and his Enterprise very commendable,
but his Profession the Civil Law; and, that he did not singly intend his
Interpreter for us, appears by his often expressing what each word signifies in
the Common Law, to distinguish it from the Civil; in which learning he bestows
a considerable part of his Book. He ingenuously says, His design is the
advancement of knowledge, and to incite others to finish his model, and supply
his defects, which in truth are not a few; For, he directly mistakes the
meaning of some Words, and derivation of others, as Ordel, Mindbruch,
Brodehalpeny, Furlong, Avishering, Thirdwith-hawanman, etc. He confounds Realty
with Royalty, and Commote with Comorth, which are distinct words. In the word
Honor, he says, that in reading he has observed thus many Honors in England,
and sets down 25; wherein, either his Reading was short, or his observations
defective; for, I have collected above twice that number out of approved
Authors and Records, in being when he wrote. He is sometimes too prolix in the
derivation of a Word, setting down several Authors Opinions, without
categorically determining which is the true; as in Exchequer, Withernam,
Herald, Earl, Justices of Trailbaston, Pawnage, Purlieu, etc. And lastly,
gives us diverse bare Words without explication, as Cone and Key, Calendring,
Coggs, Duch, Lancegay, Palingman, Bread of treet, etc. which I have supplied;
Not but that I have lest some quaere's too but those in Words of greater
difficulty.

The Author of the Law-Terms was without doubt not less learned; but, wrote so
long since, that his very Language and manner of expression was almost
antiquated, till helped by the late correction of it; He has added to diverse
Words several Cases in Law, relating thereto in general, not tending much to
their explication; which I have declined, lest the bulk should swell too big,
and the principal Design be waved: He omits the Etymons for the most part, and
is much more copious in the first part of the Alphabet, then in the later,
which argues, the Author had not time, or perseverance to finish it. They are
both much wanting in the number of Words, especially the later; For Cowel
gleaned many after the Author of the Law-Terms had inn'd his Harvest: yet, both
have much useless and repealed Law in them; as in reference to Tenures by
Knights-service and their Appendi^^s, Wardship, Villenage, Purveyance,
Star Chamber, Knighthood, etc. For, thus says the learned Author of the
Preface to Roll's Abridgment -- As time, and experience, and use, and some Acts
of Parliament have abridg'd some, and antiquided other Titles, so they have
substituted and enlarged others. Cowel also, especially in the Folio Edition,
(besides the misalphabeting) is extremely misprinted; yet the Terms of the Law
will still deservedly retain an usefulness pro tanto, and particularly for the
Law-French, to instruct the young Student therein.

Leigh affords not the least Objection against my Undertaking; for, he is a
Commentator, not an Expositor; his Title speaks it, though sometimes he acts a
little in both capacities.

Having found, these, among other, as I judged, important defects in those
Authors, considered the usefulness of Books of this Nature, and reflected on
these Expressions of the Coke on Litt. fo. 325, a and 106. b.
Oracle of our Law -- Here, as in many other places it appears, how necessary
it is to know the signification of Words. And again, That the explanation of
ancient Words, and the true sense of them is requisite to be understood, per
verba notiora: I was encouraged to bestow my endeavor herein. And, it will
abate the wonder, that I, who inter doctos me non effero, should yet not only
assume the liberty in many places to correct those learned Authors, but also
make an additional collection of above a thousand Words; if it be considered,
That they wanted those Helps I have had, viz. That incomparable Glossarium
Arohaiologicum of Sir Henry Spelman; The elaborate Institutes of Sir Edward
Coke; That excellent Dictionarium Saxonico-Latino-Anglicum of Mr. Somner; The
Learned Works of Mr. William Dugdale, Mr. Fabian Philips, and others, published
since those Authors wrote. My Genius has also led me (though sometimes
diverted) to this kind of search these thirty years, as my Glossographia will
in some measure witness; For, whilst my Contemporaries studied the Law it
self, and gained Riches; I was hunting after the difficult and uncuth Terms of
it, and got nothing, but my own satisfaction.

Nor can I otherwise judge, but a No^o lexicon may be as necessary and useful
in our Law-Common-wealth, (even from the Coif to the puny-Clerk) as a Lexicon
Juridicum among the Civilians, or Lexicon-Medicum with the Physicians since I
am by this time persuaded, that no Law or Science has more abstruse Terms then
ours.

Now, that I may in some measure prevent the Readers suspicion, that my
abilities are not commensurate with so great an Undertaking; I Will tell him
freely, I have, in this Meadow, made little hay with my own fork; but, in the
more common words have made use of Cowel, Lambert, Crompton, West, Terms of the
Law, Skene, etc. yet seldom without Corrections, Contractions or Additions; In
the Supplementals, Bracton, Britton, Fl^ta, Spolman, Camden, Cake, our several
Reporters, and diverse other Authors have been my Guides: And, in such Words,
wherein Printed Books afforded me no light, I have consulted Records, Char^ers,
ancient Manuscripts, and some of the best Antiquaries of these times, from whom
I received both encouragement and assistance.

To many Words I have added their Etymologies, where I found them apposite,
encouraged Dodridges English Lawyer, fo. 75.
thereto by the opinion of a Learned Judge -- Etymologies, if they be rightly
used, and drawn from the final cause, or from the Effect, do not only yield an
Argument of good consequence, but also afford much illustration and delight.

I have briefly inserted all the old Writs out of the Registers, though many of
them are worn out of use; and have not omitted even the Mechanic Words,
mentioned in our Statutes; since there may be use of such knowledge in
Pleadings: And Lawyers (as Cowel well observes) professing true Philosophy,
should not be ignorant of such, nor even of Trees, from the Cedar of Lebanon to
the Hysop that springs out of the Wall.

Though, to gratify the young Student, I have inserted some Words, which will
seem very common to the more Learned, yet I have rejected diverse I found in
Cowel, as too mean, and indeed not at all deserving an explication; such are
Groom, Sluice, Copy, Revels, Toil, Wedding, Baubels, etc. And the names of
our common Drugs and Spices, mentioned in the Statute of 1 Jac. Besides the
general design of this Dictionary in explaining the difficult Lawterms both
ancient and modern, I conceive the Student may make a further use of it, as a
Repertory, or Commonplace; Since many Statutes, Law Books, Charters and
Records are cited, or referred to in most words: For, I have heard, the learned
Lord Keeper Littleton made use of Cowels Interpreter for the like service.

If I have sometimes committed a Jeofaile, or hunted Counter in any explication
or Etymology, in so large a field of words, and stored with such variety of
Game, it will be no wonder, and, I hope, will draw no censure upon me from the
Ingenuous: Quis enim mortalium in argumento tam vario and immenso; Spel. in
Praef. Glossar.
tam nodoso, rigido and caliginoso, alias non erret, alias non caecutiat?
Besides, the learned Spelman sometimes concludes a Word with a fateor me
ignorare, and even Sir Edward Coke has erred (pardon the boldness of that word)
at least in Etymons, as in Atin, Hotchpot, Panel, Heriot, Domicellus, etc.
Therefore, if I leave some words with a Quaere, or a Fortasse, to be resolved,
or corrected by the more learned; it is but what Cowel frequently, and Spelman
has sometimes done.

Facile est recolere, laboriosum condere.
Advertisements.
TO the end the Reader may readily know the Series of our Kings from the
Conquest, and, for the most part, in what Kings Reign a Charter without Date is
made, by His Title; and again, in what Year of our Lord every King Reigned, and
how long, I have prefixed a Necessary Table to that purpose.

Such also of the Saxon Characters, as are different from the Common; since,
through the want of some knowledge in that Language, Authors have committed
many Errors; The word Gersuma being by some miswritten Gressume, by others
Grossome, and by some Gressame. Grithbreche occurs in some, Gethbreche,
Grithbrich, Greatbreach, Grichbreach, and Greachbreach: So for ere and ite
(Were and Wite) we meet with Pere and Pite, and the like of diverse other words.

Before the Conquest Charters were usually dated; sometimes by Olympiads,
sometimes by Calends, Nones and Ides, but most frequently by the year of our
Lord. After the Conquest, Dates were commonly omitted, especially in the Deeds
of Subjects, till King Edward the Second, and Edward the Thirds days, and
thenceforth the year of the Kings Reign, or that of our Lord was constantly
inserted: So that Deeds, made since the Conquest, and found without date, may
be presumed to be in time before those Kings Reigns.

Witnesses names were added in the body of the Deed, and with the same Hand the
Deed was written, till and in King Henry the Eighths time; but now changed into
Endorsements, where the Witnesses subscribe their own Names.

Additions to persons Names in public Writings and Pleadings were very rarely
used till the Statute of 1 Hen. 5.

In my Progress, where any ancient Charters or Records were judged to be
extraordinary, either for matter or form, I have transcribed them at large, but
the generality are abridg'd, to avoid prolixity. One only Seal of King Edward
the Fourth, as he was Earl of March, I was induced, as well for the rarity, as
preservation of it, to exhibit in Sculpture, though without the limits of my
Province.

I need not Apologize the Latin, where it occurs, since both in ancient, as
well as the modern times, our Law-pleadings, Charters and Records were always
expressed forensi latinitate, which is acknowlodged not to be of the purer
sort; And ae Dipthongs of old seldom used, though I have mostly supplied them.

To some Words I have added the variae lectiones I met with, as Churchesset,
Flemenefyrinthe, Lairwite, Scavage, etc. To others the Etymons, which sometimes
proved the more difficult, in that diverse of our Law-Terms, of birth since the
Conquest, are voces hybridae, mungrel words; one part Saxon, the other French
or Latin, not without a mixture sometimes of British and other Languages.

The Records and Charters I cite were for the most part copied from the
Originals; some from printed Books of unquestionable Authority; others, from
the Collections and Manuscripts of faithful and industrious lovers of Antiquity.

The SAXON CHARACTERS which differ from the VULGAR.
d f g h M r s t th d f g h M r s t w th

A Titular and Chronological TABLE of our KINGS and QUEENS from the Conquest,
to the present, 1670.
Kings NAMES and Titles. Began their Reigns Reigned Ye. Mo Da. Since they
Reigned. 1 WIlhelmus Rex; Wilhelmus Rex Anglorum; and Wilhelmus Rex Anglorum,
Princeps Normannorum atque Cynomannensium. 1066 Oct. 14 20 11 22 583 Sept. 9 2
Willielmus Rex Anglorum, and Willielmus dei gratia (and nutu Dei) Rex Anglorum
1087 Sept. 9 12 11 18 570 Aug. 1 1 Henric is Rex Anglorum; Henricus Dei gratia
Rex Anglorum and Henricus gratia Dei Rex Anglorum and Princeps Normannorum 1100
Aug. 1 35 4 1 535 Dec. 1 Stephanus Rex Anglorum, and Stephanus Dei gratia Rex
Anglorum. 1135 Dec. 1 18 11 18 516 Oct. 25 2 Henricus Rex Angliae, Dux
Normaniae and Aquitaniae and Comes Andegaviae 1154 Oct. 25 35 9 8 481 July 6 1
Ricardus Rex Angliae, Dux Normaniae and Aquitaniae and Comes Andegaviae 1189
July 6 9 9 1 471 April 6 Johannes, Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae,
Dux Normanniae, Aquitaniae and Comes Andegaviae 1199 April 6 17 7 0 454 Oct. 19
3 Henricus, Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normanniae,
Aquitaniae and Comes Andegaviae. Anno Regni 44, He Styled himself, Henricus Dei
gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae and Dux Aquitaniae. 1216 Oct. 19 56 1 9
398 Nov. 16 1 Edwardus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae and Dux
Aquitaniae. In Records sometimes named Edward of Westminster. 1272 Nov. 16 34 8
6 363 July 7 2 Edwardus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae and Dux
Aquitaniae. And, 14 regni. added Comes Pontivi and Monstroill. Pat. 14 Ed. 2.
Par. 2 m. 14. Styled also Edw. of Carnarvan 1307 July 7 19 7 5 344 Jan. 25 3
Edwardus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae and Dux Aquitaniae. Anno 13
Regni he omitted Dux Aquitaniae. He was also called Edward of Windsor, and was
the first that used Post Conquestum in His Title. 1326 Jan. 25 51 5 7 293 June
21 2 Ricardus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae. 1377
June 21 22 3 14 271 Sept. 29 4 Henricus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae and Franciae
and Dominus Hiberniae. 1399 Sept. 29 13 6 3 257 Mar. 20 5 Henricus Dei gratia,
Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae. Et Anno Regni 8, Hen. Dei
Gratia, Rex Angliae, haeres and Regens Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae. 1412
Mar. 20 9 5 24 248 Aug. 31 6 Henricus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae and Franciae, and
Dominus Hiberniae. 1422 Aug. 31 38 6 8 210 March 4 4 Edwardus Dei gratia, Rex
Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae. 1460 March 4 23 1 8 187 April 9 5
Edwardus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae. 1483
April 9 0 2 18 187 June 18 3 Ricardus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae and Franciae, and
Dominus Hiberniae. 1483 June 22 2 2 5 185 Aug. 22 7 Henricus Dei gratia, Rex
Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae. 1485 Aug. 22 23 10 2 162 Apr. 22 8
Henricus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae. Et Anno 10
Regni, Henricus octavus Dei gratia, etc. Anno 13 Regni, fidei Defensor was
added. Et An. 22 Regni, in terra Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Hiberniae supremum
caput, was added. Et an. reg. 34, Rex Hiberniae was added. 1059 Apr. 22 37 10 2
124 July 28 6 Edwardus Sextus, Dei gratia, Angliae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex,
fidei Desensor, Et in terra Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Hiberniae supremum caput.
1546 Ian. 28 6 5 19 117 July 26 Queen Mary summoned her first Parliament by the
same Title, but soon after omitted Supremum Caput. After She Married King
Philip, She used Her own and his titles, etc. 1553 July 26 5 4 22 112 Nov. 17
Elizabetha Dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regina, Fidei defensor.
1558 Nov. 17 44 4 16 68 March 24 Jacobus Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae
and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei defensor. 1602 Mar. 24 22 8 2 45 March 27 1 Carolus
Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei defensor. 1625
Mar. 27 23 10 2 22 Ian. 30 2 Carolus Secundus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei defensor. 1648 Ian. 30 Vivat. Vivat.

OGDOSTEICHON TECHNICON Regum Reginarumque Angliae.
Will. Conq. Will Rufus, Henri. Steph. Henque secundus,
Ric. John, Henricus, tres Edward, Rique secundus,
Post hos regnavit quartus, quintus quoque Henri,
Hen. sextus, Edward quartus quintusque Ricardus
Tertius, Hen. Sept. and Oct. Edwardusque Maria,
Eliz. Jac. Carolus primus, CAROLUSQUE SECUNDUS
Regnat; and aeterno vivat praeclarus honor,
Imperium Oceano, famam qui terminet astris.
A Law-Dictionary: Interpreting such difficult Words and obscure Terms, as are
found, either in our Common or Statute, Ancient or Modern LAWS.
A
ABactors (abactores) were stealers of Cattle or Beasts, by Herds or great
numbers; and were distinguished from Fures. Nam qui ovem unam surripuerit, ut
fur coercetur, qui gregem, ut abactor. M. S.

Abate (from the French abatre or abbatre, i. To fell, break down or defeat
utterly) signifies properly, to diminish or take away; and in our Law-writers,
it has a like signification: For to abate a Castle or Fortlet (Old Not. Br.
fol. 45.) in Westminster. 1. cap. 17. is interpreted to beat it down. And to abate a
Writ, is to defeat or overthrow it by some error or exception. Britton. cap.
48. As he that puts out the Possessor is said to Disseise; so he that steps in
between the former Possessor and his Heir, is said to abate. And in the Stat.
De conjunctim Feoffatis, 34. Edw. 1. The Writ shall be abated, that is, shall
be disabled or overthrown. So in Stamfords Pleas of the Crown, fol. 148. The
Appeal abates by Covin, i. The Accusation is defeated by Deceit, Anno 11 Hen.
6. cap. 2. -- The Justices shall cause to be abated and quashed the said Writ.
See Intrusion.

Abatement (Fr.) is sometimes used for the Act of the Abator; as the Abatement
of the Heir into the Land, before he has agreed with the Lord Old Not. Br. fol.
91. Sometimes for the affection or passing the thing abated; as Abatement of
the Writ. Kitchen, fol. 214. And in this signification it is as much as
Exceptio dilatoria, with the Civilians (Brit. cap. 51.) or rather an effect of
it: For the Exception alleged and made good, works the Abatement. And this
Exception may be taken, either to the insufficiency of the Matter, or
incertainty of the Allegation, by misnaming the Plantiff, Defendant, or place;
to the variance between the Writ, and the Specialty or Record; to the
incertainty of the Writ, Count, or Declaration, or to the death of either of
the parties, before Judgment had, and for diverse other causes: Upon which
defaults, the Defendant may pray, That the Writ or Plaint may abate; that is,
the Plaintiffs suit against him, may cease for that time. To prevent the
Abatement of Writs of Error, see the Statute 6 Car. 2. cap. 2. Sir Edward Coke
says, Abatamentum is a word of Art, and signifies an Entry by interposition. On
Littl. fol. 277. where he shows the difference between Abatement, Disseisin,
Intrusion, Deforcement, Usurpation, and Purpresture.

Abbacy (abbatia) is the same to an Abbot, as Bishopric to a Bishop: We may
call it his Paternity. Talis Abbatia (quae Paternitas Latino nomine dicitur)
funditus removeatur. Council. Meldens. Anno Dom. 845. cap. 10. The word is used
Anno 34 and 35 Hen. 8. cap. 17, 18. Sciant -- quod ego Isabella^ Comitissa
Penbr^ pio salute animae meae -- Dedi Deo and Abbathiae de Nutteleg. totam
Wicham juxta praedictam Abbathiam, etc. sine dat.

Abbat or Abbot (Abbas) A Spiritual Lord, that has the rule and pre-eminence
over a Religious House. He is by Justinian termed Archimandrita, by others
Coenobiarcha vel Archimonachus. Of these, some in England were mitred, some
not: The mitred were exempt from the jurisdiction of the Diocesan, having
Episcopal Authority within their Precincts, and being also Lords of the
Parliament; which were called Abbots Sovereign (Anno 9 Rich. 2. cap. 4.) and
Abbots General; The other sort were subject to the Diocesan in all Spiritual
Government. And as Abbots, so were there Lord Priors also, who, both had exempt
Jurisdiction, and were Lords of Parliament, as appears by Sir Edw. Coke, de
Jure Eccles. fol. 28. Of which Lord Abbots and Priors that sat in Parliament,
some Authors reckon but Twenty six: Sir Edw. Coke says they were Twenty seven
Abbots and two Priors. (On Littl. fol. 97.) In the Parliament 20 Rich. 2. there
were but Twenty five Abbots and two Priors. But in the Summons to the
Parliament at Winton, Anno 4 Edw. 3. (in Dorso claus. ejusdem An. Membran. 41.)
I find more named, to which I have added the Founders out of Mr. Dugdales
Monast. Angl.

Abbots and Priors. Founders Names. 1 Abbot of S. Austins in Canterbury.
Ethelbertus Rex, Anno 602. 2 Abbot of Ramsey. Ailwinus Semi Rex, 969. 3 Abbot
of Peterborough. Wulferus Rex, 664. 4 Abbot of Croyland. Ethelbald Rex Merciae,
726. 5 Abbot of Evesham. Egwin Episc. Wigorn, 700. 6 Abbot of St. Benet de
Hulmo. Canutus Rex, Anno 1026. 7 Abbot of Thornby. Will. Albemarle sub Hen. 2. 8
Abbot of Colchester. Eudo Dapifer, Hen. 1. 9 Abbot of Leicester. Rob. Bossue,
Comes Leic. 1141. 10 Abbot of Winchcomb. Kenulphus Rex Merciae, 789. 11 Abbot
of Westminster. Seabert Rex Occid. Sax. 604. 12 Abbot of Cirencester. Henricus
Primus, 1133. 13 Abbot of S. Albans. Offa Rex Merciae, 795. 14 Abbot of S. Mary
York. Alanus Comes Britanniae, 1088. 15 Abbot of Shrewsbury. Roger Comes
Montgom. 1081. 16 Abbot of Selby. Guliel. Conquestor, 1078. 17 Abbot of S.
Peter's Gloucester. Ofric Rex Northumb. 700. 18 Abbot of Malmsbury. Maidulfus
Hibern. Scot. 648. 19 Abbot of Waltham. Heraldus Rex, 1036. 20 Abbot of
Thorney. Adelwoldus and Edgarus Rex, 972. 21 Abbot of S. Edmonds. Canutus Rex,
1020. 22 Abbot of Beaulieu. Johannes Rex, Anno Regni 6. 23 Abbot of Abingdon.
Cissa Rex, Anno 675. 24 Abbot of Hyde. Aluredus Rex, 922. 25 Abbot of Rading.
Henricus Primus Rex, 1125. 26 Abbot of Glastonbury. Jos. Arrimat. Inas Rex
Occid. Sax. 708. 27 Abbot of Osney. Rob. Fitz Nigel Doiley, 1129. 28 Prior of
Spalding. Jo. Talbois Com. Andegav. 1074. 29 Prior of John's of Jerusalem.
Jordanus Briset and Ux ejus, 1100. 30 Prior of Jews. Will. de Warren Primus
Comes Surr. 1078.

To which were afterward added,

31 Abbot of S. Austins Bristol. Henricus Secundus Rex. 32 Abbot of Bardeney.
Rex Ethelredus, 712. 33 Prior de Semplingham. Saint Gilbertus, 1131.

To these also Henry the Eight added the Abbot of Tavestock. And in the Test
to Magna Charta, the names of some other Abbots are inserted, among the great
Men of the Realm. An Abbot with the Monks of his House, who were called the
Convent, made a Corporation, and he was not chargeable with the Act of his
Predecessor, if it were not by their Common Seal, or for such things as came to
the use of the House.

Abbathy (Anno 31 H. 8. cap. 13.) See Abbacy.

Abettator, an Abetter. See Abet.

Abbrochment (abbrocamentum) the buying up whole Wares, before they are brought
to Market, or out of the Fair or Market, and selling the same by retail. M. S.
de Placit. coram Rege Ed. 3. penes Arthur. Trevor Arm.

Abbuttals (from the Fr. abutter or abouter, i. terminare) are the Buttings or
Boundings of any Land, East, West, North, or South; declaring on what other
Lands, Highways, or other places it does Abbut: As in Crokes Reports, 2 part.
fol. 184. The Plaintiff has failed in his Abuttals, that is, In setting forth
how his Land, is abutted and bounded. Latera autem nunquam aiunt abuttare; sed
terram proximam adjacere. Those (says Cambden) that have Written of Limits,
say, That certain Hillocks or Piles of Earth, which they termed Botentines,
were set in Limits. Hence peradventure our Buttings and Boundings.

Abeyance or Abbayance (from the Fr. bayer, (...). To gape after, or expect; as
those are said, Bayer ^a (...)argent, qui spe atque animo incumbunt pecuniae)
in Littleton, cap. Disconcontinuance, Sect. 56. is thus used, The right of
Fee-simple lies in Abeyance; that is, as himself interprets it, only in the
remembrance, intendment and consideration of the Law. The Frank-tenement of the
Gleab of a Parsonage, is in no man during the time the Parsonage is void, but
is in Abeyance. And it is a Principle in the Law, That of every Land there is
Feesimple in some man, or it is in Abeyance. Considering this with the
signification of the French word, it is probable our Ancient Law Books would
signify hereby a kind of hope or longing expectance; because those things
that are in Abeyance, though for the present in no man, yet are they in hope
and expectation, belonging to him who is next to enjoy them. For I find also
in the French, that Bayard is a Man that gapes or gazes earnestly at a thing.
And, this Abeyance may be compared to that which the Civilians call
Haereditatem jacentem. See Coke on Littl. fol. 342. b. And Plowden casu
Walsingham.

Abet (from the a. i. ad vel usque, and betan. i. e. emendare, excitare)
signifies to encourage, incite or set on. The Substantive Abetment is used for
an encouraging or instigation. Stamf. Pl. Cor. fol. 105. And Abetter or
Abbettator for an instigator or setter on. Old Not. Br. fol. 21. But, both Verb
and Noun are always used in the evil part: As Abettors of Murder are those that
command, counsel, or maintain others to murder: And in some Cases such Abettors
shall be taken as Principals, in other, but as Accessories, and their presence
or absence at the Deed doing, makes a difference in the Case.

Abishersing, (according to Rastals Exposition) is to be quit of Amerciaments
before whomsoever, for Transumption proved. The word originally signifies a
Forfeiture, or an Amerciament, and is much transformed in the writing, since
more probably it should be Mishersing, Mishering, or Miskering, according to
the Learned Spelman. It seems by some Authors, to signify a Freedom or
Liberty; because he that has this word in any Charter or Grant, has not only
the Forfeitures and Amerciaments of all others for transgressions within his
Fee; but also is himself free from all such control, by any within that compass.

Abjuration (abjuratio) a forswearing or renouncing by Oath; a sworn
banishment, or an Oath taken to forsake the Realm for ever. For, as Stamford
(Pl. Cor. lib. 2. cap. 40.) says, The devotion toward the Church (first in
Edward the Confessors time, and afterward till 22 Hen. 8.) was so zealous,
That, if a man, having committed Felony, could recover a Church or Churchyard,
before he were apprehended; he might not be thence drawn to the usual trial of
Law; but confessing his fault to the Justices, at their coming, or to the
Coroner, and before them or him, give his oath finally to forsake the Realm:
The form and effect whereof you may read in De Officis Coronatorum, and in
Horns Mirror of Justices, lib. 1. cap. Del Office de Coroner. Quando aliquis
abjuravit regnum Cruoc ei liberata fuit in manu sua portanda in itinere suo per
semitas regias and vocabitur vexillum sanctae Ecclesiae, Essex. Plac. Hill. 26
Ed. 3. But this grew at last to be but a perpetual confining the offender to
some Sanctuary, wherein, upon abjuration of his liberty and free habitations,
he would choose to spend hs life, as appears Anno 22 Hen. 8. cap. 14. It is
Enacted 21 Jac. cap. 28. That hereafter no Sanctuary or Privilege of
Sanctuary, shall be allowed; and consequently Abjuration is taken away, 2
Instit. fol. 629. See Sanctuary.

Abolition (Anno 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21.) A destroying or putting out of memory.
Institutae actionis peremptio. The leave given by the King or Judges to a
criminal accuser to desist from further prosecution.

Abridge (from the Fr. Abreger) to make shorter in words, holding still the
whole substance: But in Law it seems to signify, for the most part, the making
a Declaration or Count shorter, by substracting or severing some of its
substance. For example, a Man is said to abridge his Plaint in an Assize, or a
Woman her Demand in an Action of Dower, that has put into the Plaint or Demand
any Land, not in the Tenure of the Tenant or Defendant; and, if the Tenant
pleads Non-tenure, or suchlike Plea to parcel of the Land demanded, in
Abatement of the Writ; the Demandant may abridge his Plaint or Demand to that
patcel, that is, he may leave out that part, and pray the Tenant may answer the
rest, to which he has not yet pleaded any thing: The cause is, for that in such
Writs the certainty is not set down, but they run in general. And though the
Demandant has abridged his Plaint or Demand in part, yet the Writ remains good
still for the rest. Brook, tit. Abridgment. An. 21 H. 8. cap. 3.

Abridgment of a Plaint. See Abridge.

Abrogate (abrogo) to disannul, take away, or repeal; as to abrogate a Law, i.
To lay aside or repeal it, Anno 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 3. See Prorogue.

Absentees or des Absentees, was a Parliament so called, held at Dublin, 10
May, 28 H. 8. And mentioned in Letters Patent, Dat. 29 H. 8. See Cokes, 4 Inst.
fol. 354.

Abuttals. See Abbuttals.

Accedas ad Curiam (Lat.) is a Writ that lies for him, who has received false
Judgment, or fears partiality in a Court Baron, or Hundred Court, being
directed to the Sheriff, as appears by Dyer, fol. 169. numb. 20. As the Writ De
falso judicio lies for him that has received such Judgment in the County Court,
the form whereof you may see in Fitz. Not. Er fol. 18. And in the Register,
fol. 9. b. where it is said this Writ lies for Justice delayed, as well as
falsely given; and that it is a Species of the Writ Recordare.

Accedas ad Uicecomitem, is a Writ directed to the Coroner, commanding him to
deliver a Writ to the Sheriff, who having a Pone delivered him, does suppress
it, Reg. of Writs, fol. 83.

Acceptance (acceptatio) is a taking in good part, and a tacit kind of
agreeing to some former Act done by another, which might have been undone or
avoided, if such Acceptance had not been. For example, if Baron and Feme seized
of Land in right of the Feme, make a joint Lease or Feoffment by Deed;
reserving Rent, the Baron dies, the Feme accepts or receives the Rent: By this
the Feoffment or Lease is made good, and shall bar her to bring the Writ Cui in
vita. Coke on Littl. fol. 211. b.

Accessory or Accessory (particeps criminis) most commonly signifies, one that
is guilty of a felonious offense, not principally, but by participation, as by
command, advice or concealment, and is of two sorts, 1. Before the offense or
fact, is he that commands or procures another to commit Felony, and is not
himself present; but, if he be, then he is also a Principal. 2. After the
offense, is he that receives, assists, or comforts any man, that has done any
Murder or Felony, whereof he has knowledge. He who counsels or commands any
evil, shall be judged accessory to all that follows upon it, but not to another
distinct thing. As, I command one to beat another, and he beats him so, that
the other dies of it, I shall be accessory to this murder. But, if I command
one to steal a White Horse, and he steals a Black one; or to burn such a House,
which he well knows, and he burns another, I shall not be accessory. If I
command one to kill I. S. in the Field, and he kills him in the City or Church,
or to kill him at such a day, and he kill him on another, I shall be accessory
nothwithstanding: For the killing is the substance, and the day, place, or
weapon, is but circumstance. But if I command one to kill I. S. and before he
has killed him, I come and say, I am penitent for my malice, and charge him
not to kill him, and yet he kills him, I shall not be accessory. Where the
Principal is pardoned or has his Clergy, the Accessory cannot be arraigned;
there being a Maxim in the Law, Ubi non est principalis non potest esse
accessorius: For, it appears not by the Judgment of Law, that he was Principal;
but if the Principal, after Attainder, be pardoned or has his Clergy allowed
him, there the Accessory shall be arraigned. See Sir Edward Cokes, 2 Part
Institutes, fol. 183. In the lowest and highest offenses, there are no
Accessaries, but all are Principals; as in Riots, forcible Entries, and other
transgressions, Vi and armis, which are the lowest offenses. So in the highest
offense, which is crimen laesae Majestatis, there are no Accessaries; but in
Felony there are, both before, and after. Coke on Lit^l. fol. 71. There cannot
be an Accessory before the Fact, in Manslaughter; because that is sudden and
unprepensed. See more in Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 1. cap. 45, 46, 47, 48.
Accessories in Petit-Treason, Felony, Murder, shall not have their Clergy, An.
4 and 5 Phil. and Ma. c. 4.

Account (computus) is taken for a Writ or Action, which lies against a Bailiff
or Receiver, who ought to render an account to his Lord or Master, and
refuses. And by the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 1. if the Accomptant be found in
arrear, the Auditors that are assigned to him, have power to award him to
prison, there to remain, till he makes agreement with the party. But if the
Auditors will not allow reasonable expense and costs, or if they charge him
with more Receipts then they ought, his next friend may sue a Writ of Ex part
talis out of the Chancery, directed to the Sheriff, to take four Mainpernors,
to bring his body before the Barons of the Exchequer, and to warn the Lord to
appear there at a certain day. See Fitzh. Not. Br. fol. 116.

Accord (Fr.) Agreement, Concordance, Consent. Particularly it is an Agreement
between two or more, where any person is injured by a Trespass, Offense, or
Contract, to satisfy and content him with some recompense, which, if executed,
and performed, shall be a good Bar in Law, if the other party (after the Accord
performed) bring any Action for the same.

Accroche (Fr. accrocher) To hook, clasp, or grapple unto. It is used (Anno 25
Edw. 3. Stat. 3. cap. 8.) as Encroach. In France, even at this day Accrocher un
Process, signifies to stay a Suit, or to delay the proceeding of it for a time.
See Encroachment.

Achat (Fr. Achet, i. A Bargain or Purchase) is used for a Contract or Bargain.
Brook, tit. Contract. Purveyors were by Parliament, 36 Ed. 3. ordained to be
then after called Achators.

Acquietancia de Shiris et Hundredis, i. Quod Prior non debet facere sectam ad
Comitatum Norwici vol in Hundredo pro Manerio de Rudham cum pertin. Ex Regist.
Priorat. de Coke sford.

Acquietandis plegiis, Is a Writ lying for a Surety against the Creditor that
refuses to acquit him, after the Debt is paid. Reg. of Writs, fol. 158. Where
it appears, that this is a Justicies.

Acquital (from the Fr. acquiter, to free, acquit, or discharge) most commonly
signifies a Deliverance, discharge, and setting free from the suspicion or
guilt of an offense; and is twofold, Acquittal in Law, and Acquittal in Fact.

Acquital in Law, Is when, two are appealed or endited of Felony, one as
Principal, the other as Accessory; the Principal being discharged, the
Accessory is by consequence also freed. And in this case, as the Accessory is
acquitted by Law, so is the Principal in Fact. Stamf. Pl. Cor. fol. 168.
Acquital is also where there is a Lord, Mesn, and Tenant; and the Tenant holds
Lands of the Mesn, and the Mesn holds over of the Lord Paramount: Now the Mesn
ought to acquit the Tenant of all services claimed by any other for the same
Lands; for the Tenant must do his service to the Mesn only, and not to diverse
Lords for one parcel of Land. See Coke on Littleton, fol. 100.

Acquittance (acquietantia) Is a Release or Discharge of a Debt formerly due
But the Verb (acquit) the Participle acquitted, and the Noun acquittal,
signify also a discharge or clearing from an offense objected; as acquitted by
Proclamation. Smith de Rep. Angl. p. 76. Stams. Pl. Cor. fol. 168. Brook tit.
Acquittal.

Acre (from the Germ. Acker, i. ager) Is a parcel of Land, containing in length
forty Perches, and four in breadth, or to that quantity, be the length more or
less. And, if a Man erect any new Cottage, he must lay four Acres of Land to
it, after this measure. Anno 31 Eliz. cap. 7. With this measure agrees Crompt
in his Jur. of Courts, fol. 222. Though he says, according to the Custom of
diverse Countries, the Perch differs, being in some places, and most ordinarily
but sixteen foot and a half; but in Staffordshire twenty four foot, as was
adjudged in the Case between Sir Edward Aston, and Sir John B. in the
Exchequer. In the Statute concerning sowing Flax, (24 Hen. 8. cap. 4.)
eightscore Perches make an Acre, which is forty multiplied by four: See also
the Ordinance of Measuring Land, 31 Edw. 1. Stat. 1. which agrees with this
account.

Action (actio) is thus defined by Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 1. and 3. Actio nihil
aliud est quam jus prosequendi in judicio quod alicui debetur; and is divided
into personal, real, and mixed. See Cokes 2 Inst. fol. 40.

Action personal, is that which one Man has against another, by reason of any
Contract for Money or Goods, or for offense done by him, or some other person,
for whose Fact he is by Law answerable.

Action real, is that whereby the Demandant claims title to any Lands or
Tenements, Rents, or Commons, in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, or for life. And every
Action real, is either Possessory, that is, of his own Possession or Seisin; or
ancestrel, of the Seisin or Possession of his Ancestor. Coke, lib. 6. fol. 3.

Real Actions, as Writs of Right, Writs of Entry, etc. And their several
Appendixes, as Grand Cape, Petit Cape, Receipt, View, Aid-Prayer, Voucher,
Counter-plea of Voucher, Counter-plea of Warrantry, Recovery in value, were
several great Titles in our Year-Books, but now much out of use. Preface to
Rolls Abridgment.

Action mixed, is that which lies indifferently against the thing detained, or
against the person of the Detainer; and is so called, because it has a mixed
respect, both to the thing and the person: Or (as others define it) is Suit
given by the Law to recover the thing demanded, and damages for wrong done: As
in Assize of Novel Disseisin, which Writ (if the Disseissor make a Feoffment to
another) the Disseisee shall have against the Disseisor; and the Feoffee, or
other Ter-Tenant to recover not only the Land, but damages also. And so is an
Action of Wast and Quare impedit.

Actions are also divided into Civil, Penal, and Mixed. Coke, Vol. 6. fol. 61.
a. Action Civil is that which tends only to the recovery of that which by
reason of any Contract, or other like cause, is due to us: As if a Man by
Action seek to recover a sum of Money formerly lent, etc.

Action Penal aims at some penalty, or punishment in the party sued, be it
corporal or pecuniary: As in the Action Legis Aquiliae in the Civil Law; and
with us, the next friends of a Man feloniously slain or wounded, shall pursue
the Law against the offender, and bring him to condign punishment. Bracton,
lib. 3. cap. 4.

Action Mixed, is that which seeks both the thing, whereof we are deprived, and
a penalty for the unjust detaining it: As in an Action for Tithe upon the
Statute 2 and 3 Edw. 6. cap. 13. Item est alia Actio Mixta, quae dicitur Actio
Hirciscundae, and locum habet inter eos qni communem habent haereditatem, etc.
See Coke on Littl. fol. 262. b.

Action is also (according to the Form of the Writ) divided into such as are
conceived to recover, either the simple value of the thing challenged, or the
double, trebble, or quadruple. As a Decies tantum lies against Embracers. Fitz.
Not. Br. fol. 171. And against Jurors that take Money for their Verdict of
either or both parties: And to be short, any other Action upon a Statute, that
punishes any offense by Restitution or Fine, proportionable to the
Transgression.

Action is Pre-judicial (otherwise termed Preparatory) or else Principal.
Pre-judicial is that which grows from some question, or doubt in the Principal:
As if a Man sue his younger Brother for Land descended from his Father, and it
is objected, he is a Bastard. Bracton, lib 3. cap. 4. Numb. 6. This point of
Bastardy must be tried, before the cause can further proceed; and therefore is
termed Pre-judicialis, quia prius judicanda.

Action is either Ancestrel or Personal, Stamf. Pl. Cor. 59. Ancestrel seems to
be that, which we have by some right descending from our Ancestor; and
Personal, which has beginning in, and from our selves. There is also Action
Ancestrel Droiturel, and Action Ancestrel Possessary; which see in Cokes 2
Inst. fol. 291.

Action upon the Case (actio super casum) is a general Action given for redress
of wrongs done to any Man without force, and by Law not especially provided
for, and is now most in use. For, where you have any occasion of Suite, that
neither has a fit name, nor certain Form already prescribed; there the Clerks
of the Chancery, in ancient time, conceived a sit Form of Action for the thing
in question, which the Civilians call Actionem in Factum, and we, Action upon
the Case.

Action upon the Statute (actio super Statutum) is an Action brought against a
Man, upon an offense against a Statute, whereby an Action is given, and lay not
before. As, where one commits Perjury, to the prejudice of another, he, who is
endamaged, shall have a Writ upon the Statute, and his Cause. And, the
difference between an Action upon the Statute, and Action Popular, is, Where
the Statute gives the Suite or Action to the party grieved, or otherwise to one
person certain, that is called Action upon the Statute. But where Authority is
given by the Statute to every one that will so sue, that is termed Action
Popular.

Action is Perpetual or Temporal (Perpetua vel Temporalis) and that is called
Perpetual, whose force is by no time determined. Of which sort were all Civil
Actions among the Ancient Romans, viz. Such as grew from Laws, Decrees of the
Senate, or Constitutions of the Emperors; whereas Actions granted by the
Praetor, died within the year. So we have in England, Perpetual and Temporary
Actions, and I think all may be called Perpetual, that are not expressly
limited. As diverse Statutes give Actions, so they be pursued within the time by
them prescribed; namely, the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. cap. 1. gives Action for
three years after the offenses committed, and no longer. And the Statute of 7
Hen. 8. cap. 3. does the like for four years, and that of 31 Eliz. cap. 5. for
one year, and no more. But, as by the Civil Law, no Actions were at the last so
perpetual, but that by time they might be prescribed against: So in our Law,
though Actions may be called Perpetual, in comparison of those that are
expressly limited by Statute, yet is there a means to prescribe against Real
Actions after five years, by a Fine levied, or a Recovery suffered; as you may
see in the words, Fine, Recovery, and Limitation of Assize.

Action of a Writ, is a term used, when one pleads some matter, by which he
shows the Plaintiff had no cause to have the Writ he brought; yet it may be, he
might have another Writ or Action for the same matter. Such a Plea is called, A
Plea to the Action of the Writ. Whereas, if by the Plea it should appear, That
the Plaintiff has no cause to have an Action for the thing demanded; then it is
called A Plea to the Action. Cowel.

Acts of Parliament are Positive Laws, which consist of two parts (viz.) Of the
words of the Act, and the sense of it, and they both, joined together, make the
Law.

Acton-Burnel, a Statute so called, made 13 Edw, 1. and An. 1285. Ordaining the
Statute Merchant for Recovery of Debts; and was so termed, because made at
Acton-Burnel, a Castle, anciently of the Burnels, afterward of the Lovels in
Shropshire.

Actuary (actuarius) is the Scribe that Registers the Acts and Constitutions of
the Convocation.

Addition (additio) signifies, A Title given to a Man over and above his
Christian and Surname, showing his Estate, Degree, Mystery, Trade, Place of
dwelling, etc. Additions of Estate, are these, Yeoman, Gentleman, Esquire, and
such like. Additions of Degree are those we call names of Dignity, as Knight,
Lord, Earl, Marquess, and Duke. Additions of Mystery, are, Scrivener, Painter,
Mason, etc. Addition of Town, as Dale, Thorp, and such like. And, where a Man
has household in two places, he shall be said to dwell in both of them;. so
that his Addition in either may suffice.

By the Statute of 1 Hen 5. cap. 5. It was ordained, That in Suits or Actions
where Process of Outlary lies, such Additions should be to the name of the
Defendant, to show his Estate, Mystery, and place where he dwells, and that the
Writs, not having such Additions, shall abate, if the Defendant take exception
thereto; but not, by the Office of the Court. And this was ordained, to the
intent, that one Man might not be vexed, or troubled by the Outlary of another;
but by reason of the certain Addition, every person may bear his own burden.
See 2 Part. Institut. fol. 595. and 666. And the Statute 27 Eliz. cap. 7.

Addoubors. See Redoubors.

Adeling or Ethling, from the Sax. AEthelan, i. nobilis) Was a Title of Honor
among the Angles, properly appertaining to the Successor of the Crown. For King
Edward being himself without issue, and intending to make Eadgar (to whom he
was great Uncle by the Mothers side) his heir to this Kingdom, called him
Adeling. Hoveden part poster. Annal. fol. 347. a. Vide Leges S. Edw. Conf. M.
S. a. Will. Conq. recept. cap. ante-penult. See more of this word in Spelmans
Glossarium.

Adjournment (from the Fr. adjournement) Is when any Court is dissolved for the
present, or put off, and assigned to be kept again at another day or place.
Adjournment in Air (Anno 25 Edw. 3. Statute of Purveyers, cap. 18.) Is an
appointment of a day, when the Justices in Air mean to sit again. And in 2
Edw. 3. cap. 11. Adjournment has the like signification. See Prorogue.

Adjudication (adjudicatio) A giving by Judgment, a Sentence, or Decree, An. 16
and 17 Car. 2. cap. 10.

Ad inquirendum, is a Writ Judicial, commanding enquiry to be made of any thing
touching a Cause depending in the Kings Court, for the better execution of
Justice, as of Bastardy, and such like. Whereof see great diversity in the
Table of the Register Judicial, Verbo, Ad inquirendum.

Ad jura Regis, Is a Writ that lies for the Kings Clerk, against him that
sought to eject him to the prejudice of the Kings Title in right of his Crown.
Of which see Register of Writs, fol. 61. a.

Admeasurement (admensuratio) Is a Writ which lies, for bringing those to
Reason, or a Mediocrity, that usurp more then their share. And this in two
Cases, the one termed Admeasurement of Dower (Admensuratio Dotis) where the
Widow of the deceased, holds from the Heir, or his Guardian, more, in the name
of her Dower, then of right belongs to her. Register of Writs, fol. 171. a.
Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 148. In which case, the Heir shall be restored to the
overplus. The other, Admeasurement of Pasture, (Admensuratio pasturae) which
lies between those, who have Common of Pasture, appendant to their Freehold, or
Common by Vicenage, in case any of them Surcharge the Common with more Cattle
than they ought. Regist. fol. 156. b. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 125.

Adminicle (adminiculum) Aid, help, support. Anno 1 Edw. 4. cap. 1.

Administrator (Lat.) Is he that has the Goods of a Man dying intestate,
committed to his charge by the Ordinary, and is accountable for the same,
whenever it shall please the Ordinary to call him thereto. An Action lies
against him, and for him, as for an Executor; and he shall be charged to the
value of the Goods of the Intestate, and no further; if it be not by his own
false Plea, or by wasting the Goods of the dead. If the Administrator die, his
Executors are not Administrators; but it behooves the Court to grant a new
Administration. If a stranger, who is neither Administrator nor Executor, take
the Goods of the dead, and administer of his own wrong, he shall be charged and
sued as an Executor, and not as Administrator. See the Statutes of Westminster. 2.
cap. 19. And 31 Edw. 3. cap. 11.

Administratrix (Lat.) She that has such Goods committed to her charge.

Admiral (Admiralius, Admirallus, Admiralis, Capitaneus, or Custos Maris)
signifies, An High Officer, or Magistrate, that has the Government of the
Kings Navy. See the Statutes 13 and 15 Rich. 2. cap. 5. And 3 -- 2 H. 4. cap.
11. 28 Hen. 8. cap. 15. And 27 Eliz. cap. 11. This Officer is in all Kingdoms
of Europe that border on the Sea. He has cognizance of the death, or maim of a
man, committed in any great Ship, riding in great Rivers, beneath the Bridges
thereof, next the Sea; also to arrest Ships in the great Streams, for the
service of the King or Commonwealth, and has jurisdiction in such Streams,
during the same voyages. And it appears, that anciently the Admirals of
England, had jurisdiction of all causes of Merchants and Mariners, happening not
only upon the main Sea, but in all foraign parts within the Kings Dominions,
and without them, and were to judge them in a Summary way, according to the
Laws of Oleron, and other Sea-Laws. See Prynnes Animadversions on 4 Inst. page
75. and seq.

Admission (admissio) Is when the Bishop, upon examination admits a Clerk to be
able, and says Admitto te habilem. Coke on Littl. fol. 344. a.

Admittendo Clerico, Is a Writ granted to him, who has recovered his right of
Presentation against the Bishop in the Common-Bench. The form whereof read in
Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 38. And Register of Writs, fol. 33. a

Admittendo in Socium, Is a Writ for the association of certain persons to
Justices of Assize formerly appointed. Register of Writs, fol. 206. a.

Adnichiled, (Anno 28 Hen. 8. cap. 7.) Annulled or made void.

Ad quod damnum, Is a Writ that lies to the Sheriff to enquire what hurt it may
be for the King, to grant a Fair or Market in any Town, or place; or for the
King, or any other person to grant any Lands in Fee-simple to any House of
Religion, or other Body Politic. For in such case the Land so given, is said
to fall into a dead hand; that is, such an estate and condition, that the chief
Lords lose all hope of Heriots, service of Court and Escheats, upon any
traitorous or fellonious offense committed by the Tenant. For a Body Politic
dies not, nor can perform personal service to the King, or their Mesn Lords, as
single persons may do. And therefore it is reasonable, that before any such
grant be made, it should be known what prejudice it is like to work to the
Grantor. Of this read more in Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 221. And see Mortmain.

Ad terminum qui praeteriit, Is a Writ of Entry, that lies where a Man, having
Leased Lands or Tenements for term of life or years; and after the term
expired, is held from them by the Tenant or other Stranger that enjoys the
same, and deforceth the Lessor. Which Writ lies for the Lessor, and his heir
also. Fitz Not. Br. fol. 201.

Advent (adventus) Is the time from the Sunday that falls either upon S.
Andrews day, or next to it, till the Feast of Christ's Nativity, (Sir Edward
Coke (2 Part. Inst. fol. 265.) says Advent ends eight days after the Epiphany;
but it is a mistake) wherein our Ancestors reposed much reverence and devotion,
in reference to the approaching solemn Feast. For, In Adventu Domini nulla
Assisa debet capi. Int. Placita de temp. Regis Johan. Ebor. 126. Whereupon
there was a Statute ordained, Westminster. 1. cap. 48. That notwithstanding the said
usual solemnity and time of rest, it should be lawful (in respect of Justice
and Charity, which ought at all times to be regarded) to take Assizes of Novel
Disseisin, Mort d Ancester, and Darrcin presentment, in the time of Advent,
Septuagesima, and Lent. This is also one of the times, from the beginning
whereof, to the end of the Octaves of the Epiphany; the solemnizing of marriage
is forbidden, without special License, according to these old Verses.

Conjugium Adventus prohibet, Hilarique relaxat:
Septuagena vetat, sed Paschae Octava reducit.
Rogatio vetitat, concedit Trina potestas.
See Rogation Week and Septuagesima.

Adultery (Anno 1 Hen. 7. cap. 4. Advoutry, Adulterium, quasi ad alterius
thorum) Properly spoken of married persons; but if only one of the two, by
whom this sin is committed, be married, it makes Adultery; which was severely
punished by the ancient Laws of this Land, (not to mention the Julian Law,
among the old Romans, which made it death.) Edmundus Rex Adulterium affici
jussit instar Homicidii. LL. suarum, cap. 4. Canutus Rex hominem adulterum in
exilium relegari jussit, foeminam nasum and aures praecidi. LL. par. 2. cap. 6.
and 50. Qui uxoratus faciet Adulterium habet Rex vel Dominus superiorem,
Episcopus inferiorem, LL. Hen. 1. cap. 12. Doomsday tit. Chent, Rex, Dover, --
De Adulterio per totam Chent, habet Rex hominem, Archiepiscopus mulierem,
excepta terra S. Trinitatis, S. Augustini, and S. Martini, de quibus Rex nihil
habet. Et tit. Cistre Civitas -- Vidua, si se non legitime commiscebat xx s
emendebat, puella vero x s. The penalty of this sin was called Lairwite by our
Saxons. See in 2 Part. Cokes Instit. the notable Case of Margret, the Wife of
John de Camois, who, with the consent of her Husband, lived in Adultery with
Sir William Panell, yet lost her Dower. See Dower. -- Rex -- vic. Sutht. --
Praecipimus tibi quod diligenter inquiri facias per legales homines de Visn.
Candeur. si Robertus Pincerna, habens suspectum Will. Wake qui cum uxore sua
Adulterium committeret, prohibuit ei ingressum Domus suae, and si idem Will.
post prohibitionem illam, Domus ipsius Roberti ingressus Adulterium praedictum
commisit, inde praefatus Robertus mentula eum privavit, and si Inquisitio
dederit, quod ita sit, tunc eidem Roberto and suis qui cum eo erant ad hoc
faciend. terr. and catalla sua occasion illa in manum nostram saisita, in pace
esse facias, donec aliud inde tibi praecipimus, and veritatem illius
inquisitionis G. fill. Petri Justic. and Baronibus nostris de Scace. scire fac.
Test G. fill. Petri Com. Essex apud Wudestoke, 3 Nov. -- Claus. 14 Joh. m. 2.

Ad ventrem-inspiciendum, Is a Feminine Writ, mentioned in the Statute of
Essoyns, Anno 12 Edw. 2. See Ventre inspiciendo.

Advocatione decimarum, Is a Writ that lies for the claim of the Fourth Part or
upward, of the Tithes that belong to any Church. Register of Writs, fol. 29. b.

Adboutry. See Adultery.

Advow alias abow (advocare) To justify or maintain an Act formerly done. For
example, One takes a Distress for Rent, or other thing, and he that is
distrained, sues a Replevin. Now the Distrainet, justifying or maintaining the
Act, is said to Avow. Hence comes Advowant and Advowry. Old Not. Br. fol. 43.
Bracton uses the Latin word in the same signification (as Advocatio
disseisinae) Lib. 4. cap. 26. And I find in Cassanaeus de Consuet. Burg. page
1210. Advobare in the same signification. And page 1213. the Substantive
Desavohamentum, for a Disavowing or refusing to Avow.

Advowe alias avowe (advocatus) Is used for him that has right to present to a
Benefice, Anno 25 Edw. 3. Stat. 5. Where we find also Advowce Paramount, for
the highest Patron, and is spoken of the King. Advocatus est ad quem pertinet
jus Advocationis alicujus Ecclesiae, ut ad Ecclesiam, nomine proprio non
alieno, possit praesentare. Fleta, lib. 5. cap. 14. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 39.
Uses it in the same signification. See Avowe.

Advowee Paramount (Statute of Provivisors, 25 Edw. 3.) Is taken for the King,
or highest Patron.

Advowzen (advocatio) A right to present to a Benefice; as much as Jus
Patronatus in the Canon Law. The reason why it is so termed, is, Because they
that originally obtained the right of presenting to any Church, were upholders
of, or great Benefactors to that Church, either by building or increasing it;
and are therefore sometimes termed Patroni, sometimes Advocati, sometimes
Defensores, Cap. 4. and 23. De jure Patronatus in Decretal. And Advowzen (being
a Bastard-French word) is used for the right of presenting; as appears by the
Statute of Westminster, Anno 13 Edw. 1. cap. 5.

Advowzen, Is of two sorts, Advowzen in Gross, that is, Sole, not adhering to
any Manor, as parcel of its right; and Advowzen Appendant, which depends upon
a Manor, as appurtenant to it, termed by Kitchen an Incident that may be
separated from the Subject. Of this Skene, De verbor. sign. has these words,
Dicitur Advocatio Ecclesiae, vel quia Patronus alicujus Ecclesiae ratione sui
juris advocat se ad eandem Ecclesiam, and asserit se in eadem habere jus
Patronatus, eamque esse sui quasi clientis loco, vel potius cum aliquis (nempe
Patronus) advocat alium jure suo ad Ecclesiam vacantem, eumque loco alterius
(veluti defuncti) praesentat, and quasi exhibet.

Aelmefeoh, Pecunia eleemosynaria, scilicet denaria Sancti Petri. See Almsfeob.

Aetate probanda, Is a Writ that the Kings Tenant, holding in chief by
Chivalry, and being Ward by reason of his nonage, obtained to the Escheator of
the County where he was born, or sometimes where the Land lay, to enquire
whether he were of full age to take his Lands into his own hands. Register of
Writs, fol. 294. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 253. Now disused.

Aerie or Airy of Goshawks (Fr. air) Is the proper word in Hawks, for that we
generally call a Nest in other Birds. So it is used Anno 9 Hen. 3. cap. 13. in
the Charter of the Forest, and in diverse other places.

Aesnecy. See Esnecy.

Affeerers (afferatores) probably from the Fr. affier, i. To confirm or
affirm,) are those that are appointed in Court Leets upon Oath, to settle and
moderate the Fines of such as have committed faults arbitrarily punishable, and
have no express penalty set down by Statute. The Form of their Oath you may see
in Kitchen, fol. 46. The reason of this appellation seems to be, because those
that are appointed to this Office, do affirm upon their Oaths, what penalty
they think in Conscience the Offender has deserved. We find this word used,
Anno 25 Edw. 3. Stat. 7. (viz.) The same Justices before their rising in every
Sessions, shall cause the Amerciaments so be affiered. And to the same effect,
Anno 26 Hen. 6. cap. 6. Kitchen, fol. 78. joins these three words, as
Synonima's, Affidati, Amerciatores, Affirores. Bracton has Affidare mulierem,
to be betrothed to a Woman Lib. 2. cap. 12. But I find in the Customary of
Normandy, cap. 20. This word (affeurer) which the Latin Interpreter expresses
by (taxare) that is, to set the price of a thing, as aestimare, indicare, etc.
Which etymology seems to be the best.

Affidatus, Signifies a Tenant by Fealty, -- Ego Rogerus de F^^hid dedi, etc.
Will. Wa lensi pro suo servitio unam acram and perchiam terrae, etc. Pro hac
donatione and concessione devenit praedictus Will. Affidatus meus, etc. Affidati
non proprie vassalli sunt, sed quasi Vassalli, qui in alicujus fidem and
clientelam sunt recepti, recommendati dicti. Laurentii Amalthaea. Affidatio
accipitur pro mutua fidelitatis connexione, tam in Sponsaliis, quam inter
Dominum and Vassallum. Proles de affidata and non maritata, non est haeres. M.
S. Penes Arth. Trevor Ar.

Affirm (affirmare) Signifies to ratisie or confirm a former Law or Judgment.
So is the Substantive Affirmance used Anno 8 Hen. 6. cap. 12. And so is the
Verb it self by West part secunda Symbol. tit. Fines, sect. 152. If the
Judgment be affirmed, etc. As also by Crompton in his Jurisd. fol. 166. 19 Hen.
7. cap. 20.

Afforest (afforestare) To turn Ground into Forest. Charta de Foresta, cap. 1.
Anno 9 Hen. 3. See more in Forest.

Affray (of the Fr. affros, i. A fright) Signifies a skirmish or fighting
between two or more. Lamb. in his Eirenarcha, lib. 2. cap. 3. says, It is
ofttimes confounded with Assault; but they differ in this, That an Assault is
only a wrong to the party, an Affray is a common wrong: And therefore both are
enquirable and punishable in a Leet. An Affray may also be without word or blow
given: As if a Man show himself furnished with Armor or Weapons, not usually
worn, it may strike a fear into others unarmed. And so it is used, An. 2 Edw.
3. cap. 3.

Affri vel Affra, Bullocks, or Plough-Beasts. Vicecomes liberet ei omnia
catalla debitoris, exceptis bobus and Affris carucae. Westminster. 2. cap. 18. And in
Northumberland, to this day, they call a dull or slow Horse, a False aver, or
Af^r. Spelm. From whence also may come the word Heyfer for a young Cow.

Age (aetas, Fr. aage,) Signifies that part of Man's life, which is from his
birth, to this, or his last day. But in Law it is particulary used for those
especial times, which enable Men or Women to do that, which before for want of
Age, and consequently of Judgment, they might not do. These in a Man, are two;
at Fourteen years he is at the Age of Discretion, Twenty one years, is his full
Age. Littleton, lib. 2. cap. 4. In a Woman there were six Ages observed: First,
at Seven years of Age her Father might, of old, Distrain the Tenants of his
Manor, for Aid to marry her: For at those years she may consent to Matrimony.
Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 36. numb. 3. Secondly, At nine years old, she is Dowable;
for then or within half a year after, she is able Promereri dotem and virum
sustinere. Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 22. Littl. lib. 1. cap. 5. Which Bracton does
notwithstanding limit unto Twelve years. Thirdly, At Twelve years she is able
finally, to ratify and confirm her former consent to Matrimony. Fourthly, At
Fourteen she is enabled to receive her Lands into her own hands, and should be
out of Ward, if she were of this Age at her Ancestors death. Fifthly, At
Sixteen years she should be out of Ward, though at the death of her Ancestor
she was under Fourteen. The reason is, Because then she might take a Husband
able to perform Knights service. Sixthly, At Twenty one years she is able to
alienate her Lands and Tenements. Also at the Age of Fourteen, a Man is enabled
to choose his own Guardian, and to claim his Land holden in Soccage. Dyer, fol.
162. Which Bracton (Lib. 2.) limits at Fifteen years, with whom Glanvile also
agrees. And at Fourteen a Man may consent to Marriage, as a Woman at Twelve. At
the Age of Fifteen years, a Man ought to be sworn to keep the Peace. An. 34
Edw. 1. Stat. 3. The Age of Twenty one did compel a Man to be Knight, that had
Twenty pound Land per annum in Fee, or for term of life. Anno 1 Edw. 2. Stat.
1. Which Statute is repealed 17 Car. 1. cap. 20. That Age also enables him to
make Contracts, and manage his estate; which until that time, he cannot do,
with security of those that deal with him. The Age of Twelve years binds to
appearance before the Sheriffs and Coroner, for enquiry after Robberies. Anno
52 Hen. 3. cap. 24. The Age of Fourteen years enables to enter an Order of
Religion, without consent of Parents. Anno 4 Hen. 4. cap. 17. See Coke on
Littl. fol. 78. b.

Age Prier (aetatem precari, or aetatis precatio) Is a Petition or Motion made
in Court by one in his minority, (having an Action brought against him for
Lands coming to him by descent) that the Action may rest till he come to full
age; which the Court, in most Cases, ought to grant. This is otherwise in the
Civil Law, which enforces Children in their minority to answer by their Tutors
or Curators.

Agenhine. See Hoghenhine.

Agent and Patient, Is when one is the doer of a thing, and the party to whom
it is done: As where a Woman endows herself of the fairest possession of her
Husband.

Agist (from the Fr. giste, i. A Bed or Resting Place, or from gister, i.
stabulari) Signifies to take in, and feed the Cattle of Strangers in the Kings
Forest, and to gather the Money due for the same. Charta de Foresta, cap. 9.
The Officers that do this, are called Agistors, in English Guest or
Gist-takers. Crom. Jurisd. fol. 146. These are made by the Kings Letters
Patent, and he has four of them in every Forest, where he has any Pawnage. In
what their Office consists, see Manwood, Part 1. Of Forest Laws, p. 336. Their
Function is termed Agistment; as, Agistment upon the Sea Banks. Anno 6 Hen. 6.
cap. 5. This word agist is also used for the taking in of other Men's Cattle
into any Man's Ground, at a certain rate per week. See 4 Part. Instit. fol. 293.

Agreement (Agreamentum, Plowden, fol. 17.) Is a joining or putting together of
two or more Minds in any thing done, or to be done; and this is in three
manners, 1. An Agreement executed at the beginning. 2. An Agreement after an
Act done by another, and is executed also. 3. An Agreement executory, or to be
done. The first is such, whereof mention is made in the Statute of 25 Edw. 3.
cap. 3. of Clothes, which says, That the Goods bought by Forestallers, being
thereof attainted, shall be forfeit to the King, if the Buyer thereof have made
Gree with the Seller; where the word Gree, which is otherwise called Agreement
Executed, signifies Payment for the things, or Satisfaction. The second is,
where one does an Act, and another agrees or assents thereunto afterward. The
third is, when both parties at one time are agreed, that such a thing shall be
done in time to come; which is Executory, in regard the thing is to be done
afterward.

Aid (auxilium) Is all one in signification with the French aid, and differs
only in pronunciation, if we take it as it is used in our vulgar language.
But, in our Laws, it has diverse particular significations, as sometimes it
signifies a Subsidy. An. 14 Edw. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 1. Sometimes a Prestation due
from Tenants to their Lords, as toward the Relief due to the Lord Paramount.
Glanvile, lib. 9. cap. 3. This the King or other Lord might of old lay on their
Tenants, for Knighting his eldest son at the age of fifteen years, or marrying
his daughter at seven. Register of Writs, fol. 87. a. And that at what rate
themselves listed. But the Statute of Westminster. 1. An. 3 Edw. 1. ordained a
Restraint herein upon common persons, being Lords, and tied them to a constant
rate. And 25 Edw 3. Stat. 5. cap. 11. Provides, that the rate set down by the
former Statute should hold in the King, as well as in other Lords. Of which, I
find mention in the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 10. This Imposition seems to
have descended to us from Normandy, (or rather from a more ancient Original,
viz. The Feodal Laws.) For in the Grand Custumary, cap. 35. you have a Tractat,
entitled, (...) aides Chevelz. i. De auxiliis capitalibus; whereof the first
is, A fair Pain filz de son seigneur Chevalier, i. To make the eldest son
Knight. The second, Son ainee fille marier, i. To marry the eldest daughter,
etc. Both these, and all charges incident thereunto, are taken away and
discharged by Statute, 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

This word Aid is also particularly used in Matter of Pleading, for a Petition
made in Court for the calling in of help from another, that has an interest in
the Cause in question; and is likely to give strength, both to the party that
prays in Aid of him, and also to avoid a prejudice growing toward his own
right, if not prevented. But this course of proceeding is of late much disused.
Fitz-Herbert mentions both Prier in Aid, and Prier Aid de Patron, etc.
Auxilium petere a patrono, Not. Br. fol. 50. d. And the New Book of Entries,
verbo aid de parcener, fol. 411. col. 4. The word is also found in 13 Rich. 2.
cap. 17.

This Ayd-prier or Aid-prayer, is sometime also used in the Kings behalf, that
there be no proceeding against him, till his Council be called, and heard what
they can say, for avoiding the Kings prejudice or loss in the cause in hand.
Also a City or Borough that has a Fee-Farm of the King, may pray in Aid of
him, if any thing be demanded of them relating thereto. Of this you may read
the Statute De Bigamis, An. 4 Edw. 1. cap. 1. 2 and 3. 14 Edw. 3. Stat. 1. cap.
14. and 19 Car. 2. cap. 8. Vide Resceit.

Aile (of the Fr. aieul, i. avus) signifies a Writ that lies, where the
Grandfather, or great Grandfather called by us Besaile, but in true French
Bisaycul, was seized of any Land or Tenement in Fee-simple the day he died, and
a Stranger abateth or enters the same day, and dispossesseth the Heir, Fitz.
Not. Br. fol. 222. See Plowden, fol. 449. b.

Airie of Hawks. See Aerie.

Alba firma. Census annalis qui Centenario sive Domino Hundredi penditur. Ideo
alba dicta, quod non ex more prisci saeculi in anuon a quae tunc Black mail
nuncupata fuit (hoc est census vel firma nigra) sed argento, quasi censu albo
reddebatur. Spelman. Duplex est tenura in Com. Westmerland. scil. una per Albam
firmam and alia per Cornagium, etc. 2 Part. Inst. fol. 10.

Alderman (Sax. Ealdorman, i. Senior,) Was among the Saxons, as much as Earl
among the Danes, Camb. Brit. fol. 107. Also an Elder, Senator, or Statesman. At
this day we call them Aldermen, who are associates to the Civil Magistrate of a
City or Town Corporate, 24 H. 8. cap. 13. See Spelmans Glossarium at large on
this word, where you shall find that we had here anciently a title of
Aldermannus totius Angliae. Hic requiescit D. Ailwinus inclyti Regis Eadgari
cognatus, totius Angliae Aldermannus, and hujus sacri Caenohii (i. Ramesien.)
miraculosus Fundator.

Alepiman (alepimannus) -- Omnis Alepiman de tota Soca de Hecham, debet
singulis annis unum Denarium de Chevagio; and operabitur per tres Dies in
antumpno, exceptis illis qui ab hac servitute liberi sunt. Consuetudinar. de
Hecham Prior. Lew. M. S. page 21. Videtur Alepimannos istos mancipia fuisse;
Chevagii enim solutio servitutis judicium est. Spelman.

Aler sans jour (Fr.) Is verbatim, to go without day; the meaning whereof is to
be finally dismissed the Court, because there is no day of farther appearance
assigned. Kitchen, fol. 104

Ale-silver, A Rent or Tribute yearly paid to the Lord Major of London, by
those that sell Ale within the City. Antiq. of Purveyance, fol. 183.

Aletaster, Is an Officer appointed in every Court Leet, and sworn to look to
the Assize, and goodness of Bread and Ale, or Beer, within the Precincts of
that Lordship. Kitchen, fol. 46. where you may see the Form of his Oath.

Alias, vide Capias alias.

Alien (alienare) signifies to transfer the property of any thing to another
person. To Alien in Mortmain, is to make over Lands or Tenements to a Religious
House, or other Body Politic. See Mortmain. To alien in Fee, is to sell the
Fee-simple of any Land or Tenements, or of any Incorporeal right. Westminster. 2.
cap. 25. Anno 13 Edw. 1.

Alien (alienus) One born in a strange Country. It is usually taken for the
contrary to Denizen, or a natural subject, that is, a stranger never here
enfranchised. Brook, Denizen, 4 etc. Yet a man born out of the Land, so it be
within the limits of the Kings obedience beyond the Seas, or of English Parents
out of the Kings obedience, so the Parents, at the time of the Birth be of such
obedience, is no Alien in account, but a Subject to the King. Stat. 2. 25 Edw.
3. commonly called the Statute De natis ultra mare. Also, if one born out of
the Kings alleagiance, come and dwell in England, his Children, begotten here,
are not Aliens, but Denizens. See Denizen.

Alimony (alimonia) Nourishment, maintenance. But in a modern legal sense, it
signifies, that portion or allowance, which a married Woman sues for, upon any
occasional separation from her Husband; wherein she is not charged with
Elopement or Adultery. This Alimony was anciently expressed by rationabile
estoverium, for reasonable maintenance. Rex Vic. Bucks salutem. Praecipimus
tibi quod de Maritagio Emmae de Pinckeney uxoris Laurentii Penire, qui
excommunicatus est, eo quod praedictam Emmam affectione maritali non tractat,
eidem Emmae rationabile estoverium suum invenias donec idem Laurentius vir suue
eam tanquam uxorem suam tractaverit, ne iteratus clamor ad nos inde perveniat.
T. 29 Aug. Anno Regni nostri 7. Rot. Claus. 7. Hen. p. 1. m 3.

Allay (Fr.) Is used for the temper or mixture of other Metals with Silver or
Gold. Anno 9 Hen. 5. Stat. 2. cap. 4. and Stat. 1. cap. 11. The reason of which
Allay is, with a baser metal, to augment the weight of the Silver or Gold, so
much as may countervail the Princes charge in the Coining, and to make it the
more fusile. Anto. Faber. de Nummariorum debitorum solutionibus, cap. 1. Anno 4
Hen. 7. cap. 2

Allocation (allocatio) A placing or adding unto; also allowance made upon an
account: used in the Exchequer.

Allocatione facienda, Is a Writ directed to the Lord Treasurer and Barons of
the Exchequer, upon a Complaint of some Accomptant, commanding them to allow
him such sums, as he has by virtue of his Office lawfully and reasonably
expended. Register of Writs, fol. 206. b.

Allodium. See Fee.

Alluminor (from the Fr. allumer, to lighten or kindie) is used for one, who by
his trade colors or paints upon Paper or Parchment. And the reason is,
because lie gives light and ornament by his colors to the Letters, or other
Figures colored. The word is used An. 1 Rich. 3. cap. 9. Now we call him a
Limner.

Almner or Aumoner (Elecmosynarius) Is an Officer of a King or Princes house,
whose Function is carefully to collect the fragments of Meat and Victuals, and
distribute them every day to the poor; charitably to visit the sick and
leprous, prisoners, poor widows, needy persons, and those that have no constant
abode; likewise to receive, and faithfully distribute cast Horses, Robes,
Money, and other things given in Alms; he ought also to excite the King with
often admonitions, especially on Festival days, to be bountiful in giving Alms,
and to beseech, that his rich robes may not be given to Parasites, Maskers,
Stage Players, or the like, but may go toward the increase of his Alms. Fleta,
lib. 2. cap. 22.

Almsfeoh or Aelmesfeoh (Sax.) i. Almsmoney; that is, Peterpence anciently paid
in England, on the first of August, and given by King Ina; called also
Romefeoh, Romescot, and Heorthpening. Seldens History of Tithes, page 217

Almoin. See Aumone.

Alnage (Fr. Aulnage) Ell-measure, the measuring with an Ell. Anno 17 Edw. 4.
cap. 5. See Alnager.

Alnager or Alneger (Fr. Aulner, i. A Measurer by the Ell) signifies a sworn
public Officer, who by himself or deputy looks to the Assize of Woollen Cloth
made through the Land, and to the Seals for that purpose ordained, Anno 25 Edw.
3. Stat. 4. cap. 1. And (...) Rich. 2. cap. 2. who is accountable to the King
for every Cloth so sealed in a Fee or Custom thereunto belonging, 17 Rich. 2.
cap. 2. Read of this more, 27 Edw. 3. cap. 4. -- 1 Hen. 4. cap. 13. -- 7
Ejusdem, cap. 10. -- 11 Ejusdem, cap. 6. -- 13 Ejusdem, cap. 4. -- 11 Hen. 6.
cap. 9. -- 31 Ejusdem, cap. 5. -- 4 Edw. 4. cap. 1. -- 8 Ejusdem, cap. 1. and 1
Rich. 3. cap. 8. There are now a Ternary of Officers relating to the regulation
of Clothing; all which, were anciently comprised in the unity of one person.
These bear the distinct names of Searcher, Measurer, and Alneger, which last,
though it be a Tautotological expression (Aulnage and Measure, being the same
thing denoted in two Languages) yet long usage and custom have brought them to
distinct Offices, and that which anciently was called Alnage, from whence the
Alnager takes the name, who was no more but Measurer in signification, is now
become Collector of the Subsidy granted to the King, by the before recited
Statutes, still holding the name Alnager, because the collection of that
Subsidy was by Edward the Third, committed to the charge of the Alnager, and he
nevertheless not abridged of his measuring and searching, till by his own
wilful neglect they became separated, and that by distinct Laws. Insomuch, as
there is now a peculiar Measurer, who ought to allow the Assize of length and
breadth to every particular Cloth, made in England and Wales: And, because the
Subjects of this Land should not be abused, an office of Searching is
established by Act of Parliament, whose Officer ought by his Seals, judiciously
and diligently affixed, to denote the defaults and casual abuses which each
particular Cloth contains. All these Offices were anciently under the
cognizance of the Alnager; as you may read at large in a Treatise, entitled,
The Golden Fleece, Printed Anno 1656. See 4 Instit. fol. 31.

Alodium, in Doomsday, signifies a free Manor; and Alodarii, Lords of the
same. Coke on Littl. fol. 5.

Altarage (altaragium) Comprehends not only the offerings made upon the Altar,
but also all the profit which accrues to the Priest by reason of the Altar,
Obventio Altaris.

Northampton, ss. Inter ordines sive decreta de Termino Sancti Mich Anno 21
Eliz. in Scaccario remanentes, and in custodia Rememoratoris Regis inter alia
continetur sic.

Jovis, 12 Die Nov.
UPon the Hearing of the Matter betwixt Ralph Turner, Vicar of West-Haddon, and
Edward Andrews, it is ordered, That the said Vicar shall have, by reason of the
words (Altaragium cum manso competenti) contained in the Composition of the
Profits assigned for the Vicars maintenance, all such things as he ought to
have by these words, according to the Definition thereof made by the Reverend
Father in God, John Bishop of London, upon Conference with the Civilians, viz.
David Hewes, Judge of the Admiralty, Bartholomew Clark, Dean of the Arches,
John Gibson, Henry Jones, Laurence Hewes, and Edward Stanhop, all Doctors of
the Civil Law, that is to say, By Altaragium, Tithes of Wool, Lamb, Colt, Calf,
Pigs, Goslings, Chickens, Butter, Cheese, Hemp, Flax, Honey, Fruits, Herbs, and
such other small Tithes, with Offerings, that shall be due within the Parish of
West-Haddon.

And the like case was for Norton in Northamptonshire, heard in the said Court
within these two or three years, upon the Hearing Ordered in the like manner.

Oblationes sive numinorum, sive panum, tali vel tali Altari, vel ex devotione
vel ex consuetudine, aut a Parochianis, aut ab extraneis factae, Altaragii
nomine censebantnr. Gloss. in Mat. Paris.

Alto and basso, or in Alto and in basso. Pateat universis per presents quod
Willielmas Tylar de Yetton, and Thomas Gower de Aylemestre posuerunt se in alto
and in basso in arbitrio quatuor hominum, viz. -- de quadam querela pendente
inter eos in Curia de Wyggemore ad sectam praedicti Willielms versus praefatum
Thomam, Et praedicti quatuor homines judicaverunt and ordinaverunt quod -- Dat.
apud Aylemestre die Mercurii prox. post Festum Conceptionis B. Mariae, Anno 2
Hen. 5. -- Ipse Prior venit and Bogo similiter and ponunt se in gratiam,
misericordiam and voluntatem Regis de alto and basso, ad quod mandantur Turri
London, etc. Plac. coram Rege, Hill. 18 Edw. 1. By this is meant, the absolute
submission of all differences, small and great, high and low.

Amabyr. See Chevage.

Ambidexter (Lat) He that uses his left hand as well as his right; that plays
on both sides: But in the legal acception, it signifies, That Juror or
Embraceor who takes Money on both sides for giving his verdiet; for which he
forfeits ten times so much as he takes, 38 Edw. 3. cap. 12. Crompt. Just. of P.
fol. 156. b.

Ame (Kings Proclamation, 1663.) See Aume.

Amenable (from the Fr. amener, i. To bring or lead unto) Others write it
amainable, from the Fr. main, a hand) tractable; that may be led by the hand or
governed; that may be brought or fetched in. It is applied in our Law Books to
a Woman that is supposed governable by her Husband.

Amendment (amendatio) signifies the correction of an Error committed in a
Process, and espied before or after Judgment; and sometimes after the party
seeking advantage by the Error. Brook, titulo, Error and Amendment.

Amerciament (from the Fr. Merci, i. misericordia,) signifies the pecuntary
punishment of an offender against the King, or other Lord in his Court, that is
found to be in misericordia, i. to have offended, and to stand to the mercy of
the Lord. There seems to be a difference between Amerciaments and Fines: These,
as they are taken for punishments, are punishments certain, which grow expressly
from some Statute; but Amerciaments are arbitrably imposed by Affeerors. See
Kitchen, fol. 78. and 214. Manwood (in his first part of Forest Laws, page
166.) makes another difference, as if an Amerciament were a more easy or
merciful penalty, and a Fine more sharp and grievous. Take his words, If the
Pledges for such a Trespass appear by common Summons, and not the Defendant
himself, then the Pledges shall be imprisoned for the Defendants default. But
otherwise it is, if the Defendant himself appear, and be ready in Court before
the Lord Justice in Air, to receive his Judgment, and to pay his Fine. But if
such Pledges make default, they shall be Amerced, but not Fined. The Author of
the New Terms of Law says, That Amerciament is most properly a Penalty
assessed by the Peers or Equals of the Party Amerced for an offense done; for
which, he puts himself upon the mercy of the Lord: Who also mentions an
Amerciament Royal, and defines it to be a pecuniary punishment laid upon a
Sheriff, Coroner, or such like Officer of the King, by Justices for some
offense. Ratcliff, Baron of the Exchequer, 2 Hen. 7. fol. 7. See Misericordia.

Amortization (amortizatio, Fr. amortissement) Est praediorum translatio in
manum mortuam, quod tamen sine venia Principis non fiat. Jus amortizationis est
privilegium seu licentia capiendi in manum mortuam. In the Statute De
libertatibus perquirendis, Anno 27 Edw. 1. the word Amortisement is used. See
Mortmain.

Amortize (from the Fr. amortir) Is to Alien Lands or Tenements to any
Corporation, Guild or Fraternity, and their Successors; which cannot be done
without License of the King, and the Lord of the Manor. Anno 15 Rich. 2. cap.
5. See Mortmain, and the Statute of Amortizing Lands made tempore Edw. 1.

Amoveas manum. See Ouster le Main.

An, jour and Waste (Annus, Dies, and Vastum) Look Year, Day, and Waste.

Ancorage (ancoragium) A duty taken of Ships for the Pool of the Haven, where
they cast Anchor. M. S. Arth. Trevor Ar. For no man can let any Anchor fall on
the Kings Ground in any Port, without paying therefore to the Kings Officers
appointed by Patent.

Ancestor, (antecessor) Is well known; but we make this difference betwixt that
and Predecessor; the first is applied to a natural person, as I. S. and
Antecessores sui; the other to a Body Politic or Corporate, Episcopus Winton.
and Predecessores sui. Coke on Littl. Lib. 2. cap. 4. Sect. 103.

Ancestrel, As Homage Ancestrel, i. Homage that has been done or performed by
ones Ancestors. See Homage.

Ancient, (Fr. ancien) In Greys-Inn the Society consists of Benchers, Ancients,
Barrasters, and Students, under the Bar; where the Ancients are of the more
Ancient Barrasters. In the Inns of Chancery there are only Ancients, and
Students, or Clerks, and among the Ancients, one is yearly the Principal, or
Treasurer. In the Middle Temple, Ancients are such as are past their Reading,
and never read.

Ancient demean or demain, (vetus Patrimonium Domini) Is a certain Tenure,
whereby all the Manors belonging to the Crown in the days of Saint Edward, or
William the Conqueror, were held. The number and names of which Manors, as of
all other belonging to common persons, after a Survey made of them, he caused
to be written in a Book, now remaining in the Exchequer, and called Doomsday.
And those which by that Book appear to have at that time belonged to the Crown,
and are contained under the Title Terra Regis, are called Ancient Demesne.
Kitchen. fol. 98. Of these Tenants there were two sorts; one that held their
Land frankly by Charter, the other by Copy of Court-Roll, or by Verge at the
Will of the Lord, according to the Custom of the Manor. Britton. cap. 66.
numb. 8. The benefit of this Tenure consists in these Points. 1. The Tenants
holding by Charter, cannot be impleaded out of their Manor, or, if they be,
they may abate the Writ; by Pleading their Tenure, before or after answer made.
2. They are free of Toll, for all things, concerning their Sustenance and
Husbandry. 3. They may not be empannelled upon any Enquest. See more in Fitz.
Not. Br. fol. 14. d. and fol. 228, etc. By whom it appears, these Tenants held
originally by Ploughing the Kings Land, plashing his Hedges, or such like,
toward the maintenance of his Household; in which regard, they had such
Liberties given them, wherein, to avoid disturbance, they may have Writs to
such as take the Duties of Toll; as likewise for Immunity of Portage, Passage,
or such like. No Lands ought to be accounted Ancient Demesne, but such as are
held in Soccage. See Monstraverunt and Demain.

Ancienty, (Fr. anciennete, i. ancientnes) In the Statute of Ireland, 14 Hen.
3. is used for Eldership or Seniority. As, The Eldest Sister can demand no more
then her other Sisters, but the chief Mease by reason of her Ancienty.

Andena, A swath in Mowing. See Dole.

Annats (annates) Are all one with Firstfruits. Anno 25 Hen. 8. cap. 20. The
reason is, because the rate of First Fruits paid of Spiritual Livings, is after
one years profit. Annates more suo appellant primos fructus unius anni
sacerdotii vacantis, aut dimidiam eorum partem, says Polydor Virgil de Inven.
rerum lib. 8. cap. 2. Note, Annates, Primitiae, and First Fruits, are all one.
Cokes 12. Rep. fol. 45. See Firstfruits.

Anniented (from the Fr. aneantir, i. To make void) signifies as much as
frustrated or brought to nothing. Littleton, lib. 3. cap. Warranty.

Anniversary days (dies anniversarii) Were of old those days, wherein the
Martyrdoms or Deaths of Saints were celebrated yearly in the Church; or the
days whereon, at every years end, Men were wont to pray for the Souls of their
deceased Friends, according to the continued custom of Roman Catholics;
mentioned in the Statute 1 Edw. 6. cap. 14. and 12 Car. 2. cap. 13. This was in
use among our ancient Saxons, as you may see in Lib. Rames. Sect. 134.

Annua pensione, Is a Writ (now difused) whereby the King having an Annual
Pension due to Him from an Abbor or Prior, for any of His Chaplains, (whom He
should think good to nominate, being as yet unprovided of suffiliving) demands
the same of the said Abbot or Prior; and also wills him for His Chaplains
better assurance, to give him His Letters Patent for the same. Register of
Writs, fol. 265, 307. And Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 231. Where you may see the names
of all the Abbeys and Priories bound to this, in respect of their Foundation or
Creation.

Anno Domini, Is the computation of time from the Incarnation of our Lord
JESUS, and is used in public writings; sometimes with, and sometimes without
the year of the Kings reign. As the Romans made their computation from the
Building of the City Rome, and the Grecians by Olympiads: So Christians in
remembrance of the happy Incarnation of our Savior, reckon their time from
thence. The day of the Month, the Year of our Lord and Savior Christ, and the
Year of the Kings reign, are the usual Dates of Deeds. Cokes 2 Inst. fol. 675.

Annuity (annuus redditus) Signifies a Yearly Rent to be paid for term of Life,
or Years, or in Fee; and is also used for the Writ that lies against a Man for
recovery of such a Rent. Register of Writs, fol. 158. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 152.
Annuity is otherwise defined to be a certain sum of Money granted to another in
Fee-simple, Fee-tail, for Life or Years, to receive of the Grantor or his
Heirs, so that no Freehold be charged therewith; whereof a man shall never
have Assize, or other Action, but a Writ of Annuity. Doctor and Student, Dial.
1. cap. 3. Shows several differences between a Rent, and an Annuity, whereof
the first is, That every Rent, be it Rentcharge, Rent-service, or Rent-seek,
is issuing out of Land; but an Annuity charge the person only, that is to
say, The Grantor or his Heirs that have Assets by descent. The second is, That
for the recovery of an Annuity, no Action lies, but only the Writ of Annuity
against the Grantor, his Heirs, or Successors; but of a Rent, the same Actions
lie as do of Land, as the Case requires. The third difference is, That an
Annuity is never taken for Assets, because it is no Freehold in Law, nor shall
it be put in Execution upon a Statute Merchant, Statute Staple or Elegit, as a
Rent may. Dyer, fol. 345. numb. 2. Coke on Littl. fol. 144. b.

Anoisance alias Nuisance (Fr. Nuisance, i. Hurt or Offense) Has a double
signification, being used as well for any hurt done, either to a public place,
as Highway, Bridge, or Common River; or to a private, by laying any thing that
may breed infection, by incroaching, or such like means: As also, for the Writ
that is brought upon this transgression; whereof see more in Nuisance. The word
Anoisance I find Anno 22 Hen. 8. cap. 5.

Ansel weight. See Aunsel.

Apostata capiendo, Is a Writ (now out of use) that lay against one, who having
entered and professed some Order of Religion, brake out again and wandered the
Country, contrary to the Rules of his Order. The form whereof, with other
circumstances, you shall find in the Register of Writs, fol. 71. and 267. And
Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 233.

Apparator (Anno 21 Hen. 8. cap. 5) A Messenger that cites offenders to appear
in the Spiritual Court, and serves the Process thereof.

Apparlement (of the Fr. pareillement, i. likewise, or in like manner)
Signifies a resemblance, or likelihood; as Apparlement of War, mentioned in our
Statutes.

Appeal (Fr. Appel) Is as much as accusatio with the Civilians. For, as in the
Civil Law, Cognizance of Criminal Causes, is taken either upon inquisition,
denunciation, or accusation; so in ours, upon Indictment or Appeal: Indictment
comprehending both Inquisition and Denunciation; and Accusation or Appeal, is a
lawful Declaration of another Man's crime (which by Bracton must be Felony at
least) before a competent Judge, by one that sets his name to the Declaration,
and undertakes to prove it, upon the penalty that may ensue of the contrary.
For the whole course of an Appeal, I must refer you to Bracton, lib. 3. tract.
2. cap. 18. Smith de Republ. Angl. lib. 3 cap. 3. Britton, cap. 22, 25. And to
Stamf. Pl. Coron. lib. 2. cap. 6, 7, etc. An Appeal is commenced two ways,
either by Writ or by Bill; Appeal by Writ is, when a Writ is purchased out of
the Chancery, by one to another; to this end, that he Appeal a third of some
Felony committed by him, finding Pledges that he shall do it, and deliver this
Writ to the Sheriff to be recorded. Appeal by Bill is, when a Man of himself
gives up his Accusation in Writing to the Sheriff or Coroner, offering to
undergo the burden of Appealing the person therein named.

This point of our Law, among others is drawn from the Normans, which appears
plainly by the Grand Customary, cap. 68. Where there is set down a solemn
discourse, both of the effects of this Appeal, viz. The Order of the Combat,
and of the Trial by Inquest; which by our Law, is in the choice of the
Defendant. See New Book of Entries, verbo Appel. Book of Assizes, fol. 78. And
3 Part. Inst. fol. 131.

Appeal of Maihem, Is an accusing of one that has maimed another. But that
being no Felony, the Appeal thereof is but in a manner an Action of Trespass;
because there is nothing recorded but damages. Bracton calls this Appellum de
Plagiis and Mahemio, and writes a whole Chapter of it, Lib. 3. Tract. 2. cap.
24. See Coke, Vol. 4. fol. 43. a. In King John's time, there is recorded an
Appeal against a Jew, Qui fecit ementulari quendam nepotem suum.

Appeal of wrong Imprisonment, Is used by Bracton for an Action of wrong
Imprisonment, Lib. 3. Tract. 2. cap. 25.

Appeal (from Appello, to call, because Appellans vocat reum in judicium, Coke
on Littl. lib. 2. cap. 11.) Is diverse times used in our Common Law, as in the
Civil; which is for a removing of a Cause from an Inferior Judge to a Superior;
As Appeal to Rome, Anno 24 Hen. 8. cap. 12. and 1 Eliz. cap. 1. So S. Paul
appealed from Festus to Caesar. But more commonly for the private accusation of
a Murderer, by a Person who had interest in the party murdered, or of any Felon
by one of his Accomplices in the Fact. See Approver, and see Coke on Littl. fol.
287. b.

Appellor or Appealor, Is he, who has committed some Felony which he
confesses, and now Appeals, that is, Accuses others who were accomplices with
him. And those that are so appealed are called Appealees. Anno 28 Edw. 1. See
Approver.

Appendant (appendens) Is an Inheritance belonging to another that is more
worthy; as Accessorium principali with the Civilians, or, Adjunctum subjecto
with the Logicians. An Hospital may be Appendant to a Manor, Fitz. Not. Br.
fol. 142. Common of Fishing appendant to a Freehold, Westminster. 2. c. 25. Anno 13
Edw. 1. Appendants are ever by Prescription. See Coke on Littl. fol. 121. b.

Appennage or Apennage (Fr.) The portion of the Kings younger Children in
France, a Childs part. They have in France a Fundamental Law, which they call
the Law of Apennages, whereby the Kings younger Sons have Dutchies, Counties,
or Baronies, granted unto them, and their Heirs, or Heirs-males of their
Bodies, the Reversion reserved to the Crown, and all Matters of Regality, as
Coynage, Levying Taxes, and the like. It is derived Ab appendendo, or from the
German word Avanage, which signifies a Portion. See Gerard du Heylan, and Spel.
Glossar. in voce Appennagium.

Appertinances (pertinentia) Are things both Corporal, belonging to another
thing, as to the more principal; as Hamlets to a chief Manor, Common of
Pasture, Turbary, Piscary, and such like; and Incorporeal, as Liberties, and
Services of Tenants, Brit. cap. 39. Where it may be observed, That he accounts
Common of Pasture, Turbary, and Piscary, to be things Corporal. See Common.

Apportionment (apportionamentum) Is a dividing of a Rent into parts, according
as the Land (whence the whole Rent issues) is divided among two or more. As if
a Man have a Rent-service issuing out of Land, and he purchases part of the
Land, the Rent shall be apportioned, according to the value of the Land. So if
a Man let Lands for years, reserving Rent, and after a stranger recovers part
of the Land, the Rent shall be apportioned. But a Rentcharge cannot be
apportioned, nor things that are entire; As if one hold Land by service, to pay
to his Lord yearly at such a Feast, a Horse, or Rose; there, if the Lord
purchase part of the Land, this service is totally extinct; because such things
cannot be divided without hurt to the whole. Yet in some Cases a Rentcharge
shall be apportioned, as if a Man has a Rentcharge issuing out of Land, and
his Father purchases part of the Land charged in Fee, and dies, and this
parcel descends to his Son, who has the Rentcharge; there this Charge shall be
apportioned, according to the value of the Land; because such portion of the
Land, purchased by the Father, comes not to the Son by his own Act, but by
descent and course of Law. Common Appendant is of common right, and severable;
and though the Commoner, in such case, purchase parcel of the Land, wherein the
Common is Appendant, yet the Common shall be apportioned. But in this case,
Common Appurtenant, and not Appendant, by such Purchase is extinct. Coke, lib.
8. fol. 79.

Apposer. See Foreign Apposer.

Apprendre, (Fr.) As Fee or Profit Apprendre (Anno 2 and 3 Edw. 6. cap. 8.) Fee
or Profit to be taken or received.

Apprentice, (Fr. apprenti, and that from apprendre, to learn, whence their
apprentisage, and our apprentiship) Is one that is bound by Covenant to serve a
Tradesman or Artificer, a certain time (for the most part seven years) upon
condition, That the Master shall, during that time, instruct him in his Art or
Mystery. Sir Tho. Smith (in his Rep. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 8.) says, They are a
kind of Bondmen, differing only, in that they are servants by Covenant, and
for a time. Anciently Barrasters were called Apprentices of the Law. As appears
by Mr. Seldens Notes upon Fortescu, p. 3. So the Learned Plowden styled
himself. Sir Henry Finch in his Nomotechnia writes himself Apprentice del Ley;
and Sir Edward Coke in his 2 Part. Instit. fol. 564. says Apprenticii Legis, in
pleading, are called Homines consiliarii, and in Lege periti. And in another
place, -- Apprentices, and other Counselors of Law.

Appropriation (appropriatio, from the Fr. approprier, i. aptare, accomodare)
Signifies the severing of a Benefice Ecclesiastical (which originally, and in
nature is, Juris Divini, and in Patrimonio nullius) to the proper and perpetual
use of some Religious House, Bishopric, College, etc. So called, because
Parsons, not being ordinarily accounted (Domini) but usufructarii, having no
right of Fee-simple, are by reason of their perpetuity, accounted owners of the
Fee-simple, and therefore called Proprietarii. Before the time of Richard the
Second, it was lawful (as it seems) to appropriate the whole Fruits of a
Benefice to an Abbey or Priory, they finding one to serve the Cure. But that
King ordained, That in every License of Appropriation made in Chancery, it
should expressly be contained, That the Diocesan of the place should provide a
convenient sum of money to be yearly paid out of the Fruits, toward the
sustenance of the poor in that Parish, and that the Vicar should be well and
sufficiently endowed, Anno 15 Rich. 2. cap. 6. To make an Appropriation (after
License obtained of the King in Chancery) the consent of the Diocesan, Patron,
and Incumbent are necessary, if the Church be full; if it be void, the
Diocesan, and the Patron, upon the Kings License, may conclude it. Plowden in
Grendons Case, fol. 496. To dissolve an Appropriation, it is enough to present
a Clerk to the Bishop, and he to institute, and induct him: For that once done,
the Benefice returns to the former nature, Fitz. Not. Br. 35. and Coke, lib. 7.
fol. 13.

Approvement (Anno 43 Eliz. cap. 11.) Is the same with improvement; but it is
more particularly used for the enclosing part of a Common by the Lord of the
Manor, leaving sufficient nevertheless for the Commoners.

Approver (approbator) Is one, that confessing Felony committed by himself,
appeals or accuses others to be guilty of the same; and is so called, because
he must prove that which he has alleged in his Appeal. This Proof is by
Battle, or by the Country, at his election that appealed. The Form of this
Accusation you may in part gather by Cromptons Justice of Peace, fol. 250. and
251. That it is done before the Coroner, either assigned to the Felon by the
Court, to take and record what he says, or else cal^ed by the Felon himself,
and required for the good of the Commonwealth to do so. The Approvers Oath,
when he begins the Combat, you may see in the last Page of Crompton, as also
the Proclamation by the Herald. Of the Antiquity of this Law, read at large
Bracton, lib. 3. Tract. 2. cap. 21. and 34. Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 2. cap. 52.
cum seq. And 3 Part. Instit. fol. 129. See Prover.

Approvers of the King (Approbatores Regis) Are those that have the letting of
the Kings Demeans in small Manors, to his best advantage. Anno 51 Hen. 3.
Stat. 5. And in the Statute of 1 Edw. 3. cap. 8. the Sheriffs call themselves
the Kings Approvers.

Approve (approhare) To augment or (as it were) to examine to the utmost. For
example, To approve Land, is to make the best benefit of it by increasing the
Rent, etc. Anno 9 Hen. 6. cap. 10. Bailiffs of Lords in their Franchises, are
called their Approvers; and by what follows, you may see what kind of
Approvers or Improvers were formerly in the Marches of Wales, authorized by the
Prince thereof. Richard de Lyngein Emprover desuth Commission nostre tree dout
Seigneur le Prince deins le Count de Hereford, and le Marches adjoygnant, a
toutz y ceux qui cests Letters verront ou orront, salutz. Sachez moy aver grant
a une Janin de Brompton loyal and liege home nostre Seigneur le Roy, and a ses
servants, de vendre and acheter bests and berbez deins le Count de Hereford,
and le March adjoygnant sans empechement ou arrest de nulluy, come loyal and
liege hommes, a son propre use and encrese, sans refreshmente des Rebels de
Gales. Et cest ma Lettre serra son Garrant. En tesmoignage de quel chose a y
ceste jay mise mon Seal. Don a Lemestre le xi jour de Julet le ann de Regne le
Roy Henric. le quart apres le Conquest, quarte. -- See 2 Part. Instit. fol.
474. -- Quod nullus libere tenens infra Baroniam illam se appruira posset de
vasto suo, etc.

Aquage (aquagium, q. aquae agium, i. aquae ductus and aquaegangium) -- Non
liceat alicui de caetero facere dammas vel fordas aut alia impedimenta in
aliquibus landeis watergangiis, fossatis sive aquagiis eommunibus in marisco
praedicto. Ordinatio Marisci de Romeney facta tempore Hen. 3. and Edw. 1. page
72. See Watergage.

Arbitrator (Lat.) Is an exttaordinary Judge or Commissioner in one or more
Causes, between party and party, chosen by their mutual consents. This
Arbitrament is either general, that is, including all Actions, Quarrels, and
Demands, or Special, which is or one or more Matters, Facts, or Things
specified. The Civilians make a difference between Arbiter and Arbitrator: For
though they both ground their power upon the comprimise of the parties, yet
their liberty is diverse. For Arbiter is tied to proceed and judge according to
Law, with Equity intermingled; Arbitrator is permitted wholly to his own
discretion, without solemnity of Process or Course of Judgment, to hear or
determine the Controversy committed to him; so it be Juxta Arbitrium boni
viri. See Alto and Basso.

Arbitrament. See Arbitrator.

Arches Court (Curia de Arcubus) Is the chief and ancientest Consistory that
belongs to the Archbishop of Canterbury, for debating Spiritual Causes; and is
so called from Bow-Church in London, (dedicated to the Blessed Virgin) where it
was kept. And the Church is so called of the fashion of the Steeple or Clochier
thereof, whose top is raised of Stone-pillars, built Arch-wise, like so many
Bent-Bows.

The Judge of this Court is termed The Dean of the Arches, or The Official of
the Arches Court. Dean of the Arches, because with this Officialty is commonly
joined a peculiar Jurisdiction of Thirteen Parishes in London, termed a Deanery,
being exempted from the Authority of the Bishop of London, and belonging to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, of which, the Parish of Bow is one, and the chief,
because the Court was there kept.

The Jurisdiction of this Judge is ordinary, and extends it self through the
whole Province of Canterbury. So that upon any Appeal made, he forthwith, and
without any further examination of the Cause, sends out his Citation to the
Appealee, and his Inhibition to the Judge, from whom the Appeal was made. Of
this read more in Historia de Antiq. Eccles. Britan. And 4 Part. Instit. fol.
337.

Archive (archivum, from arca, a Press or Chest.). The Rolls, or a place
wherein Ancient Records, Charters, and Evidences (that belong to the Crown and
Kingdom) are kept; also the Chancery or Exchequer Office.

Arms (arma) In the understanding of Law, are extended to any thing that a Man
wears for his defense, or takes into his hands, or uses in his wrath to cast
at, or strike another. Crompt. Just. of Peace, fol. 65. a. So Armorum
appellatio, non utique scuta and gladios, and galeas significat, sed and fustes
and lapides.

Arms are also, what we call in Latin Insignia, Ensigns of Honor.

Argentum Dei. Gods-penny, i. Earnest Money, or Money given in earnest: In
Lincolnshire called Earls.

Arpen or Arpent (Fr.) An Acre or Furlong of Ground, the most ordinary one,
called L'Arpent de France, is One hundred Perches square, after Eighteen Foot
to the Perch. This word is often found in Doomsday, Quatuor Arpenni vineae
noviter plantatae. Tit. Middlesex.

Array (an old Fr. word) signifies the ranking or setting forth a Jury or
Enquest of Men, empannelled upon a Cause. 18 Hen. 6. cap. 14. Hence the Verb to
Array a Panel. An. 3. H. 5. cap. 5. and Old Not. Br. fol. 157. That is, to set
forth the Men empannelled one by another. The Array shall be quashed, ibidem.
By the Statute, every Array in Assize ought to be made four days before. Br.
tit. Panel. number. 10. To challenge the Array. Kitchen, fol. 92. See Challenge.
To lead and conduct persons armed and arrayed, 14 Car. 2. cap. 3.

Arrayers (arraiatores) Is used in the Statute, 12 Ri(...) cap. 6. for such
Officers, as had care of the Soldiers Armor and see them duly accoutred in
their kinds. Such were the Commissioners of Array, appointed by King Charles
the First, in the year 1642. Edw. Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hib. and Dux
Aquit. dilectis and fidelibus suis Johanni de Occlesthorp and Johanni de
Fenton, electoribus and Arraiatoribus hominum in Wapentachio de Barkeston
salutem. Cum ad repellendam Scotorum maliciam qui regnum nostrum hostiliter
sunt ingressi, homicidiam, depredationes, incendia and alia mala -- citia
perpetrando versus parts Marchiae Scotiae, etc. Inde Scoti cum toto posse suo
ut pro certo didiscimus prope ci^itatem nostram Karleoli ista die Martis se
congregare proponunt, etc. Nos considerantes periculum, etc. Omnes homines
defensibiles and potentes ad pugnandum ejusdem Wapentagii tam milites quam
alii, etc. I. me ipso apud North-Alverton xiii die Junii, Anno regni nostri
primo.

Arraine or Arraigne (from the French Arranger, i. to set a thing in order or
in his place) has the same signification in Law: For he is said to Arraine a
Writ of Novel Disseisin, who prepares and fits it for Trial before the Justices
of the Circuit, Old Not. Br. fol. 109. Littleton (page 78.) uses the word in
the same sense, viz. The Lease arraineth an Assize of Novel Disseizin. To
arraign the Assize, is to cause the Tenant to be called, to make the Plaint,
and to set the Cause in such order, as the Tenant may be enforced to answer
thereto, Coke on Littl. fol. 262. b. Also a Prisoner is said to be arraigned,
when he is endicted and brought forth to his Trial. Arraigned within the Verge
upon Murder. Stamf. Pl. Cor fol. 150. The manner of this Arraignment you may
read in Sir Thomas Smith de Rep. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 23. -- The Learned Spelman
is of opinion, it should be written Arrame, from arramare, and that from the
old French arramir, i. jura^e, promittere, solenniter profiteri.

Arrearages (from the Fr. arriere, retro) The remain of an Account, or a Sum of
Money remaining in the hands of an Accomptant. It is sometimes used more
generally for any Money unpaid at a due time; as Arrearages of Rent.

Arrentation (from the Span. arrendare, q. ad certum reditum dimittere,) Ordin.
Forestae, 34 Edw. 1. cap. 6. Signifies the licencing an owner of Lands in the
Forest, to enclose them, (Bassa haya and parvo fossato, i. with a low Hedge,
and small Ditch; which is according to the Assize of the Forest) under a Yearly
Rent. Saving of the Arrentations, Is saving power to give such Licenses for a
Yearly Rent.

Arrest (Fr. a stop or stay, and is metaphorically used for a Decree, or
Determination of a Cause debated, or disputed pro and con; as Arrest du Senate.
i. Placitum Curiae.) with us Arrest is taken for the Execution of the Command
of some Court or Officer of Justice, and a Man stopped, staid, or apprehended
for Debt, etc. is said to be Arrested; which may be called The beginning of
Imprisonment.

To move or plead in Arrest of Judgment, is to show cause why Judgment should
be staid, notwithstanding the Verdict be given. To plead in Arrest of taking
the Enquest upon the former Issue, is to show cause why an Enquest should not
be taken, etc. Brook, tit. Repleader. For preventing Arrests of Judgments, see
the Statute, 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. 8.

Arrestandis bonis ne dissipentur, Is a Writ which lies for him, whose Cattle
or Goods are taken by another, who during the controversy, does, or is like to
make them away, and will hardly be able to make satisfaction for them
afterward, Register of Writs, fol. 126.

Arrestando ipsum, qui pecuniam recepit ad proficiscendum in obsequium Regis,
etc. Is a Writ which lies for the apprehension of him that has taken
Prest-Money for the Kings Wars, and hides himself when he should go Register of
Writs, fol. 24. b.

Arresto facto super bonis mercatorum alienigenorum, etc. Is a Writ which lies
for a Denizen, against the Goods of Strangers of any other Country, found
within this Kingdom, in recompense of Goods taken from him in that Country,
after he has been denied restitution there. Register of Writs, fol. 129, a.
This among the Ancient Civilians was called Clarigatio, now barbarously
Reprisalia.

Arretted, (arrectatus, quasi, ad rectum vocatus) That is convented before a
Judge, and charged with a crime. It is sometimes used for imputed, or laid
unto; as, no folly may be arretted to one under age. Littleton, cap. Remitter.
Chaucer uses the Verb Arretteth, i. Lays blame, as it is interpreted.
Bracton says, Ad rectnm babere Malefactorem, i. To have the Malefactor forth
coming, so as he may be charged and put to his Trial, Lib. 3. tract. 2. cap.
10. And in another place, Rectatus de morte hominis, charged with the death of
a Man.

Arrura, -- Hoc Scriptum factum apud Sutton Courtenay, 20 Dic Dec. 4 Edw. 3.
Inter Dominum Hugonem de Courtenay ex part una and Ric. de Stanlake and
Johannam uxorem ejus ex altera, testatur, quod idem Dominus Hugo, in excambium
-- remisit -- eisdem Ricardo and Johannae -- omnimoda opera, VIZ. Arruras,
Messiones and Cariagia, and alia quaecunque opera -- Et ipsi non dabunt Medfee,
etc. Penes Tho. Wollascot de Sutton praedict. Ar. q. If not here used for
Ploughing and Harrowing.

Arthel, (An. 26 H. 8. cap. 6. -- And that no person or persons shall
hereafter, at any time, cast any thing into any Court within Wales, or in the
Lordships Marchers of the same, by the mean or name of an Arthel; by reason
whereof the Court may be let, disturbed, or discontinued for that time, upon
pain of, etc.) Is a British word, and is more truly written Arddelw, which the
Southwales men write Arddel, and signifies (according to Dr. Davies Dictionary)
Astipulari, Asserere. Vindicare; Assertio, Vindicatio; Anglice Avouch. Example,
O delir Din, 'ai ledrad in ei Law rhaid iddo geifio Arrdelw cyfreithlon, i fwrw
ei ledrad oddiwrtho. i. It a Man be taken with stolen Goods in his hands, he
must be allowed a lawful Arddelw (Vouchee) to clear him of the Felony. Which is
part of the Law of Howel Dda; but probably was so abused in Henry the Eighths
time, by the delay of, or exemption of Felons, and other Criminals from,
Justice, that provision by this Statute was made against it. Thus explicated by
the Learned Meredith Lloyd Esquire

Articles of the Clergy (Articuli Cleri) Are certain Statutes made touching
Persons and Causes Ecclesiastical. Anno 9 Edw 2. and Anno 14 Edw. 3. Stat. 3.

Assart, (Fr. Essarter, to glade or make Glades in a Wood, to make Plain, to
Grub up or clear a ground of Bushes, Shrubs, etc.) Is (according to Manwood,
cap. 9. numb. 1.) an offense committed in the Forest, by plucking up those
Woods by the Roots, which are Thickets, and Cover for the Deer, and by making
them plain as arable Land; which is the greatest Offense or Trespass that can
be done in the Forest, to Vert or Venison, containing as much or more then
Waste. For whereas Waste of the Forest, is but the Felling and Cutting down the
Coverts, which may grow again: Assart is a Plucking them up, and Destroying
them; which is confirmed out of the Red Book in the Exchequer, in these words,
Assarta vero occasiones nominantur, quando Forestae nemora vel Dumeta, pascuis
and latibulis ferarum oportuna, succiduntur: Quibus succisis and radicitus
avulsis, terra subvertitur and excolitur. And again out of Register of Writs,
fol. 257. in the Writ Ad quod Damnum, sent out in case where a Man sues for a
License to Assart his Grounds in the Forest, and to make it several for
Tillage. So that it is no offense, if done with License. To this Bracton may be
added, (Lib. 4. cap. 38.) who says, That these words Boscus efficitnr
Assartum, signify as much as Redactus ad culturam. Of this you may read more
in Cromp. Jursid. fol. 203. and in Charta de Foresta, Anno 9 Hen. 3. cap. 4.
where it is written Assert, not Assart. And in Manwood, part. 1. page 171. That
which we call Assartum, is elsewhere termed Disboscatio. Quietus de Essartis we
find in a Charter of Privilege granted by Henry the First, to the Abbot of
Rames. Sect. 198. And in Pat. 18 Edw. 3. page 1. m. 19. -- Et quibusdam Sartis,
quae sartaverunt homines ipsius Ecclesiae, etc.

Assart was also anciently used for a parcel of Land assarted, as appears by
this Charter of Roger Earl of Mortimer. Sciant praesentes and futuri, quod ego
Rogerus de Mortuo mare Dedi and concessi Ade Pistori pro servitio suo tresdecem
acras terrae super Mughedone inter pratum quod fuit Petri Budelli and viam quae
vadit per medium Mughedone. Dedi etiam eidem Ade Duo Asarta en la Hope, quae
appellantur Ordrichesruding and Aldicheruding, in quibus Asartis continentur
quinque acrae ad eandem mensuram tresdecem acrarum super Mughedone. Ad tenendum
de me and haeredibus meis sibi and haeredibus suis in feo do and haereditate
libere and quiet, Reddendo inde annuatim mihi and haeredibus meis ille and
haeredes sui duos solidos ad Festum Sancti Michael. pro omni servitio, salvo
servitio Domini Regis. Ut autem haec mea Donatio and concessio firma sit and
stabilis, eam, hac carta^ mea^ figillo meo munita, confirmavi. Hi is testibus,
Ade Salvag. Walt. de novo Menul. etc. Sine dat. Penes Tho. Bridgwater, Genesis

Assault (assultus) Is a violent kind of injury offered to a Man's person, of a
higher nature then Battery; for it may be committed by offering a blow, or by a
terrifying speech, (Lamb. Eiren. lib 1. cap. 3.) As to rebuke a Collector with
foul words, so that he departed for fear without doing his Office, was taken
for an Assault. To strike at a Man, though he were neither hurt nor hit with
the blow, was adjudged the like. 22 Lib. Ass. Plea. 60. For Assault does not
always necessarily imply a hitting, or blow; because in Trespass for Assault
and Battery, a Man may be found guilty of the Assault, and excused of the
Battery, 25 Edw. 3. cap. 24. The Feudists define it thus, Assultus est impetus
in personam aut locum, sive hoc pedibus fiat, vel equo aut machinis aut
quacunque alia re assiliatur. Zasius de Feud. page 10. number. 38.

Assach or Assath (An. 1 H. 5. cap. 6.) Was a strange kind of Purgation used
of old in Wales, by the Oaths of 300 Men. For so I find it explicated in an
ancient M. S. Assach est un Jur. de 300 homes in Gales, and is now abrogated.

Assay of Measures and Weights (from the Fr. Essay, i. a proof or trial) Is the
examination used by the Clark of the Market. Register of Writs, fol. 279. -- Ac
Assisam and Assaiam panis, vini and Cervisiae. Paten. 37 Hen. 8. Tho. Marrow.

Assaier of the King (Assaisiator Regis, Fr. assayeur) Is an Officer of the
Mint for the due trial of Silver, indifferently appointed between the Master of
the Mint, and the Merchants that bring Silver thither for exchange. Anno 2 Hen.
6. cap. 12. Vessels of Gold shall be assayed. Anno 28 Edw. 1. cap. 20. and 18
Car. 2. cap. 5. Mandatum est Will. Hardel, Clerico, quod convocatis in
prasentia sua omnibus monetariis, Assaisiatoribus, custodibus, operariis and
aliis ministris de Cambiis Regis London. and Cantuar. per visum and testimonium
illorum provideat, quod tot and tales operarii sint in praedictis Cambiis, qui
sufficiant ad operationes regias faciendas, ne Rex pro defectu hujusmodi
ministrorum dampnum incurrat. T. apud Wudstoke, 10 Junii. Claus. 17 Hen. 3. m.
8.

Assembly unlawful, Is the meeting of three or more persons to do an unlawful
act, though they do it not. Lamb. Eiren. lib. 1. cap. 19. See Unlawful Assembly.

Assessor Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 15. uses it quasi, Ordinator, Collocator,
Dispositor) We now use it for him that Assesseth Public Taxes; as two
Inhabitants in every Parish were Assessors for the Royal Aid, that is, rated
every person according to the proportion of his estate. Anno 16 and 17 Car. 2.
cap. 1. Also an Officer in the Presbyterian Assemblies.

Assets (Fr. Assez, i. satis) Signifies Goods enough to discharge that burden,
which is cast upon the Executor, or Heir, in satisfying the Testators or
Ancestors debts, or Legacies. In Brook, titulo, Assets par descent, you shall
find, That whoever charges another with Assets, charges him with having enough
descended, or come to his hands to discharge that which is in demand. Of this
there are two sorts, Assets per descent, and Assets enter mains.

The first is, Where a Man enters into Bond, and dies seized of Lands in
Fee-simple, which descend to his Heirs, and are therefore chargeable as Assets
in his hands: But if the Heir alien the Lands, before the Bond be put in suit,
he is discharged. Assets enter mains, is when a Man dies indebted, leaving to
his Executors sufficient to discharge his Debts and Legacies; this is called
Assets in their hands.

Assign (assignare) Has two significations; one general, as to appoint a
Deputy, or to set over a right to another; in which, Britton (fol. 122.) says,
this word was first brought into use in favor of Bastards, because they cannot
pass under the name of Heirs, were therefore comprised under that of Assigns.
The other special, as to point at, or set forth, viz. To Assign Error, is to
show in what part of the Process Error is committed. To assign ^false Judgment,
is to declare how and where the Judgment is unjust. To assign a false Verdict.
Old Not. Br: fol. 17, 19, and 112. To assign Waste, is to show, wherein
especially the Waste is committed. Register of Writs, fol. 72. Assign in the
general signification is used, Anno 20 Edw. 1. and 11 Hen. 6. cap. 2. in these
words, Justices assigned to take Assizes. And the Substantive Assignment has
the same signification; as the Assignment of a Lease, is the setting over, or
transferring the Lessees interest to another.

Assignee, Is he that is deputed or appointed by another to do any act, or
perform any business, or enjoy any commodity; and he may be so, either by Deed,
or in Law. Assignee by Deed, is when a Lessee of a term, sells and assigns the
same to another, that other is his Assignee by Deed. Assignee by Law, is he
whom the Law so makes, without any appointment of the person; as an Executor is
the Assignee in Law to the Testator, who dies possessed of a Lease made to him
and his Assigns. Perkins (tit. Grants) says, An Assignee is he that possesses,
or enjoys a thing in his own right; and Depty, is he that does it in the right
of another.

Assise of mort d'auncester (Assisa mortis antecessoris) Lies where my Father,
Mother, Brother, Sister, Uncle, Aunt, etc. died seized of Lands, Tenements,
Rents, etc. that he had in Fee-simple, and after his death a stranger abates:
And it is good as well against the Abator, as any other in possession. How
likewise this is extended, see Bracton, lib. 4. tract. 3. per totum. Britton,
cap. 70. F. Not. Br. fol. 114. Register of Writs, fol. 223.

Assise of darrein presentment (assisa ultimae praesentationis) Lies where I or
my Ancestor have presented a Clerk to a Church, and after (the Church being
void by his death, or otherwise) a stranger presents his Clerk to the same
Church, in my disturbance. And how otherwise this Writ is used, see Bracton,
lib. 4. tract. 2. Register of Writs, fol. 30. F. Not Br. fol. 195.

Assise de utrum (assisa utrum) Lies for a Parson against a Layman, of a
Layman against a Parson, for Land or Tenement doubtful, Whether it be Lay-fee,
or Free-alms. And of this s^c Bracton, lib. 4. tract. 5. cap 1. and seq.
Britton, cap. 95. The reason why these Writs are called Assizes, may be diverse.
First, because they settle the Possession, and so an outward right in him that
obtains by them. Secondly, They were originally executed at a certain time and
place formerly appointed. For by the Norman Law, the time and place must be
known forty days before the Justices sit on them: And by our Law there must be
likewise fifteen days of preparation, except they be tried in the standing
Courts at Westminster, as appears by F. Not. Br. fol. 177. d, (...). Lastly,
They may be called Assizes, because they are tried most commonly by especial
Courts, set and appointed for the purpose, as may be well proved, not only out
of the Customary of Normandy, but our Books also: Which show, That in ancient
times Justices were appointed by special Commission, to dispatch Controversies
of Possession, one or more, in this or that only County, as occasion fell out,
or Disseisins were offered, and that as well in Term time, as out of Term:
Whereas of later days, we see that all these Commissions of Assizes, of Eyr, of
Oyer and Terminer, of Jail-delivery, and of Nisi prius, are dispatched all at
one time, by two several Circuits in the year, out of term, and by such as have
the greatest sway of Justice, being all of them the Kings Justices of either
Bench, Barons o^ the Exchequer, or Sergeants at Law.

Assise, In the second signi sication, ac oding to Littleton, is used for a
Jury. For (to use his own example) it is set down in the beginning of the
Record of an Assise of Novel Disseisin, Assisa venit recognitura, which is as
much as to say, Juratores veniunt recognituri. He gives this reason why the
Jury is called an Assise, Because, by Writ of Assise, the Sheriff is commanded,
Quod faciat duodecim liberos and legales homines de viceneto, etc. Videre
Tenementum illud, and nomina eorum imbrevtari, and quod summoneat eos per bonas
summonitiones, quod sint coram Justiciariis, etc. parati inde facere
recognitionem, etc. This is (as if he should have spoken shorter) Metonymia
effecti. For they are called the Assizes, because they are summoned by virtue
of the Writ so termed. And yet the jury summoned upon a Writ of Right, is
likewise called the Assise, as himself there confesses. Which Writ of Right is
not an Assise; but this may be said to be (...), or abusively so termed. Assise
in this signification is divided In magnam and parvam. Glanvile, lib. 2. cap. 6
and 7, etc. and Britton, cap. 12. Where it appears, wherein the Great Assise
differs from the Petit Assise. The former four kinds of Assizes used in
Actions only Possessory, are called Petit Assizes, in respect of the Grand
Assise. For the Law of Fees is grounded upon two Rights: One of Posseshon, the
other, of Property. And as the Grand Assise serves for the Right of Property;
so the Petit Assise serves for the Right of Possession. Horns Mirror of
Justices, lib. 2. cap. De Novel Disseisin.

Assise in the third signification, according to Littleton; is an Ordinance or
Statute of Assise; as the Statute of Bread and Ale made Anno 51 Hen. 3. is
termed the Assise of Bread and Ale (Assisa panis and cervisiae) Reg. of Writ,
fol. 279. b.

Assise of the Forest (Assisa de Foresta) Is a Statute or Condition, touching
orders to be observed in the Kings Forest. Manwood, part. 1. page 35. Crompton
in the Court of Justices of the Forest, per totum, fol. 146. and seq. And the
Assise of the King, Anno 18 Edw. 1. Stat. 1. called The Statute for view of
Frank-Pledge. And these are called Assizes, because they set down and appoint a
certain measure, rate, or order in the things they concern. Of Assise, in this
signification, Glanvile also speaks, Lib. 9. cap. 10. in fine. Generaliter
verum est quod de quolibet placito quod in comitatu deducitur and terminatur,
misericordia quae inde provenit, vicecomiti debetur. Quae quanta sit, per
nullam assisam generalem determinatum est. And thus much touching Littletons
Division.

But if we mark well the Writers of the Law, we shall find this word (Assise)
more diversely used, then this Author has noted. For it is sometime used for
the measure or quantity it self, (and that per Metonymiam effecti) because it
is the very scantline described or commanded by the Ordinance: For example, we
say, When Wheat, etc. is of this price, then the Bread, etc. shall be of this
Assise. This word is farther taken, for the whole Process in Court upon the
Writ of Assise, or for some part thereof, as the Issue or Verdict of the Jury.
For example, Assizes of Novel Disseisin, etc. shall not be taken, but in their
Shires, and after this manner, etc. Mag. Char. cap. 12. And so it seems to
signify, Westminster. 2. cap. 25. Anno 13 Edw. 1. in these words, Let the Disseisor
allege no false exceptions, whereby the taking of the Assizes may be deferred,
etc. And Anno 34 Edw. 1. Stat. 2. if it be found by Assise; the Assise is
arraigned; to aver by the Assise; the Assise by their default shall pass
against them. And also Anno 1 Hen. 6. cap. 2. Assizes awarded by default of the
Tenants, etc. Lastly, By Merton, cap. 4. Anno 20 Hen. 3. certified by the
Assise; quit by the Assise, etc. And in this signification Glanvile calls it
Magnam Assisam domini Regis: quae ex duodecim ad minus legalium hominum
Sacramentis consistit, L. 2. c. 7. Bracton uses it in like sort, as, Assisa
cadit in transgressionem, and Assisa cadit in perambulationem L. 4. c. 30, 31.
Fleta defines an Assise, in this signification, thus. Assisa in jure
possessorio, est quaedam recognitio duodecim hominum juratorum, per quam
Justiciarii certiorantur de articulis in brevi contentis. And Assise also, thus
signifying, is said sometime to pass (per modum assisae) and sometime in modum
juratae; in manner of an Assise, when only the Dissesin in question, is put to
the trial of the Twelve; in manner of a Jury, when any exception is objected to
disable the interest of the Disseisee, and is put to be tried by the Twelve,
before the Assise can pass.

Assise in this signification, is taken four ways, Old Not. Br. fol. 105. The
first is Assise at large, which is taken as well upon other Points, as upon the
Disseisin. For example, where an Infant brings an Assise, and the Deed of his
Ancestor is pleaded, whereby he claims his Right or founds his Title, then the
Assise shall be taken at large: That is, the Jury shall enquire not only
whether the Plaintiff were disseised, or not, by the Tenant, but also of these
Points, viz. Whether his Ancestor were of full age, of good memory, and out of
Prison, when he made the Deed, pleaded. Another example, You may read in
Littleton, cap. Estates upon Condition. The second manner is, when the Tenant,
as it were, setting foot to foot with the Demandant, without farther

Assay of Measures and Weights (from the Fr. Essay, i. a proof or trial) Is the
examination used by the Clerk of the Market. Register of Writs, fol. 279. -- Ac
Assisam and Assaiam panis, vini and Cervisiae. Paten. 37 Hen. 8. Tho. Marrow.

Assayer of the King (Assaisiator Regis, Fr. assayeur) Is an Officer of the
Mint for the due trial of Silver, indifferently appointed between the Master of
the Mint, and the Merchants that bring Silver thither for exchange. Anno 2 Hen.
6. cap. 12. Vessels of Gold shall be assayed. Anno 28 Edw. 1. cap. 20. and 18
Car. 2. cap. 5. Mandatum est Will. Hardel, Clerico, quod convocatis in
praesentia sua omnibus monetariis, Assaisiatoribus, custodibus, operariis and
aliis ministris de Cambiis Regiis London. and Cantuar. per visum and
testimonium illorum provideat, quod tot and tales operarii sint in praedictis
Cambiis, qui sufficiant ad operationes regias faciendas, ne Rex pro defectu
hujusmodi ministrorum dampnum incurrat. T. apud Wudstoke, 10 Junii, Claus. 17
Hen 3. m. 8.

Assembly unlawful, Is the meeting of three or more persons to do an unlawful
act, though they do it not. Lamb. Eiren. lib. 1. cap. 19. See Unlawful Assembly.

Assessor (Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 15. uses it quasi, Ordinator, Collocator,
Dispositor.) We now use it for him that Assesseth Public Taxes; as two
Inhabitants in every Parish were Assessors for the Royal Aid, that is, rated
every person according to the proportion of his estate. An. 16 and 17 Car. 2.
cap. 1. Also an Officer in the Presbyterian Assemblies.

Assets (Fr. Assez, i. satis) Signifies Goods enough to discharge that burden,
which is cast upon the Executor or Heir, in satisfying the Testators or
Ancestors Debts, or Legacies. In Brook, titulo, Assets par descent, you shall
find, That whoever charges another with Assets, charges him with having enough
descended, or come to his hands to discharge that which is in demand. Of this
there are two sorts, Assets per descent, and Assets enter mains.

The first is, Where a Man enters into Bond, and dies seized of Lands in
Fee-simple, which descend to his Heirs, and are therefore chargeable as Assets
in his hands: But if the Heir alien the Lands, before the Bond be put in suit,
he is discharged. Assets enter mains, is, when a Man dies indebted, leaving to
his Executors sufficient to discharge his Debts and Legacies; this is Assets in
their hands.

Assign (assignare) Has two significations; one general, as to appoint a
Deputy, or to set over a right to another; in which, Britton (fol. 122.) says,
this word was first brought into use in favor of Bastards, because they cannot
pass under the name of Heirs, were therefore comprised under that of Assigns.
The other special, as to point at, or set forth, viz. To Assign Error, is to
show in what part of the Process Error is committed. To assign false Judgment,
is to declare how and where the Judgment is unjust. To assign a false Verdict.
Old Not. Br. fol. 17, 19, and 112. To assign Waste, is to show, wherein
especially the Waste is committed. Register of Writs, fol. 72. Assign in the
general signification is used, Anno 20 Edw. 1. and 11 Hen. 6. cap. 2. in these
words, Justices assigned to take Assizes. And the Substantive Assignment has
the same signification; as the Assignment of a Lease, is the setting over, or
transferring the Lessees interest to another.

Assignee, Is he that is deputed or appointed by another to do any act, or
perform any business, or enjoy any commodity; and he may be so, either by Deed,
or in Law. Assignee by Deed, is when a Lessee of a term, sells and assigns the
same to another, that other is his Assignee by Deed. Assignee by Law, is he
whom the Law so makes, without any appointment of the person; as an Executor is
the Assignee in Law to the Testator, who dies possessed of a Lease made to him
and his Assigns. Perkins (tit. Grants) says, An Assignee is he that possesses,
or enjoys a thing in his own right; and Deputy, is he that does it in the right
of another.

Assise, is derived from the French, Assis, i. assessum, locatum, definitum)
and is diversely used. Littleton, Cha. Rents, says it is Aequivocum, and sets
down three significations of it. One, as it is taken for a Writ, another as it
is used for a Jury, the third for an Ordinance. i. Assise is a Writ dir^cted to
the Sheriff for Recovery of Possession of things immovable, whereof your self,
or Ancestors have been disseised; and this is as well of things corporal, as
incorporeal Rights, being of four sorts, viz.

Assise of Novel Disseisin (Assisa novae Disseisinae) Lies where a Tenant in
Fee-simple, Fee-tail, or for Life, is lately disseised of his Lands or
Tenements, Rent-service, Rentseck, or Rentcharge, Common of Pasture, etc. and
diverse other such like, of which you may read Glanvile, lib. 10. cap. 2.
Bracton, lib. 4. tract. 1. Britton, cap. 70. Reg. of Writs, fol. 197. Fitz.
Not. Br. fol. 177. Westminster. 2. cap. 25. Anno 13 Edw. 1. And to this may aptly be
added, the Bill of Fresh force, which is directed to the Officers or
Magistrates of Cities or Towns-corporate, being a kind of Assise, for Recovery
of Possession in such places, within forty days after the force, as the
ordinary Assise is in the County, Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 7.

Assise of Mort d'Auncester (Assisa mortis antecessoris) Lies where my Father,
Mother, Brother, Sister, Uncle, Aunt, etc. died seized of Lands, Tenements,
Rents, etc. that he had in Fee-simple, and after his death a stranger abates:
And it is good as well against the Abator, as any other in possession. How
likewise this is extended, see Bracton, lib. 4. tract. 3. per totum. Britton,
cap. 70. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 114. Reg. of Writs, fol. 223.

Assise of darrein presentment (assisa ultimae praesentationis) Lies where I or
my Ancestor have prsented a Clerk to a Church, and after (the Church being void
by his death, or otherwise) a stranger presents his Clerk to the same Church,
in my disturbance. And how otherwise this Writ is used. See Bracton, lib. 4.
tract. 2. Register of Writs, fol. 30. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 195.

Assise de utrum (Assisa utrum) Lies for a Parson against a Layman, or a
Layman against a Parson, for Land or Tencment doubtful, Whether it be Lay-fee,
or Free-alms. And of this see Bracton, lib. 4. tract. 5. cap. 1. and seq.
Britton, cap. 95. The reason why these Writs are called Assizes, may be diverse.
First, because they settle the Possession, and so an outward right in him that
obtains by them. Secondly, They were originally executed at a certain time and
place formerly appointed. For by the Norman Law, the time and place must be
known forty days before the Justices sit on them: And by our Law there must be
likewise fifteen days of preparation, except they be tried in the standing
Courts at Westminster, as appears by Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 177. d, e. Lastly,
They may be called Assizes, because they are tried most commonly by especial
Courts, set and appointed for the purpose, as may be well proved, not only out
of the Customary of Normandy, but our Books also: Which show, That in ancient
times Justices were appointed by special Commission, to dispatch Controversies
of Possession, one or more, in this or that only County, as occasion fell out,
or Disseisins were offered, and that as well in Term time, as out of Term:
Whereas of later days, we see that all these Commissions of Assizes, of Eyr, of
Oyer and Terminer, of Jail-delivery, and of Nisi prius, are dispatched all at
one time, by two several Circuits in the year, out of term, and by such as have
the greatest sway of Justice, being all of them the Kings Justices of either
Bench, Barons of the Exchequer, or Sergeants at Law.

Assise, In the second signification, according to Littleton, is used for a
Jury. For (to use his own example) it is set down in the beginning of the
Record of an Assise of Novel Disseisin, Assisa venit recognitura, which is as
much as to say, Juratores veniunt recognituri. He gives this reason why the
Jury is called an Assise; Because, by Writ of Assise, the Sheriff is commanded,
Quod faciat duodecim liberos and legales homines de viceneto, etc. Videre
Tenementum illud, and nomina eorum imbreviari, and quod summoneat eos per bonas
summonitiones, quod sint coram Justiciariis, etc. parati inde facere
recognitionem, etc. This is (as if he should have spoken shorter) Metonymia
effecti. For they are called the Assizes, because they are summoned by virtue
of the Writ so termed. And yet the jury summoned upon a Writ of Right, is
likewise called the Assise, as himself there confesses. Which Writ of Right is
not an Assise; but this may be said to be (...), or abusively so termed. Assise
in this signification is divided In magnam and parvam. Glanvile, lib. 2. cap. 6
and 7, etc. and Britton, cap. 12. Where it appears, wherein the Great Assise
differs from the Petit Assise. The former four kinds of Assizes used in
Actions only Possessory, are called Petit Assizes, in respect of the Grand
Assise. For the Law of Fees is grounded upon two Rights: One of Possession, the
other, of Property. And as the Grand Assise serves for the Right of Property;
so the Petit Assise serves for the Right of Possession. Horns Mirror of
Justices, lib. 2. cap. De Novel Disseisin.

Assise in the third signification, according to Littleton, is an Ordinance or
Statute of Assise; as the Statute of Bread and Ale made Anno 51 Hen. 3. is
termed the Assise of Bread and Ale (Assisa panis and cervifiae) Reg. of Writ,
fol. 279. b.

Assise of the Forest (Assisa de Foresta) Is a Statute or Condition, touching
orders to be observed in the Kings Forest. Manwood, part. 1. page 35. Crompton
in the Court of Justices of the Forest, per totum, fol. 146. and seq. And
Assise of the King, Anno 18 Edw. 1. Stat. 1. called The Statute for view of
Frank-Pledge. These are called Assizes, because they set down and appoint a
certain measure, rate, or order in the things they concern. Of Assise, in this
signification, Glanvile also speaks, Lib. 9. cap. 10. in fine. Generaliter
verum est quod de quolibet placito quod in comitatu deducitur and terminatur,
misericordia, quae in de provenit, vicecomiti debetur: Quae quanta sit; per
nullam assisam generalem determinatum est. And thus much touching Littletons
Division.

But if we mark well the Writers of the Law, we shall find this word (Assise)
more diversely used, then this Author has noted. For it is sometime used for
the measure or quantity it self, (and that per Metonymiam effecti) because it
is the very scantline described or commanded by the Ordinance: For example, we
say, When Wheat, etc. is of this price, then the Bread, etc. shall be of this
Assise. This word is further taken, for the whole Process in Court upon the
Writ of Assise, or for some part thereof, as the Issue or Verdict of the Jury.
For example, Assizes of Novel Disseisin, etc. shall not be taken, but in their
Shires, and after this manner, etc. Mag. Char. cap. 12. And so it seems to
signify, Westminster. 2. cap. 25. Anno 13 Edw. 1. in these words, Let the Disseisor
allege no false exceptions, whereby the taking of the Assizes may be deferred,
etc. And Anno 34 Edw. 1. Stat. 2. if it be found by Assise; the Assise is
arraigned; to aver by the Assise; the Assise by their default shall pass
against them. And also Anno 1 Hen. 6. cap. 2. Assizes awarded by default of the
Tenants, etc. Lastly, By Merton, cap. 4. Anno 20 Hen. 3. certified by the
Assise; quit by the Assise, etc. And in this signification Glanvile calls it
Magnam Assisam domini Regis: quae ex duodecim ad minus legalium hominum
Sacramentis consistit, L. 2. c. 7. Bracton uses it in like sort, as, Assisa
cadit in transgressionem, and Assisa cadit in perambulationem L. 4. c. 30, 31.
Fleta defines an Assise, in this signification, thus. Assisa in jure
possessorio, est quaedam recognitio duodecim hominum juratorum, per quam
Justiciarii certiorantur de articulis in brevi contentis. And Assise also, thus
signifying, is said sometime to pass (per modum assisae) and sometime in modum
juratae; in manner of an Assise, when only the Disseisin in question, is put
to the trial of the Twelve; in manner of a Jury, when any exception is objected
to disable the interest of the Disseisee, and is put to be tried by the Twelve,
before the Assise can pass.

Assise in this signification, is taken four ways, Old Not. Br. fol. 105. The
first is Assise at large, which is taken as well upon other Points, as upon the
Disseisin. For example, where an Infant brings an Assise, and the Deed of his
Ancestor is pleaded, whereby he claims his Right or founds his Title; then the
Assise shall be taken at large: That is, the Jury shall enquire not only
whether the Plaintiff were disseised, or not, by the Tenant, but also of these
Points, viz. Whether his Ancestor were of full age, of good memory, and out of
Prison, when he made the Deed, pleaded. Another example, You may read in
Littleton, cap. Estates upon Condition. The second manner is, when the Tenant,
as it were, setting foot to foot with the Demandant, without farther
circumstance, pleads directly contrary to the Writ, no wrong, no disseisin. The
third is, When the Tenant alleges something by exception that must be tried
by a Jury, before the principal cause can proceed: As if he plead Foreign
Release, or Foreign Matter tryable in another County. For, in this case, the
Justices refer the Record to the Court of Common Pleas, for trial of the Foreign
Pleas, before the Disseisin can come to be decussed. Of this sort read diverse
other examples in Bracton, lib. 4. part. 1. cap 34. For there are of them (as
he says, and Britton also, cap. 52.) both dilatory and peremptory. The fourth
and last manner is, Assise of Right of Damages; that is, when the Tenant,
confessing an Ouster, and referring it to a Demurrer in Law, whether it were
rightly done or not, is adjudged to have done wrong. For then shall the
Demandant have a Writ to recover damages, called an Assise to recover damages,
as also the whole Process.

Assise, is further taken for the Court, place, or time, when and where the
Writs and Processes of the Assise are handled or taken: And in this
signification Assise is general; as when the Justices go their several
Circuits, with their Commission, to take all Assizes twice in the year, that is
called the General Assise. It may likewise, in this signification, be special;
as if an especial Commission be granted to certain persons (as was often done
in ancient time, Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 11.) for taking an Assise upon one
Disseisin or two; this would be called a Special Assise. And in this very
signification, Glanvile uses it, Lib. 9. cap 12. See Cokes, 4 Inst. fol. 158.

Concerning the General Assise, in the most usual signification, thus the
Learned Sir Fr. Bacon.

ALl the Counties of this Realm (says he) are divided into six Circuits, and
two Learned Men are assigned by the Kings Commission to every Circuit, who ride
twice a year through those Shires allotted to that Circuit; these we call
Justices or Judges of Assise, who have five several Commissions by which they
sit.

The first is a Commission of Oyer and Terminer directed to them, and many
others of the best account in their Circuits. But in this Commission the Judges
of Assise are of the Quorum; so as without them, there can be no proceeding.
This Commission gives them power to deal with Treasons, Murders, and all manner
of Felonics and Misdemeanors; and this is their largest Commission.

The second is of Goal Delivery, and that only to the Judges themselves, and
the Clerk of the Assise Associate; by this Commission they are to deal with
every Prisoner in Goal, for what offense soever he be there.

The third Commission is directed to themselves only, and the Clerk of Assise,
to take Assizes, by which they are called Justices of Assise; and the Office of
these Justices, is to do right upon Writs called Assise, brought before them by
such as are wrongfully thrust out of their Lands.

The fourth Commission is to take Nisi Prius, directed to none but the Judgee
themselves, and their Clerks of Assizes; by which they are called Justices of
Nisi Prius.

The fifth is a Commission of Peace in every County of their Circuit. And all
the Justices of Peace, having no lawful impediment, are bound to be present at
the Assizes, to attend the Judges, as occasion shall fall out; if any make
default, the Judges may set a Fine upon him at their pleasure and discretions.
The Sheriff of every Shire is also to attend in person, or by a sufficient
Deputy, allowed by the Judges, who may Fine him, if he fail, etc. See more in
Sir Fr. Bacons Use of the Law, fol. 13. usque 21.

Assisa Continuanda, Is a Writ directed to the Justices assigned to take an
Assise, for the continuance of the Cause, in case where certain Records
alleged, cannot in time be procured by the party that would use them, Reg. of
Writs, fol. 217.

Assisa Proroganda, Is a Writ directed to the Justices of Assise, for stay of
proceeding, by reason of the Kings business, wherein the party is employed.
Reg. of Writs, fol. 208, and 221.

Assisors, (assisores) sunt qui Assisas condunt, aut taxationes imponunt.
Spelman. In Scotland (according to Skene) they are the same with our Jurors,
and their Oath is this.

We shall leil suith say,
And na suith conceal, far na thing we may,
Sa far as we are charged upon this Assise,
Be God himself, and be our part of Paradise.
And as we will answer to God, upon
The Dreadful day of Dome.
Association (associatio) Is a Patent sent by the King (either of his own
motion, or at the suit of the Plaintiff) to ^ustices appointed to take Assizes
of Novel Disseisin, or of Oyer and Terminer, etc. to take others unto them, as
Fellows and Colleagues in that affair. The examples, and sundry uses hereof you
may find in Fitz-Nat. Br. fol. 185 and 111. But more particularly in Reg. of
Writs, fol. 201, 206, 223.

Assoile (absolvere) Signifies to deliver, pardon, or set free from an
Excommunication. Stamf. Pl. Cor. fol. 72. to this effect; otherwise the
Defendant should remain in prison, till the Plaintiff were assoiled; that is,
delivered from his Excommunication. So in 1 Hen. 4. cap. 10. Mention being made
of King Edward the Third, it is added, Whom God assoil. Henric. Duc de
Lancastre, Count de Leicestre, de Derby and de -- Senescal Dengletre, A touts
ceux que ceste endentnre verront ou orront salut en Dieu, Come nostre chere and
bien ame cousin John de Blount eit en nostre mein renduz seissaunte acres de
terre ou les appurtenances en Salford en nostre Ducbee de Lancastre les quels
il avoit a luy and a ses Heirs du don and Feofment nostre tres honor Seigneur
and pere, que Dieu assoile, etc. Dat. 30 Edw. 3.

Assumpsit (from Assumo) Is a voluntary promise made by word, whereby a man
assumes or takes upon him to pay or perform any thing to another. This word
comprehends any verbal promise made upon consideration, which the Civilians
express diversely, according to the nature of the promise, calling it sometimes
Pactum, sometimes Promissionem, Pollicitationem, or Constitutum.

Astrihilthet or Atrihilthet. (Sax.) Hi qui pacem Regis habent, vel manu vel
brevi, ei fideles existant -- Qui si nimis confidens in pace quam habet, per
superbiam alicui forisfecerit, damnum restauret and iterum tantundem, quod
Angli vocant Astrihilthet. LL. divi Edwardi, cap. 30. See Hovedon, page 606.

Atia. See Odio and Atia.

At large. See Verdict at large Littl. fol. 98. To vouch at large, Old Not. Br.
fol 108. To make title at large. Kitchen, fol. 68. See Bar.

Attache, (attachiare. From the Fr. attacher, i. figere, nectere, alligare)
Signifies to take or apprehend by Commandment or Writ. Lamb. (in his Eiren.
lib. 1. cap. 16.) makes this difference between an Arrest, and an Attachment,
that an Arrest proceeds out of an Inferior Court by Precept, and an Attachment
out of higher Courts, by Precept or Writ; and that a Precept to Arrest, has
these formal words, Duci facias, etc. And a Writ of Attachment these,
Praecipimus tibi quod attachies talem and habeas cum coram nobis, etc. Whereby
it appears, that he, who Arrests, carries the party Arrested to another higher
person to be disposed of forthwith; he that attacheth, keeps the party
attached, and presents him in Court at the day assigned in the Attachment. Yet
an Attachment sometimes issues out of a Court Baron, which is an Inferior
Court, Kitchen, fol. 79. There is another difference, in that an Arrest lies
only upon the Body of a Man, and an Attachment sometimes on his Goods; which
makes it in that particular differ from a Capias, in being more general: For, a
man may be attached by an hundred Sheep (Kitchen, fol. 263.) but the Capias
takes hold of the Body only. See Skene, Verbo, Attachiamentum.

Attachment by Writ, differs from a Distress or Distringas in this, That an
Attachment reaches not to Lands, as a Distress does, and that a Distress
touches not the Body (if it be properly taken) as an Attachment does, yet are
they diverse times confounded, as may appear by Glanvil, lib. 10. cap. 3. and
Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 66. Howbeit, in the most common use, an Attachment is an
apprehension of a Man by his Body, to bring him to answer the Action of the
Plaintiff. A Distress, without a Writ, is the taking of a Man's Goods for some
real cause, as Rent, Service, or the like, whereby to force him to Replevy, and
so to be Plaintuff in an Action of Trespass against him that distrained him.
See Distress.

Attachment out of the Chancery, is had of course, upon an Affidavit made, That
the Defendant was served with a Subpaena, and appears not, or issues upon not
performing some Order or Decree. After the return of this Attachment by the
Sheriff, Quod non est inventus in Baliva sua -- Another Attachment with
Proclamation issues out against him; and if he appears not thereupon, then a
Writ of Rebellion. West. part. 2. Symbol, tit. Proceedings in Chancery.

Attachment of Privilege, Is by virtue of a Man's Privilege, to call another
to that Court, whereto he himself belongs; and in respect whereof he is
privileged, to answer some Action. New Book of Entries. Verbo, Privilege,
fol. 431.

Foreign Attachment, Is an Attachment of Goods or Money, found within a Liberty
or City, to satisfy some Creditor of his within such City or Liberty. And, by
the Custom of some places, as London, etc. a Man may attach Money or Goods in
the hands of a Stranger, whilst he is within their Liberty. As if A ows B 10
l. and C ows A 10 l. B may attach this 10 l. in the hands of C, to satisfy
himself for the Debt due from A. See Calthrops Reports, page 66.

There is likewise an Attachment of the Forest, which is one of the Three
Courts there held; The lowest is called the Attachment; the mean, Swainmote;
the highest, the Justice in Eyrs seat. This Court of Attachment seems to be so
called, because the Verderors of the Forest have therein no other Authorty, but
to receive the Attachments of Offenders against Vert and Venison, taken by the
rest of the Officers, and to enrol them, that they may be presented or punished
at the next Justice Seat. Manwood, part. 1. page 93. And this Attaching is by
three means, By Goods and Chattels; by Body, Pledges, and Mainprize, or by the
Body only. The Court is kept every Forty days throughout the year See Crompton
in his Court of the Forest. The diversity of Attachments you may see in
Register of Writs, under the word Attachiamentum, in Indice.

Attaint (attincta) As it is a Substantive, is used for a Writ, that lies after
Judgment, against a Jury, that has given a false Verdict in any Court of
Record (be the Action Real or Personal) if the Debt or Damages surmount the sum
of 40 s. What the Form of the Writ is, and how in use, is expressed in Fitz.
Not. Br. fol. 105. and New Book of Entries, fol. 84. The reason why it is so
called, is because the party that obtains it, endeavors thereby to touch or
stain the Jury with Perjury, by whose Verdict he is grieved: And if the Verdict
be found false, then the Judgment anciently was, That the Jurors Meadows should
be ploughed up, their Houses broke down, their Woods grubbed up, and all their
Lands and Tenements forfeited to the King: But if it pass against him that
brought the Attaint, he shall be imprisoned and grievously ransomed at the
Kings Will. See Glanvile, lib. 2. cap. 19. Smith de Repub. Angl. lib. 3 cap. 2.
11 Hen. 7. cap. 21 and 23 Hen. 8. cap. 3. In what diversity of Cases this Writ
is brought, see Reg. of Writs in Indice. It was anciently called Breve de
Convictione. See Coke on Littl. fol. 294. b.

Attainted (attinctus) Is used particularly for such as are found guilty of
some crime or offense, and especially of Felony or Treason. Yet a Man is said
to be attainted of Disseisin. Westminster. 1. cap. 24, and 36. Anno 3 Edw. 1. And so
it is taken in French, as Estre attaint and vayncu en aucun case, i. to be cast
in any case. Britton. cap. 75. uses the Participle Attaint, in the sense we say
attained unto. A Man is attainted by two means, by Appearance, or by Process.
Stanf. Pl. Cor. fol. 44. Attainder by Appearance is by Confession, by Battle,
or by Verdict. Confession (whereof Attaint grows) is twofold; one at the Bar
before the Judges, when the Prisoner, upon his Indictment read, being asked
guilty or not guilty, answers guilty, never putting himself upon the Jury; the
other is, before the Coroner in Sanctuary, where he upon his Confession, was,
in former times constrained to abjure the Realm, which kind also, of the
effect, is called Attainder by Abjuration, Stanf. fol. 182. Attainder by
Battle, is when the party, appealed by another, and choosing to try the truth by
Combat, rather then by Jury, is vanquished. Attainder by Verdict, is when the
Prisoner at the Bar, answering not guilty to the Indictment, has an Enquest of
Life and Death passing upon him, and is, by their Verdict, pronounced guilty.
Idem, f. 108 and 192. Attainder by Process, otherwise called Attainder by
Default, or Attainder by Outlary, is where a party flies, or does not appear,
until he has been five times called publicly in the County Court, and at last
upon his default is pronounced or returned Outlawed. The same Author (fol.
108.) makes a difference between Attainder and Conviction; with whom agrees the
Statute, Anno 34 and 35 Hen. 8. cap. 14. and Anno 1 Edw. 6. cap. 12. in these
words, That then every such Offender, being duly thereof convicted or attainted
by the Laws of this Realm, etc. And I find by Stanf. (Pl. Cor. fol. 66.) That
a Man by our ancient Laws, was said to be convicted presently upon the Verdict
(guilty,) but not to be attainted, until it appeared he was no Clerk, or being
a Clerk, and demanded by his Ordinary, could not purge himself. And in one word
it appears, That Attainder is larger then Conviction; Conviction being only by
the Jury: And Attainder is not before Judgment. Perkins, Grants, number. 27, 29.
Yet it appears by Stanf. fol. 9. that Conviction is sometimes called Attainder:
For there he says, the Verdict of the Jury does either acquit or attaint a Man.
And so it is, Westminster. 1. cap. 14. This ancient Law touching the Conviction and
Purgation of Clerks is altered by 23 Eliz. cap. 2. as you may read in Clergy.

Attainder (attincta and attinctura) Is when a Man has committed Treason or
Felony, and after Conviction, Judgment has passed upon him. The Children of a
person Attainted of Treason cannot be Heirs to him, or any other Ancestor. And
if he were noble and gentle before, he and his posterity are made base and
ignoble: This corruption of Blood cannot be salved, but by Act of Parliament.
See Attainted, and Felony.

Attendant (attendens) Signifies one that ows a duty or service to another, or
depends on him. For example, there is Lord, Mesn, and Tenant, the Tenant holds
of the Mesn by a penny, the Mesn holds over by two pence: The Mesn releases to
the Tenant all the right he has in the Land, and the Tenant dies; his Wife
shall be endowed of the Land, and she shall be Attendant to the Heir of the
third part of the penny, and not of the third part of the two pence. For she
shall be endowed of the best Possession of her Husband. And, where the Wife is
endowed by the Guardian, she shall be Attendant to the Guardian, and to the
Heir at his full age. Kitchen, fol. 209. With whom agrees Perkins in Dower, 424.

Attermining. -- Also such as will purchase attermining of their Debts shall be
sent into the Exchequer. Ordinatio de libertatibus perquirendis. Anno 27 Edw.
1. It comes from the Fr. Attermoye, i. That has a term or time granted for the
payment of a debt. So in this Statute, it seems, to signify the Purchasing or
gaining a longer time for payment of a debt. Atterminent quaerentes usque in
proximum Parliamentum, Westminster. 2. cap. 24.

Attorney (atturnatus) Is he that is appointed by another Man to do any thing
in his stead; as much as Procurator or Syndicus in the Civil Law. West defines
them thus, Atturneys are such persons as by the Consent, Commandment, or
Request of others, see to, and take upon them the charge of their business,
part. 1. Symbol. lib. 2. sect. 559. In ancient time, those of Authority in
Courts, had it in their power, whether to suffer men to appear, or sue by
another then themselves, as is evident by Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 25. in the Writ
Dedimus potestatem de Attornato faciendo, where it is showed, That Men were
driven to procure the Kings Writs or Letters Patent to appoint Atturneys for
them; but it is since provided by Statutes, that it should be lawful so to do,
without any such circuit, as appears by 20 Hen. 3. cap. 10. -- 6 Edw. 1. c. 8.
-- 27 ejusdem, Stat. 2. -- 12 Edw. 2. cap. 1. -- 15 ejusdem, cap. unico. -- 7
Rich. 2. cap. 14. -- 7 Hen. 4. cap. 13. -- 3 Hen. 5. cap. 2. -- 15 Hen. 6. cap.
7. and 17 Hen. 7. cap. 2. And you may see great diversity of Writs in the Table
of the Register, wherein the King by his Writ commands the Judges to admit of
Atturneys; whereby there grew at last so many unskilful Atturneys, and so many
mischiefs by them; that for restraining them, it was enacted (4 Hen. 4. cap.
18.) that the Justices should examine them, and displace the unskilful. And
again, (33 Hen. 6. cap. 7.) that there should be but a certain number of them
in Norfolk and Suffolk. In what cases a Man at this day may have an Attorney,
and in what not, see Fitz. ubi supra.

Attorney is either general, or special. Attorney General is he, who by general
Authority is appointed to manage all our Affairs or Suits; As the Attorney
General of the King, which is as much as Procurator Caesaris was in the Roman
Empire. Attorney General of the Duke. Cromp. Juris. fol. 105. Attorney Special
or Particular, is he that is employed in one or more causes particularly
specified; of whom you may read more at large in Glanvile, lib. 11. cap. 1. and
Britton, cap. 126. There are also, in respect of the diverse Courts, Atturneys
at large, and Atturneys special, belonging to this, or that Court only. The
name is borrowed of the Normans, as appears by the Customary, cap. 65. Our old
Latin word for it, seems to be Responsalis. Bracton, lib. 4. cap. 31.

Attorney of the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster (Atturnatus Curiae Ducatus
Lancastriae) Is the second Officer in that Court, and seems, for his skill in
Law, to be there placed as Assessor to the Chancellor of that Court, being for
the most part some Honorable Person, and chosen rather for some especial trust,
reposed in him, to deal between the King and his Tenants, than for any great
Learning; as was usual with the Emperors of Rome, in the choice of their
Magistrates.

Attournment (from the Fr. Tourner, i. vertere) Is an acknowledgment of the
Tenant to a new Lord. As when one is Tenant for Life, and he in Reversion,
grants his right to another, it is necessary the Tenant for Life agree thereto,
which is called Attornment, without which nothing passes by the grant. But if
the Grant be by Fine in Court of Record, he shall be compelled to Attourn.
Stat. 27 Hen. 8. cap. 16. The words used in Attournment are these, I agree me
to the Grant made to you, or (more commonly) Sir, I attourn to you by force of
the same Grant; or, I become your Tenant, or deliver to the Grantee a penny by
way of Attournment. Littl. lib. 3. cap. Attournment, where you may find diverse
other Cases, whereto Attournment appertains, and that it is the transposing
those duties, which the Tenant owed his former Lord, to another, as his Lord.
Attournment is either by word, or by act, voluntary or compulsory, by the Writ
Per quae servitia, (Old Not. Br. fol. 155.) or sometimes by Distress. Fitz.
Not. Br. fol. 147. It may be made to the Lord himself, or to his Steward in
Court. Kitchen, fol. 70. There is Attournment in Deed, and Attournment in Law.
Coke, vol. 6. fol. 113. a. Attournment in Law is an Act, which though it be no
express Attournment, yet in intendment of Law, it is of equal force. Coke on
Littl. fol. 309.

Atturnato faciendo vel recipiendo, Is a Writ, which a Man owing suit to a
County, Hundred, or other Court, and desiring to make an Attorney to appear for
him there (whom he doubts the Sheriff or Steward will not otherwise admit)
purchases, to command him to receive such a Man for his Attorney, and admit
his appearance by him. The form and other Circumstances whereof. See in Fitz.
Not. Br. fol. 156.

Avage or Avisage, Is a Rent or Payment which every Tenant of the Manor of
Writtel in Essex, upon St. Leonards day, 6 November. pays to the Lord, viz. for
every Pig under a year old ob; for every yearling Pig 1 d, and for every Hog
above a year old 2 d, for the privilege of Pawnage in the Lords Woods. Tob.
Edmonds, Genesis Senescal. ibidem.

Audience Court (Curia Audientiae Cantuariensis) Is a Court belonging to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, of equal authority with the Arches, though inferior,
both in Dignity, and Antiquity, and is held in the Archbishops Palace. Of
which, you may read more in a Book, entitled, De Antiquitate Ecclesiae
Britannicae Historia, and 4 Inst. fol. 337.

Audiendo and terminando, Is a Writ, or rather a Commission directed to certain
persons, when any Insurrection or great Misdemeanor is committed in any place;
for the appeasing and punishment thereof, of which, you may read at large in
Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 110. See Oyer and Terminer.

Audita querela, Is a Writ that lies against him, who, having taken a
Statute-Merchant, or Recognisance in the nature of a Statute Staple, or a
Judgment or Recognisance of another, and craving, or having obtained execution
of the same from the Major and Bailiffs, before whom, it was entered; at the
complaint of the party, who entered the same, upon suggestion of some just
cause, why Execution should not be granted, as a Release, or other Exception.
This Writ is granted by the Lord Chancellor of England (upon view of the
Exception suggested) to the Judges of either Bench, willing them to grant
Summons to the Sheriff of the County, where the Creditor is, for his appearance
at a certain day before them. See more in Old. Not. Br. fol. 66. and Fitz. Not.
Br. fol. 102.

Auditor (Lat.) Is an Officer of the King, or some other great personage, who
yearly, by examining the Accounts of all under Officers accomptable, makes up a
general Book; which shows the difference between their Receipts or Charge, and
their Allowances, commonly called Allocations. As namely, the Auditors of the
Exchequer take the Accounts of those Receivers, who receive the Revenues of the
Augmentation, as also of the Sheriffs, Escheators, Collectors, and Customers.
Of which, see the Statute 33 Hen. 8. c. 83. and 4 part. Inst. fol. 106.

Auditor of the Prests or Imprests, Are also Officers in the Exchequer, who
take and make up the great Accounts of Ireland, Berwick, the Mint, and of any
Money imprested to any Man for His Majesty's service. See Practice of the
Exohequer, p. 83.

Auditor of the Receipts, Is an Officer of the Exchequer who Files the Tellers
Bills, and makes an Entry of them, and gives in every week to the Lord
Treasurer, a Certificate of the Money received. He makes also Debentures to
every Teller, before they pay any Money, and takes their Accounts. See 4 part.
Inst. fol. 107.

Aventure (rectius adventure) Is a mischance causing the death of a Man,
without Felony; as when he is suddenly drowned or burnt, by any disease or
mischance, falling into the Water or Fire. Britton, cap. 7. where you may read
how it differs from Misadventure, which see.

Avenage (Fr.) A certain quantity of Oats paid to a Landlord in lieu of some
other duties, or as a Rent from the Tenant.

Avenor (from the Fr. avene, i. Oats) Is an Officer of the Kings, who provides
Oats for his Stable; and is mentioned Anno 13 Car. 2. cap. 8.

Avera (quasi overa, a Gal. ouvre, and ouvrage, velut operagium) In Doomsday,
Grentbrigsh, Rex Fordham, sed tamen semper inveniat Averam vel 8 d. in Servicio
Regis. That is, a days work of a Ploughman, or 8 d. 4 Inst. fol. 269.

Average (averagium, from Averia, i. Cattle) Signifies Service which the Tenant
ows the King, or other Lord, by Horse or Ox, or by Carriage with either; For in
ancient Charters of Privileges, we find Quietum esse de Averagiis. Others
probably derive it from the French (euvrage or euvre, i. opus) It has two
significations: First, Rastal mentions the Kings Averages, which I take to be
the Kings carriage by Horse or Cart. Then, Anno 32 H. 8. cap. 14. and 1 Jac.
cap. 32. it is used for a certain contribution that Merchants and others, do
proportionably make toward their losses, who have their Goods cast into the
Sea for the safeguard of the Ship, or of the Goods and Lives of them in the
Ship, in time of a Tempest. And this contribution seems to be so called,
because it is proportioned after the rate of every Man's Average, or Goods
carried. In this last sense, it is also used in the Statute 14 Car. 2. cap. 27.

Average, Is also a little duty, which those Merchants, who send Goods in
another Man's Ship, do pay to the Master of it, for his care of them, over and
above the Freight; for in Bills of Lading it is expressed -- Paying so much
Freight for the said Goods, with Frimage and Average accustomed.

Averiis captis in Withernam, Is a Writ, for taking Cattle to his use, who has
his Cattle unlawfully taken by another, and driven out of the County where they
were taken, that they cannot be Replevied. Reg. of Writs, fol. 82. When mention
is made of one Beast, we say, Quidam equus, vel quidam bos; when of two or
more, we do not say Equi or boves, but tot averia.

Averment (verificatio) From the Fr. Averer, i. verificare, testari) Signifies
commonly an offer of the Defendant, to make good or justify an Exception
pleaded in Abatement or Bar of the Plaintiffs Action; and it signifies the Act,
as well as the offer of justifying the Exception. For, Anno 34 Edw. 1. Stat. 2.
The Dema^^ant will offer to aver by the Assise or Jury, etc. In the English
Not. Br. fol. 57. These Errors shall be tried by Averment, etc. And in 15 Hen.
6. cap. 1. The Defendants shall have their Averment, to say, that, etc.
Averment is twofold, viz. general and particular; a general Averment, which is
the conclusion of every Plea to the Writ, or in Bar of Replications, and other
Pleadings (for Counts or Avowries in nature of Counts, need not be averred)
containing matter Affirmative, ought to be averred, with an hoc paratus est
verificare, etc. Particular Averment, is when the life of Tenant for Life, or
Tenant in Tail is averred, etc. And an Averment contains as well the matter as
the Form thereof. Coke on Littl. fol. 362. b.

Averpeny (quasi average-peny) Is Money contributed toward the Kings averages,
or Money given to be freed thereof. Rastals Exposition of words. Averpeny, hoc
est, quietum esse de diversis Denariis pro averagiis Domini Regis.

Augmentation (augmentatio) Was the name of a Court, erected 27 Hen. 8. as
appears by the Twenty seventh Chapter of that years Parliament; to this end,
that the King might be justly dealt with, touching the profit of such Religious
Houses and their Lands, as were given him by Act of Parliament the same year,
not Printed. For dissolving which Court, there was authority given Queen Mary,
by the Parliament held the first of Her Reign. Sess. 2 Ca. 10. Which She
afterward put in execution by Her Letters Patent. The Court took name from
this, That the Revenue of the Crown was thought to be much augmented by the
suppression of the said Houses, many of which, the King reserved to the Crown.

Avisage. See Avago.

Aulneger. See Alnager.

Aumone, (Fr. aumosne, i. an Alms) Tenure in Aumone, is a Tenure by Divine
Service; so says Britton, fol. 164. As when Lands or Tenements are given in
Alms, to some Church or Religious House, with Condition, that some Service or
Prayers shall be offered at certain times, for the good and quiet of the Donors
Soul, or otherwise. See Frank Almoin.

Aumonier (Fr. Aumosnier.) See Almner.

Auncel-weight (quasi Hand-sale weight, or from Ansa, i. The handle of the
balance) Is a kind of weight with Scales hanging, or Hooks fastened at each
end of a Beam or Staff, which a Man lifted up upon his forefinger or hand, and
so discerned the equality or difference between the weight, and the thing
weighed. In which, because there was wont to be great deceit, it was forbidden
25 Edw. 3. Stat. 5. cap. 9. 34 Ejusdem, cap. 5. and 8 Hen. 6. cap. 5. And the
even balance only commanded; notwithstanding it is still used in some parts
of England. By a Constitution made by Henry Chicheley, Archbishop of
Canterbury, Anno 1430. Pro abolitione ponderis vocati Le Auncel weight seu
Scheft seu Pounder, etc. (Doloso quodam staterae genere) qui utitur
Excommunicandus.

Ancient Demeasn. See Ancient Demeasn.

Avoidance has two significations; the one when a Benefice becomes void of an
Incumbent; the other, when we say in Pleadings in Chancery, confessed or
avoided, traversed, or denied, etc. See Voidance.

Avowe (advocatus) Britton (cap. 29.) says, That Avowe is he to whom the right
of Advowzen of any Church Appurtains; so that he may present thereunto in his
own name: And is called Avowe, for a difference from those that sometime
present in another Man's name, as a Guardian that presents in the name of his
Ward; and for a difference also from those, who have the Lands, whereto an
Advowzen appertains, but only for term of their lives, or of years, by
Intrusion or Disseisin. See Advowe.

Avowry (Fr. Advouerie) Is where one takes a Distress for Rent, or other thing,
and the other sues Replevin, then the taker shall justify in his Plea for what
cause he took it; and if he took it in his own right, he ought to show that,
and so avow the taking, which is called his Avowry. But if he took it in the
right of another, then, when he has showed the Cause, he shall make Conusance
of the taking, as Bailiff or Servant to him in whose right he did it. Terms of
the Law. Anno 21 Hen. 8. cap. 19. For the more speedy and effectual proceeding
upon Distresses and Avowries for Rents, see the Stat. 17 Car. 2. cap. 7.

Avoir du pois (Fr. avoir du poids, i. Habere pondus, aut justi esse ponderis)
Signifies, First, a kind of weight different from that which is called
Troy-weight, containing but Twelve ounces to the pound, whereas this has
Sixteen. And in this respect it is (probably) so called, because it is of more
weight then the other. 2. It signifies such merchandises as are weighed by this
weight, and not by Troy-weight, as in the Statute of York, 9 Edw. 3. in Proaem.
27 Edw. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 10. and 2 Rich. 2. cap. 1. See Weights.

Aurum Reginae. Rot. Pat. Anno 52 Hen. 3. in. 26. See Queen-Gold.

Austureus, A Goshawk; whence we usually call a Faulkoner, who keeps that kind
of Hawks, an Ostringer. Some ancient Deeds have reserved Unum Austurcum, as a
Rent to the Lord.

Await (13 Rich. 2. cap. 1. It is Ordained, That no Charter of Pardon from
thenceforth shall be allowed before any Justice for Murder, or for the Death of
a Man, stain by Await, Assault, or Malice prepensed, Lreason or Rape of a
Woman, unless the same be specified in the Charter, etc.) Seems to signify
that which we now call Way-laying, or lying in Wait.

Award (from the Fr. agarder) Proprie est Judicium ejus, qui nec a lege nec a
Judice datur, ad dirimendam litem, sed ab ipsis litigantibus eligitur. Is the
judgment of him, who is chosen by two or more parties at variance, to determine
the Controversy between them. Dictum, quod ad custodiendum seu observandum
partibus imponitur. Spel.

Awm (1 Jac. cap. 33. and 12 Car. 2. cap. 4.) A Measure of Rhenish-wine,
containing forty Gallons: Yet I find in a very old Printed Book thus -- The
Rood of Rhenish-wine of Dordreyght is ten Awames, and every Awame is fifty
Gallons. Item, the Rood of Antwarp is xiiij Awames, and every Awame is xxxv
Gallons.

Auxilium ad filium militem faciendum et filiam maritandam, Was a Writ directed
to the Sheriff of every County, where the King or other Lord had any Tenants,
to levy of them reasonable Aid, toward the Knighting His Son, and the Marriage
of His eldest Daughter. See Aid. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 82. and An. 12 Car. 2.
cap. 24.

Aid. See Aid.

B.
BAchelor (bachalaureus) of the Fr. Bachalier, i. tyro.) Whence I gather,
those, that are called Bachelors of the Companies in London, are such of each
Company, as are springing toward the estate of those that are employed in
Council, but as yet are inferiors. For every Company of the Twelve, consists of
a Master, two Wardens, the Livery, (which are Assistants in Matters of Council,
or at the least, such as the Assistants are chosen out of) and the Bachelors,
who are yet but in expectance of Dignity among them, and have their Function
only in attendance upon the Master and Wardens.

Bachelor was anciently attributed to the Lord Admiral of England, if he were
under a Baron. This word is used, Anno 13 Rich. 2. Stat. 2. cap. 1. and
signifies as much as Knight-Batchelor does, 3 Edw. 4. cap. 5. that is, a Simple
Knight, not a Knight Baneret, or Knight of the Bath.

Sachez nous Roger de Mortimer Seigneur de Wygemore avoir done and grante a
nostre chier Bachiler, Monseur Robert de Harley, pour son bon service and pour
cent livres de argent, la guard du Corpse Gilbert Filz and heir Sir Johan de
Lacy, ensemblement ove le marriage mesmes celuy Gilbert deyns age esteant en
nostre guard, etc. Done a Penebrugge l'an du regne le Roy Edward Filz le Roy
Edward unzyme. See Baneret.

Backberend (Sax.) Signifies bearing upon the back, or about a Man. Bracton
uses it for a sign or circumstance of manifest theft, (called by the Civilians
Furtum manifestum) which he defines thus, Ubi latro deprehensus est seisitus de
aliquo latro^imio, sc. Handhabend and Backberend, and insecutus fuerit per
aliquem cujus res illa fuerit, Lib. 3. tract. 2. cap 32. Manwood (2 pa. For.
Laws) Notes it for one of the four Circumstances or Cases, wherein a Forester
may arrest the Body of an Offender against Vert or Venison in the Forest. For
by the Assise of the Forest of Lancaster (says he) taken with the manner, is,
when one is found in the Kings Forest in any of these four degrees. Stable
Stand, Dog-draw, Back-bear, and Bloody-hand. Which see in their proper places.

Badger (from the Fr. Bagagier, i. A Carrier of Luggage) Signifies with us one
that buys Corn or Victuals in one place, and carries it to another, to make
profit by it. See Cromptons Just. of Peace, fol. 69, 70.

Bail (from the Fr. noun Bail, i. A Guardian or Jailer) Is properly used for
the freeing or setting at liberty of one arrested or imprisoned upon Action,
either Civil or Criminal, under surety taken for his appearance at a day and
place certain. Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 8. number. 8 and 9. The reason why
it is called Bail, is, Because by this means the party Restrained, is delivered
into the hands of those that bind themselves for his forthcoming. There is
both common and special Bail; Common Bail is in Actions of small prejudice or
concernment, being called Common, because any Sureties in that case, are taken;
whereas in Causes of greater weight, as Actions upon Bond or Specialty, Special
Bail or Surety must be taken, as Subsidy Men at least, and they according to
the value. Manwood, in his first part of Forest Laws, page 167. says, there is
a great diversity between Bail and Mainprise: For he that is Mainprised, is
always said to be at large, and to go at his own Liberty out of Ward, from the
time he is Mainprised, till the day of his appearance: But otherwise it is,
where a Man is let to Bail by four or two Men, by the Lord Chief Justice in
Air, until a certain day; for there he is always accounted by the Law, to be
in their Ward, and custody for the time: And they may, if they will, keep him
in Ward or Prison. So that he who is so bailed, shall not be said by the Law,
to be at large, or at his own liberty. See Lamb. Eiren lib. 3. cap. 2. page
330. Bail is also a certain Limit within the Forest, as it is divided into the
charges of several Foresters. Crompton in the Oath of Bow-bearer, fol. 201. See
Mainprise, and 4 Instit. fol. 178.

Bailiff (Balivus) As the name, so the Office it self in ancient time was
answerable to that of France, where there are Eight Parliaments, which are high
Courts, whence lies no Appeal; and within the Precincts of those several parts
of that Kingdom, which belong to each Parliament, there are several Provinces,
to which Justice is ministered by certain Officers called Bailiffs. So in
England we see many several Counties, in which, Justice has been ministered to
the Inhabitants by the Officer, whom we now call Sheriff or Vicount (the one
name descending from the Saxons, the other from the Normans.) And though I
cannot expressly prove, That this Sheriff was ever called a Bailiff, yet it is
probable that was one of his names also; because the County is often called
Baliva, a Bailywick. As namely, in the Return of a Writ, Non est inventus in
Baliva mea, etc. Kitchen Returna Brevium, fol. 285. And in the Sheriffs Oath,
the County is called his Bailiwick. I think the word Bailiff used in Magna
Chart. cap. 28. and 14 Edw. 3. Stat. 1. cap. 9. compriseth as well Sheriffs as
Bailiffs of Hundreds. But as the Realin is divided into Counties, so every
County is again divided into Hundreds; within which, it is manifest, that in
ancient time the Kings Subjects had justice ministered to them by the several
Officers of every Hundred, which were called Bailiffs, as those Officers do in
France and Normandy, being chief Officers of Justice within every Province.
Grand Customary of Norm. cap. 1. And it appears by Bracton (lib. 3. tract. 2
cap. 34. number. 5.) that Bailiffs of Hundreds might hold Plea of Appeal and
Approvers. But since that time these Hundred Courts (certain Franchises
excepted) are by the said Statute of 14 Edw. 3. swallowed into the County
Courts, as you may read in County and Hundred. And now the Bailiffs name and
office is grown into such contempt, at least these Bailiffs of Hundreds, that
they are now but bare Messengers and Mandataries within their Liberties, to
serve Writs, and such vile Offices; for which see Crompt. Just. of Peace, fol.
49. a. Yet is the name otherwise still in good esteem; for the chief
Magistrates in diverse Corporate Towns, are called Bailiffs, as of Ludlow,
Leominster, etc. And again, there are certain persons to whom the Kings Castles
are committed, who are called Bailiffs, as the Bailiff of Dover Castle.

These ordinary Bailiffs are of two sorts, Bailiffs Errant, and Bailiffs of
Franchises. Bailiffs Errant (Balivi Itinerantes) are those whom the Sheriff
appoints to go up and down the County to serve Writs, Summon the County
Sessions, Assizes, and such like. Bailiffs of Franchises (Balivi Franchesiarum
aut Libertatum) are those who are appointed by every Lord within his Liberty,
to do such Offices therein, as the Bailiff Errant does at large in the County.
Of these read Sir Tho. Smith de Repub. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 16. There are also
Bailiffs of the Forest (Manwood, part. 1. page 113.) and Bailiffs of Husbandry,
belonging to private Men of good Estates, who are so called, because they
dispose of the under servants, every Man to his labor and task, check them for
misdoing their business, gather the profits to their Lord and Masters use, and
deliver an account thereof at the years end, or otherwise as it shall be called
for.

The Office or Duty of a Bailiff of a Manor, or Household (which in ancient time
seems to have been all one.) Fleta well describes, Lib. 2. cap. 72 and 73. The
word Balivus is derived from Baal, i. Dominus; quia Balivi Dominantur suis
subditis, quasi little Magistri and Domini.

Bailiff of the Moot. See Moot.

Bale (Fr.) A Pack, or certain quantity of Merchandise; as a Bale of Spicery,
of Books or Thread. I find the word in the Statute 16 Rich. 2. cap. 1. and
still in use. And Ballot (Fr.) a little Pack.

Balenger Seems to have been a kind of Barge, or Water-vessel, by the Statute
28 H. 6. cap. 5.

Baliva. Statute of Marlbridge, 52 Hen. 3. cap. 2. -- Ubi Balivam habeat vel
jurisdictionem. Here Baliva is well expounded by the Statute it self; for in
this place it signifies Jurisdiction. Cokes 2 Inst. fol. 105.

Balivo amovendo, Is a Writ to remove a Bailiff out of his Office, for want of
sufficient living within his Bailiwick. Reg. of Writs, fol. 78.

Balkers or Balcors. See Conders.

Ban or Bans (Bannum) from the British Ban, i. Clamor, Is a Proclamation or
public notice given of any thing. This word Bans we use in publishing
Matrimonial Contracts in the Church, before Marriage, to the end, If any Man
can speak against the intention of the parties, either in respect of Kindred,
Pre-contract, or otherwise, they may take their Exception in time. And in the
Canon Law, Banna sunt Proclamationes sponsi and sponsae in Ecclesiis fieri
solitae. Yet our word Banning seems to come thence, being an Exclamation or
Cursing. Bracton mentions Bannus Regis, for a Proclamation or Silence made by
the Court, before the Congress of the Champions in a Combat, Lib. 3. tract. 2.
cap. 21. -- In terra suae ditionis Bannum, i. Interdictum misit, quod est
prohibitio, ut nullus fur vel latro esset, etc. Hist. Norm. edit. Anno 1619,
fol. 85. b.

Bane, (from the Sax. bana, A Killer or Murderer) Signifies the destruction or
overthrow of any thing; As I will be the Bane of him, is a common saying: And
he who was the cause of another Man's drowning, is said to be Labane, i.
Malefactor. Bracton, l. 2. tract. 8. cap. 1.

Baneret, (Banerettus, Eques vexillarius, or Miles vexilliferus) Is a Knight
made in the Field, with the Ceremony of cutting off the point of his Standard,
and making it a Banner, according to Sir Tho. Smith in his Repub. Angl. Others
add, That Blood must be first drawn in the Field. They are allowed to display
their Arms in a Banner in the Kings Army, as Barons do. Camden in his Britan.
fol. 109. has these words, Baneretti, cum Vassalorum no men jam desierat, a
Baronibus secundi erant; quibus inditum nomen a Vexillo, Concessum illis erat
Militaris virtutis ergo quadrato vexillo (perinde ac Barons) uti, unde and
Equites Vexillarii a nonnullis vocantur, etc. Some maintain a Baneret ought not
to be made in a Civil War, but I find in Sir Rich. Bakers Chron. fol. 260.
That Henry the Seventh made diverse Banerets upon the Cornish Commotion in the
year 1495. Of creating these Knights, read Seagar-Norroy his Book, Lib. 2. cap.
10. and Seldens Titles of Honor, fol. 799. That they are next to Barons in
Dignity, appears by the Statute 14 Rich. 2. c. 11. and 5 Rich. 2. Stat. 2. cap.
4. They were anciently called by Summons to the Parliament. And we find that a
Baneret, for Praying a Pardon for a Murderer contrary to the Statute, is
subject to the same punishment with a Baron, 13 Rich. 2. Stat. 2. cap. 1. Will.
de la Pole was created Baneret by Edward the Third, by Letters Patent, Anno
Regni sui 13. Memb. 13. Those Banerets, who are created sub Vexillis Regiis, in
exercitu Regali, in aperto bello, and ipso Rege personaliter praesente,
explicatis, take place of Baronets; as appears by the Letters Patent for
Creation of Baronets. See Cokes 4 Inst. fol. 6.

Bank (Lat. Bancus, Fr. Banque) Has two significations; the first, (and that
most noble) is a Seat or Bench of Judgment, as Bank le Roy, the Kings Bench,
Bank de Common Plees, the Bench of Common Pleas, or the Common Bench, called
also in Latin Bancus Regius and Bancus Communium Placitorum. The second is a
Bank, where a great sum of Money is let out to use, returned by exchange, or
otherwise disposed to profit. Jus Banci, or the Privilege of the Bench, was
anciently allowed only to the Kings Judges, Qui summam administrant justitiam;
for Inferior Courts, such as Court Barons, and Hundred Courts, were not allowed
that Privilege. Since, at this day, the Hundred Court of Freibridge, in
Norfolk, is held under an Oak at Geywood; and the Court for the Hundred of
Woolsey in Herefordshire, is held under an Oak near Ashton in that County,
which is called the Hundred Oak. See Free-Bench.

Bankrupt (quasi Bancus ruptus) Because when the Bank or Stock is broken or
exhausted, the owner is said to be a Bankrupt, Anno 34 Hen. 8. cap. 4. and 1
Jac. 15. He is thus doscribed.

ALl and every such person and persons using, or that shall use the Trade of
Merchandise, by way of Bargaining, Exchange, Bartery, Chevisance, or otherwise
in Gross, or by seeking his, her, or their Trade of Living by Buying and
Selling, and being a Subject born of this Realm, or any the Kings Dominions, or
Denizen, who at any time since the First day of this present Parliament, or at
any time hereafter shall depart the Realm, or begin to keep his other House or
Houses, or otherwise, to absent him or herself, or take Sanctuary or suffer him
or herself willingly to be arrested for any debt or other thing, not grown or
due, for Money delivered, Wares sold, or any other just or lawful cause, or
good consideration or purposes, or has or will suffer him or herself to be
outlawed, or yield him or herself to prison; or willingly, or fraudulently
has, or shall procure him or herself to be arrested, or his or her Goods,
Money, or Chattels to be attached, or sequestered, or depart from his or her
Dwelling House, or make or cause to be made any Fraudulent Grant, or Conveyance
of his, her, or their Lands, Tenements, Goods, or Chattels, to the intent, or
whereby his, her, or their Creditors, being Subjects born, as aforesaid, shall,
or may be defeated or delaid for the recovery of their just and true Debt; or
being Arrested for Debt, shall, after his or her Arrest, lie in Prison Six
Months, or more, upon that Arrest, or any other Arrest or Detention in Prison
for Debt, and lie in Prison Six Months upon such Arrest or Detention, shall be
accounted and adjudged; a Bankrupt to all intents and purposes.

But by Act 14 Car. 2. cap. 23. it is provided, That no person whatsoever, who
shall adventure in the East India, or Guiney Company, or in the Royal Fish
Trade, shall be esteemed a Merchant or Trader within any Statute for Bankrupts,
or liable to the same.

Bannum et Banleuga, A Territory, Precinct, or the utmost Bounds of a Manor or
Town; so it is used 47 Hen. 3. Rot. 44. Carta Canuti Regis Coenobio Thorneiae
-- Notum facio, me eleemosinam nostram Christo concessisse and omnibus Sanctis
suis -- viz. primo terram illam a Twiwella usque Thorney, ubi Bannum nostrum
cessat.

Banishment (Fr. Bannissement) Has a known signification; but there are two
kinds of it, one voluntary and upon Oath, whereof you may read Abjuration; the
other upon compulsion for some offense or crime; as if a Layman succor him,
who, having taken Sanctuary for an offense, obstinately refuses to abjure the
Realm, he shall lose his life, if a Clerk do so, he shall be banished. Stamf.
Pl. Cor. fol. 117.

Barator. See Barrator.

Barbican (Barbicanum) A Watchtower, Bulwark, or Brest-work. Mandatum est
Johanni de Kilmyngton Custodi Castri Regis and Honoris de Pickering, quoddam
Barbicanum ante portam Castri Regis praedicti muro lapideo, and in eodem
Barbicano quandam portam cum ponte versatili, etc. de novo facere, etc. T.
Rege, 10. Aug. Claus. 17 Edw. 2. m. 39.

Barcaria or Barcarium, A Sheep-coat, and sometimes a Sheep-walk. M. S. de
Placit. Ed. 3. See Bercaria.

Bard a lias Beard. See Clack.

Bargain and Sale, Is properly a Contract made of Manors, Lands, and other
things, transferring the property thereof from the Bargainer to the Bargainee,
which ought to be in consideration of Money; it is a good Contract for Land,
etc. and the Fee passes, though it be not said in the Deed (To have and to
hold, to him and his heirs,) and though there be no Livery and Seisin given by
the Vendor; so it be by Deed indented, sealed, and enrolled, either in the
County where the Land lies, or in one of the Kings Courts of Record at
Westminster, within six months after the date of the Deed. 27 Hen. 8. cap. 16.
Such Bargain and Sale may also be made by Lease and Release, without either
Livery or Enrolment.

Barkary (barkaria, corticulus) A Tan-house, Heath-house, or House to keep Bark
in. New Book of Entries, tit. Assise corp. Polit. 2.

Baron (baro) Has diverse significations. First it is a degree of Nobility next
a Viscount. Bracton (Lib. 1. cap. 8. numb. 4.) says, Sunt and alii Potentes sub
Rege, qui dicuntur Barons, quasi, robur belli. In which signification it
agrees with other Nations, where Baroniae are as much as Provinciae. So as
Barons are such as have the Government of Provinces, as their Fee holden of the
King, some having greater, some lesser authority within their Territories. Yet
it is probable, that of old here in England, all those were called Barons that
had such Seigniories or Lordships, as we now call Court Barons, who are at this
day called Seigneurs in France: And the Learned in our Antiquities, have
informed us, That not long after the Conquest, all such came to the Parliament,
and sat as Peers in the Lords House. But when by experience it appeared, that
the Parliament was too much thronged with such multitudes, it was in the Reign
of King John ordained, That none but the Barons Majores should for their
extraordinary wisdom, interest, or quality, be summoned to Parliament. After
that, again Men seeing this estate of Nobility to be but casual, and depend
merely upon the Princes pleasure, they sought a more certain hold, and obtained
of the King Letters Patent of this Dignity, to them, and their Heirs-male; who
were called Barons by Letters Patent, or by Creation, whose posterity are now
by inheritance, and true descent of Nobility, those Barons that are called
Lords of the Parliament, of which kind, the King may create at his pleasure.

Nevertheless, there are yet Barons by Writ, as well as Barons by Letters
Patent. Those Barons who were first by Writ, may now justly also be called,
Barons by Prescription, for that they and their Ancestors have continued
Barons, beyond the Memory of Man. The original of Barons by Writ, Camden (in
his Britan. page 109.) refers to Henry the Third. Barons by Letters Patent, or
Creation commenced 11 Rich. 2. The manner of whose Creation read in Seldens
titles of Honor, fol. 687. Ferns Glory of Generosity, page 125, 126. To these
Seager (lib. 4. cap. 13. Of Honor, Civil, and Military) adds a third kind of
Baron, calling them Barons by Tenure, which are some of our Ancient Barons, and
likewise the Bishops, who, by virtue of Baronies annexed to their Bishoprics,
always had place in the Lords House of Parliament, and are termed Lords
Spiritual.

Baron in the next signification, is an Officer, as Barons of the Exchequer, of
whom, the principal is called Lord chief Baron (Capitalis Baro,) and the three
other are his Assistants in Causes of Justice, between the King and his
Subjects, touching matters appertaining to the Exchequer, and the Kings
Revenue. The Lord Chief Baron, is the chief Judge of the Court, and in Matter
of Law, Information and Plea answers the Bar, and gives order for Judgment
thereupon. He alone in the Term time sits upon Nisi prius, that come out of the
Kings Remembrancers Office, or out of the Office of the Clerk of the Pleas,
which cannot be dispatched in the mornings for want of time. He takes
Recognizances for the Kings Debts, for appearances and observing orders. He
takes the presentation of all the Officers in Court under himself, and of the
Lord Major of London, and sees the Kings Remembrancer give them their Oaths. He
takes the Declaration of certain Receivers accounts of the Lands of the late
Augmentation made before him, by the Auditors. He gives the two Parcel-makers
places by virtue of his Office.

The second Baron, in the absence of the Lord chief Baron, answers the Bar and
takes Recognizances as aforesaid. He gives yearly the Oath to the late Major of
London, for the true account of the profits of his Office. He takes certain
Receivers accounts, and examines the Letters and Sums of such Sheriffs Foreign
Accounts; as also the Accounts of Escheators and Collectors of Subsidies and
Taxes, as are brought him by the Auditor of the Court.

The third Baron, in the absence of the other two, answers the Bar and takes
Recognizances as aforesaid. He gives yearly the Oath to the late Major and
Gawger of London for his true accompting. He also takes certain Receivers
Accounts, and examines the Letters and Sums of such of the former Accomptants,
as are brought unto him.

The fourth Baron, is always a Cursitor of the Court; at the days prefixed, he
takes Oath of all High Sheriffs, and their Under Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other
Accomptants, for their true accompting. He takes the Oath of all Collectors,
Comptrollers, Surveyors, and Searchers of the Custom-houses, that they have
made true Entrances in their Books. He apposeth all Sheriffs upon their Summons
of the Pipe in open Court; and informs the rest of the Barons of the Course of
the Court, in any Matter that concerns the Kings Prerogative. He likewise
examines such Accounts as are brought to him.

These Barons of the Exchequer are ancient Officers; for I find them named in
Westminster. 2. cap. 11. Anno 13 Edw. 1. and they are called Barons, because Barons
of the Realm were wont to be employed in that Office. Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 24.
Their Office is to look to the Accounts of the Prince, and to that end, they
have Auditors under them; as also to decide all Causes appertaining to the
Kings Revenue, coming into the Exchequer by any means; as in part is proved by
the Statutes of 20 Edw. 3. cap 2. and 27 ejusdem, Stat. 2. cap. 18. 5 Rich. 2.
Stat. 1. cap. 9. and 12 and 14 ejusdem, cap. 11. Whereupon they have been of
late persons learned in the Laws, whereas in ancient time they were Majores and
Discretiores in Regno, sive de Clero essent, sive de Curia.

There are also Barons of the Cinque Ports, Anno 31 Edw. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 2.
and 33 Hen. 8. cap. 10. which are two in every of these Towns, Hastings,
Winchelsey, Rye, Rumney, Hithe, Dover, and Sandwich, who have places in the
Commons House of Parliament. See Seldens Titles of Honor at large, sol 687. and
seq.

Baron in the third signification, is used for the Husband in relation to his
Wife.

The chief Magistrates of London were also called Barons, before there was a
Lord Major, as appears by the City Seal, as also by their ancient Charters --
Henricus (3) Rex. Sciatis nos concessisse and hac pr^senti Carta nostra
confirmasse Baronibus nostris de Civitate nostra London. quod elegant sibi
Mayer de seipsis singulis annis, etc. See Spelmans Gloss. at large upon this
word.

Baronet (Baronettus) Is a dignity or degree of Honor which has precedence
before all Banerets, Knights of the Bath, and Knights-Batchelors, except such
Banerets as are made Sub vexillis Regiis, in exercitu Regali, in aperto bello
and ipso Rege personaliter pr^sente.

This Order of Baronets, King James created in the year 1611. with such
precedence as abovesaid, and other privileges, etc. as may appear in Rot. Fat.
10 Jac. part. 10. m. 8. and 14 Jac. par. 2. m. 24., with an Habendum sibi and
Haeredibus masculis, etc. See Baneret. Where Baronets are mentioned in our old
Statutes and ancient Authors, it is mistaken for Banerets, 2 Inst. fol. 667.
And Seldens Titles of Honor, fol. 736.

Barony (Baronia) Is the Dignity, Territory, and Fee of a Baron; under which
notion, are comprehended not only the Fees and Lands of Temporal Barons, but
of Bishops also, who have two estates, one as they are Spiritual Men, by reason
of their Spiritual Revenues and Promotions, as was the Tribe of Levi among the
Israelites. The other grew from the bounty of our English Kings, whereby they
have Baronies, and Lands so called, and are thereby Barons or Lords of
Parliament.

This Barony (as Bracton says, Lib. 2. cap. 34.) Is a right indivisible; and
therefore, if an Inheritance be to be divided among Coparceners, though some
capital Messuages may be divided, yet, Si capitale Messuagium sit caput
Comitatus, vel caput Baroniae, they may not be parcelled. The reason is, Ne sic
caput per plures particulas dividatur, and plura jura Comitatuum and
Baroniarium deveniant ad nihilum, per quod deficiat regnum, quod ex Comitatibus
and Baroniis dicitur esse constitutum. The Manor of Burford in the County of
Salop, was found by Inquisition, capt 40 Edw. 3. Teneri de Rege ad inveni^ndos
5 homines pro Ex^rcitu Walliae, and per servitium* Baroniae, and the Lord
thereof (Sir Gilbert Cornwall) is called Baron of Burford; but is no Baron of
Parliament.

Barrator or Barater (Fr. Barateur, i a Deceiver) Is a common mover or
maintainer of Suits, Quarrels, or Parts, either in Courts or elsewhere in the
Country, and is himself never quiet, but at variance with one or other. Qui cum
Terentiano Davo omnia perturbat. To this purpose read Lamb. Eiren. page 342.
who says also, That Barrettor (for so he writes it) may come from the Latin
Baratro or Balatro, a vile Knave, or (...)hrift; and by a Metaphor, a Spot in a
Commonwealth See the Statute of Champerty, 33 Edw. 1. Stat. 2. and Westminster. 1.
cap. 32. Skene, in the word Barratry, says, That Barrators are Symonists, so
called of the Italian word Barrataria, signifying Corruption or Bribery in a
Judge, giving a false sentence for Money; whom you may read more at large, as
also Hortensius Cavalcanus, in his Tract. de Brachio Regio, part 5. number. 66.

Barraster (Barrasterius, Repagularis Causidicus.) See Utter-Barraster.

Bar (Fr. Barriere or Bar) Signifies legally a destruction for ever, or
taking away for a time the action of him that has right; and it is called a
Plea in Bar, when such a Bar is pleaded. Coke on Littl. fol. 372. Plowden, in
Colthirsts Case, fol. 26 and 28. And Brook, tit. Bar, number. 101. and 5 Hen. 7.
fol. 29.

This word is also used for a Material Bar, as the place where Sergeants at Law
or Counselors stand to plead Causes in Court, or Prisoners to answer their
Indictments; whence our Lawyers, who are called to the Bar, or Licensed to
plead (in other Countries called Licenciati) are termed Barrasters, 24 Hen. 8.
cap. 24. See Blank-bar.

Bar Fee, Is a Fee of xx d, which every Prisoner, acquitted of Felony, pays to
the Jailer, Crompt. Just. of Peace, fol. 158.

Barrel, Is a Measure of Wine, Oil, etc. containing the eighth part of a Tun,
the ^ourth of a Pipe, and the moiety of a Hogshead, that is, Thirty one
Gallons, and a half, Anno 1 Rich. 3. cap. 13. But the quantity of this Vessel
seems to differ according to the Liquor; for a Barrel of Beer contains Thirty
six Gallons, the Kilderkin Eighteen, and the Firkin Nine. A Barrel of Ale
Thirty two Gallons, the Kilderkin Sixteen, and the Firkin Eight. Anno 23 Hen.
8. cap. 4. and 12 Car. 2. cap. 23. -- The said Assise of 32 Gallons of
Winemeasure, which is about 28 Gallons of old Standard, well packed, and
containing in every Barrel usually, a thousand full Herrings, at least, is, and
shall be taken for good, true, and lawful Assise of ^erring Barrels. Anno 13
Eliz. cap. 11.

Barriers (Fr. Barrieres) Signifies with us, that which the French call (Jeu de
Bars, i. Palaestram) A Martial Exercise of Men, armed and sighting together
with short Swords, within certain Bars or Rails, whereby they are severed from
the Beholders; now disused.

Barter (from the Span. Baratar, i. To sell cheap, or to deceive or cheat in
Bargaining) Signifies with us to exchange one commodity for another, to truck
Wares for Wares. Anno 1 Rich. 3. cap. 9. And so Bartry the Substantive, 13
Eliz. cap. 7. The reason may be, because they that chop and change in this
manner, do endeavor for the most part, one to overreach, or deceive the other.
See Barrator.

Barton, In Devonshire, and the West of England. Is used for the Demesne Lands
of a Manor; for the Mannor-house it self; and in some places for Outhouses,
and Fold-yards. In the Statute 2 and 3 Edw. 6. cap. 12. Barton Lands and Demesne
Lands are used as Synonima's. See Berton.

Base Court, (Fr. Cour Basse) Is any Co^rt, not of Record, as the Court Baron.
Of this read Kitchen, fol. 95, 96, etc.

Base Fee. See Base Estate.

Base Estate (Fr. Bas Estat) Signifies, that Estate which Base Tenants have in
their Lands. Base Tenants are those (according to Lamb. verbo, Paganus) who
perform inferior Villainous service to their Lords. Kitchen, fol. 41. makes
Base-tenure and Frank-tenure to be contraries, and puts Copiholders in the
number of Base Tenants; whence it may be gathered, that every Base Tenant holds
at the will of the Lord, yet that there is a difference between a Base Estate
and Villenage; which Fitzherbert in his Not. Br. fol. 12. seems to confound.
For to hold in pure Villenage, is to do all that the Lord will command him. So
that if a Copiholder have but Base Estate, he, not holding by the performance
of every Commandment o^ his Lord, cannot be said to hold in Villenage. Whether
it may be said, That Copiholders are, by custom and continuance of time, grown
out of that extreme servitude, wherein they were first created, I leave to
others of better Judgment, since Fit^^. (loco ^itato) says, Tenure by Copy is
but of late time.

Basels (Baselli) A sort of Coin, al^olished by Hen. 2. Anno 1158. This year
the King altered his Coin, abrogating certain pieces called Basels. Hollinsh.
page 67.

Baselard or Basillard, In the Stat. 12 R. 2. cap. 6. signifies a Weapon; which
Mr. Speight, in his Exposition upon C^aucer, calls Pugionem vel sicam.

Bastard (Bastardus, from the British Bastardd, i. nothus,) Is he or she that
is born of any Woman not married, so that the Childs Father is not known by
the order of Law, and therefore is called Filius Populi. Cui pater est populus,
pater est sibi nullus and omnis:
Cui pater est populus, non habet ipse patrem.


Such Bastard cannot inherit Land as Heir to his Father, nor can any person
inherit Land as Heir to him, but one that is Heir of his Body. Littl. Sect. 401.

If the Child be begotten by him that does marry her after the Childs Birth,
yet it is in Judgment of Law, a Bastard, though the Church holds it legitimate.
Stat. 20 Hen. 3, 9. and 1 Hen. 6. 3. Coke on Littl. 244.

If a Man take a Wife, who is great with Child by another, who was not her
Husband, it shall be said the Child, and may be the Heir of the Husband,
though it were born but one day after the Espousals solemnized.

If one marry a Woman, and die before night, and never Bed her, and she have a
Child after, it seems it shall be accounted his Child, and Legitimate. See
the English Lawyer, 117.

If a Man or Woman* marry a second Wife or Husband, the first being living, and
have issue by that second Wife or Husband, such issue is a Bastard. 39 Edw. 3.
14. 7 Hen. 4. 49. 18 Edw 4. 26.

If a Woman elope with a Stranger, and has a Child by him, her Husband being
infra quatuor maria, this is Legitimate, and shall inherit the Husbands Land.
44 Edw. 3. 10. 7 Hen 4. 10.

The punishment of the Mother and reputed Father of a Bastard. Anno 18 Eliz.
cap. 3.

He that gets a Bastard in the Hundred of Middleton, in Com. Kent, forfeits all
his Goods and Chattels to the King. M S. de temp. Edw. 3. Before the Statute 2
and 3 Edw. 6. cap. 21. one was adjudged a Bastard, Quia filius Sacerdotis. Int.
Plac. de temp. Joh. Reg. Lincoln. 42.

Bastardy (Fr. Bastardage) Signifies a defect of Birth, objected to one born
out of Wedlock. Bracton. lib. 5. cap. 19. How Bastardy is to be proved, or to
be enquired into, if it be pleaded. See Rastals Entries, tit. Bastardy, fol.
104. And the Stat. 9 Hen. 6. cap. 11. Kitchen, fol. 64. mentions Bastardy
Special, and Bastardy General. The difference whereof is, That Bastardy General
is a Certificate from the Bishop of the Diocese to the Kings Justices, after
such enquiry made, that the party enquired of, is a Bastard, or not a Bastard,
upon some question of Inheritance. Bastardy Special is a Suit commenced in the
Kings Court, against him that calls another Bastard; so termed, because
Bastardy is the principal case in trial, and no inheritance contended for.
Whereby it appears, that in both these significations, Bastardy is rather taken
for an examination or trial, whether a Man's Birth be defective or illegitimate,
than for Bastardy it self. See Brook tit. Bastardy, and Dr. Ridleys Book, page
203, 204.

Baston (Fr.) A Staff, Club, or Cowlstaff. But in our Statutes it signifies one
of the Warden of the Fleets Servants or Officers, who attends the Kings Courts
with a Red Staff, for taking such to Ward as are committed by the Court. Anno 1
Rich. 2. cap. 12. 5 Eliz. cap. 23. See Tifstaff.

Batable Ground, Was the Land lying between England and Scotland, heretofore in
question, when they were distinct Kingdoms, to which it belonged, Anno 23 Hen.
8. cap. 6. and 32 Ejusdem, cap. 6. As if we should say, Litigious or Debatable
Ground; for by that name Skene calls Ground that is in Debate or Controversy
betwixt two. Came. Brit. tit. Cumberland.

Battle (Fr. Battle) Signifies a Trial by Combat: The manner whereof, being
long, full of Ceremonies, and now difused, we must refer you to Glanvile, lib.
2. cap. 3, 4, 5. Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 21. fol. 140. Britton, cap.
22. Smith de Rep. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 7. and lib. 3. c. 3. Coke on Littl. fol.
294. And on Westminster. 1. fol. 247. See Combat.

Battery (from the Fr. Batre, i. to strike, or Sax. batte, i. fustis) Is a
violent striking, or beating a Man; who (in regard it tends to the breach of
the Peace) may therefore either indict the other party, (whereby he is Fineable
to the King) or have his Action of Trespass, of Assault and Battery, against
him, (for every Battery implies an Assault) and recover so much in Costs and
Damages, as the Jury will give him, which Action will lie as well before as
after the Indictment. But if the Plaintiff made the first assault, then the
Defendant shall be quit, and the Plaintiff shall be amerced to the King for his
false Suit. In some Case a Man may justify the beating another in a moderate
manner, as the Parent his Child, the Master his Servant or Apprentice, etc.
This the Civilians call Injuriam personalem.

Batus (Sax. bat) A Boat. And Batellus, a little Boat. -- Concessit etiam idem
Hugo Wake pro se and Hered. suis, quod praedictus Abbas and Successores sui and
Ecclesia sua de Croyland habeant tres Batellos in Harnolt, etc. Charta. Edw. 1.
20 ^ulii. 18 Regni. See Libera Batella.

Bay or Pen, Is a Pond-head made up of a great height to keep in store of
Water; so that the Wheels of the Furnace or Hammer belonging to an Iron Mill,
may be driven by the Water coming thence, through a Passage or Flood-gate,
called the penstock. Also, a Harbor where Ships ride at Sea near some Port. The
word is mentioned Anno 27 Eliz. cap. 19.

Beacon (from the Sax. Beacen, i. signum, vel symbolum) Anno 8 Eliz. cap. 13.
is well known. Hence Beaconage, Money paid toward the maintenance of a Beacon;
and we still use the word to becken, from the Saxon beacnian, to nod unto, or
signify. See the Statute 5 Hen. 4. And Dors. Pat. 28 Hen. 6. par. 2. m. 21.
Pro signis Anglice Beacons and Vigiliis.

Bid or Bead (Sax. Bead, a Prayer;) so that to say Ones Beads, is to say Ones
Prayers. They were most in use before Printing, when poor people could not go
to the charge of a Manuscript Prayer Book. These are mentioned in 27 Hen. 8.
cap. 26. and 3 Jao. cap. 5.

Bearding alias Barding of Wool. See Clack.

Bearors -- Justices of Assie shall enquire, bear, and determine of
Mainteynors, Bearors, and Conspirators, and of those that commit Champarti,
etc. Anno 4 Edw. 3. cap. 11. such as bear down or oppress others; maintainers.

Beasts of Chase (Ferae Campestres) Are five; the Buck, the Do, the Fox,
Martron and Roc. Manwood, 1 Part. page 342. and 2 Part. cap. 4. number. 2.

Beasts of the Forest (Ferae Sylvestres) Are the Heart, Hind, Hare, Bore, and
Woolf. Manwood, part. 2. cap. 4. number. 1.

Beasts and Fowls of Warren, Are the Hare, Coney, Pheasant, and Partridge.
Manw. part. 2. cap. 4. number. 3.

Beastials. See Bestials.

Beau-pleader (Fr. Beau-plaider, i. To plead fairly) Is a Writ upon the Statute
of Marlbridge, 52 Hen. 3. cap. 11. whereby it is provided, That neither in the
Circuit of Justices, nor in Counties, Hundreds, nor Courts Baron, any Fines
shall be taken of any Man for Fair pleading, that is, for not pleading fairly
or aptly to the purpose; upon which Statute, This Writ was ordained against
those that violate the Law herein. See Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 270. whose
Definition is to this effect. The Writ upon the Statute of Marlbridge for not
Fair Pleading lies where the Sheriff, or other Bailiff in his Court, takes Fine
of the Party, Plaintiff, or Defendant; for that he pleads not fairly, etc. And
it was as well in respect of the Vicious Pleading, as of the Fair Pleading by
way of amendment. 2 Part. Inst. fol. 122.

Bedel (Bedellus, Sax. bydel) A Crier or Messenger of a Court, the Keeper of a
Prison or House of Correction, an under Bailiff of a Manor. Manwood, par. 1.
fol. 221. says, A Beadle is an Officer or Servant of the Forest, who makes all
manner of Garnishments of the Courts of the Forest, and all Proclamations, as
well within the Courts, as without, and executes all the processes of the
Forest; he is like a Bailiff Errant of a Sheriff in a County. Edgarus
interdicit omnibus ministris suis, id est, Vicecomitibus, Bedellis, and Balivis
in Patria Girvirorum -- Ne introeant fines and limits dicti Marisci. Ingulphus
Hist. Croyl.

Bedelary, Is the same to a Bed^l, as Bailiwick to a Bailiff. Littl. lib. 3.
cap. 5.

Bederepe alias Bidrepe (Sax.) Is a service, which some Tenants were anciently
bound to perform, viz. To repe their Landlords Corn at Harvest, as some yet
are tied to give them one, two, or three days work, when they are called --
Debent venire in Antumpno ad precariam quae vocatur a le Bederepe. Pla. in
Crast. Pur. 10 Hen. 3. Rot. 8.

Benefice (beneficium) Is generally taken for any Ecclesiastical Living, or
Promotion, be it Dignity, or other; As Anno 13 Rich. 2. Stat. 2. cap. 2. where
Benefices are divided into Elective and Donative. So is it used in the Canon
Law. Duarenus de Beneficiis, l. 2. cap. 3.

Beneficio primo Ecclesiastico habendo, Is a Writ directed from the King to the
Chancellor, to bestow the Benefice that shall first fall in the Kings gift,
above or under such a value, upon this or that Man. Reg. of Writs, fol. 307. b.

Benerth, Was a Service which the Tenant rendered to his Lord with his Plough
and Cart. Lamb. Itin. page 212. and Coke on Littl. fol. 86. a.

Benevolence (Benevolentia, favor, good will) Is used both in the Chronicles
and Statutes of this Realm, for a voluntary gratuity given by the Subjects to
the King. Stows Annals, page 701. By the Statute of 1 Rich. 3. cap. 2. it is
called a New Imposition. But Stow, page 791. says, That the invention grew
from Edward the Fourths days; you may find it also (Anno 11 Hen. 7. cap. 10.)
to be yielded to that worthy Prince, in regard of his great expenses in Wars,
and otherwise. See Cokes 12 Rep. fol. 119, 120. It is in other Nations called
Subsidium charitativum, given sometimes to Lords of the Fee by their Tenants,
sometimes to Bishops by their Clergy. Cassan. de consuet. Burg. page 134, 136.
By Act of Parliament, 13 Car. 2. cap. 4. it was also given to His Majesty that
now is, King Charles the Second.

Bercaria (from the Fr. Bergerie) A Sheepcoat or Sheepfold. In Doomsday it is
called Berquarium. 2 Part. Cokes Inst. fol. 476. -- Dedi sexaginta acras
terrae, ad unam Bercariam faciendam -- Mon. Angl. 2. p. fol. 599. a. where it
seems to signify a Sheep-walk.

Berghmayster (from the Sax. berg. Mons, quasi, Master of the Mountain.) A
Bailiff or chief Officer among our Derbishire Miners, who, among other parts of
his Office, does also execute that of Coroner among them. -- Juratores dicunt,
quod in principio quando Mineratores veniunt in campum minera quaerentes,
inventa minera, venient ad Balivum qui dicitur Berghmayster, and petent ab eo
duas Metas, si sit in novo campo, and habebunt unam, scil. pro inventione, and
aliam de jure Mineratorum, and unaquaeque meta continet quatuor Perticatas, and
ad foveam suam septem pedes, and unaquaeque Per^^cata ^rit de 24 pedibus, etc.
Es^. de Anno 16 Edw. 1. number. 34. In Turr. Land. See Berghmoth.

Bergmoth or Berghmote. -- Juratores dicunt etiam quod Placita del Bergmoth
debent teneri de tribus septimanis in tres septimanas super mineram in Pecco.
Es^. 16 Edw. 1. ut supra. This Bergmoth or Berghmote, comes from the Saxon
berg, i. Mons and mote or gemote, conventus: Quasi, the Court held upon a Hill,
for deciding Pleas and Controversies among the Derbishire Miners; of which,
thus Mr. Manlove, in his ingenious Treatise of their Customs.

-- And Suit for Oar must be in Berghmote Court,
Thither for Justice Miners must resort:
If they such Suits in other Courts commence, 3 Edw. 6. Art. 9. 3 and 4 Phil.
and Ma. Art. 16.

They lose their due Oar-debt, for such offense;
And must pay Costs; because they did proceed
Against their Custom: Miners all take heed.
No Man may sell his Grove, that is in contest,
Till Suit be ended; after the Arrest 3 Edw. 6. Art. 20. 3 and 4 Phil. and Ma.
Art. 26. 16 Edw. 1. c. 2. 3 Edw. 6. Art. 10. 3 and 4 Phil. and Ma. Art. 19, 30
and 33.

The Sellers Grove is lost by such offense,
The Buyer fined, for such Maintenance.
And two great Courts of Berghmote ought to be
In every year, upon the Minery,
To punish Miners that transgress the Law,
To curb Offenders, and to keep in aw
Such as be Cavers, or do rob Men's Coes;
Such as be Pilferers, or do steal Men's Stows;
To order Grovers, make them pay their part,
Join with their Fellows, or their Groves desert;
To fine such Miners, as Men's Groves abuse,
And such as Orders to observe refuse;
Or work their Meers beyond their length and Stake; 3 and 4 Phil. and Ma. Art.
31.

Or otherwise abuse the Mine and Rake;
Or set their Stows upon their Neighbors Ground,
Against the Custom, or exceed their Bound:
Or Purchasers, that Miners from their way Ibid. Art. 4, 5.

To their Wash-troughs do either stop or stay;
Or dig or delve in any Man's Bing-place;
Or do his Stows throw off, break, or deface;
To fine Offenders, that do break the Peace,
Or shed Man's Blood, or any Tumults raise; 26 Edw. 1. cap. 2. 3 and 4 Phil. and
Ma. Art. 28.

Or Weapons bear upon the Mine or Rake;
Or that Possession forcibly do take;
Or that disturb the Court, the Court may fine
For their Contempts (by Custom of the Mine)
And likewise such as dispossessed be,
And yet set Stows against Authority;
Or open leave their Shafts, or Groves, or Holes,
By which Men lose their Cattle, Sheep, or Soles.
And to lay Pains, that grievance be redressed,
To case the Burdens of Poor-men oppressed.
To swear Berghmaysters, that they faithfully
Perform their Duties on the Minery;
And make Arrests, and eke impartially
Impanel Jurors, Causes for to try;
And see that Right be done from time to time
Both to the Lord, and Farmers, on the Minc.
Bernet, (Incendium, from the Sax. byrnan, to burn) Is one of those crimes,
which, by Henry the First's Laws, cap. 13. Emendari non possunt. See Opentheff.

Bery or Bury (from the Sax. Byr, i. Habitatio) A dwelling place, a
Mansion House or Court, a chief Farm. The chief House of a Manor, or the Lords
Seat is still so called in some parts of England; as in Herefordshire there are
the Beries of Stockton, Luston, Hope, etc. Anciently also used for a Sanctuary.

Berton (Bertona, a Sax. bear, hordeum, and ton, villa) Est area in aversa
part aedium ruralium primartarum, in qua horrea, stabula and vilioris officii
aedificia sita sunt, and in qua fodentur domestica animalia and negotiationes
rusticae peraguntur. -- Rex Thesaurario and Baronibus suis de Scaccario
salutem. Quia volumus quod Castrum nostrum Glocestriae, nec-non and Tina and
Bertona Gloc. corpori dicti Comitatus nostri Gloc. annectantur, etc. Claus. 32
Edw. 1. m. 17.

Berwica, A Hamlet, or Village appurtenant to some Town or Manor; often found
in Doomsday; from the Sax. bereica, a Corn-Farm, or Villa frumentaria. Manerium
minus ad maius pertinens; non in gremio Manerii, sed vel in confinio vel
dis-junctius interdum situm est. Spel.

Besaile (Fr. Bisayeul, i. The Father of the Grandfather) Signifies a Writ
that lies where the Great Grandfather was seized of any Lands or Tenements in
Fee-simple, the day he died; and after his death, a stranger abates or enters
the same day uppn him, and keeps out his Heir, etc. The form and further use of
this Writ, read in Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 221.

Besca, A Spade, or Shovel: (From the Fr. bescher, to Dig or Delve) -- In
communi pastura turbas, cum una sola besca, fodient and nihil dabunt. Prior.
Lew. Custamar. de Hecham. pa. 15. Hence perhaps -- Una bescata terrae inclusa
-- (Mon. Angl. p. 2. fol. 642. a.) may signify a piece of Land usually dug,
such as Gardiners sow Roots in.

Bestials (Fr. Bestiails, i. Beasts or Cattle of any sort) Anno 4 Edw. 3 cap.
3. It is written Bestail; and is generally and properly used for all kind of
Cattle. Mentioned also in 12 Car. 2. cap. 4.

Bidale or Bid-all, Precaria potaria (from the Sax. biddan, i. To pray or
sapplicate) Is the invitation of Friends to drink Ale at the House of some poor
Man, who thereby hopes a charitable contribution for his relief; still in use
in the West of England, and falsely written Bildale in some Copies of Bracton,
lib. 4. cap. 1. number. ult. And mentioned 26 Hen. 8. cap. 6. See Sothale.

Bidding of the Beads (Anno 27 Hen. 8. cap. 26.) Was anciently an invitation or
notice given by the Parish Priest to his Parishioners at some special times to
come to Prayers, either for the Soul of some Friend departed, or upon some
other particular occasion. And, to this day our Ministers do usually, on the
Sunday precedent, bid such Festivals, as happen in the week following,
Holidays; that is, desire or invite their Parishioners to observe them. Bidding
comes from the Sax. biddan, i. To desire or entreat; and Bead, in that
language, signifies a Prayer.

Bidripe (Bidripa.) See Bederepes.

Biga, Properly a Cart, or Chariot, drawn with two Horses coupled side to side;
but, in our ancient Records, it is used for any Cart, Wain, or Wagon -- Et
quod eant cum Bigis and carris and caeteris falleris super tenementum suum,
etc. 2 Mon. Angl. fol. 256. b.

Bigamus, Is he that has married two or more Wives, or a Widow, as appears in
the Statutes, 18 Edw. 3. cap 2. and 1 Edw. 6. cap. 12. 2 Part. Cokes Inst. fol.
273.

Bigamy, (Bigamia) Signifies a double marriage or the marriage of two Wives; it
is used for an impediment to be a Clerk, Anno 4 Edw. 1. 5. Upon those words of
S. Paul to Timothy, Chap. 5. 2. (Oportet ergo Episcopum irreprehensibilem esse
and unitis uxoris virum.) Upon which, the Canonists founded that Doctrine; That
he that has married a Widow, is by their interpretation, taken to have been
twice married. And both these, they not only exclude from holy Orders, but
deny them all Privileges that belong to Clerks. But this Law is abolished by 1
Edw. 6. cap. 12. and 18 Eliz. cap. 7. Which allow to all Men that can read as
Clerks, though not within Orders, the benefit of Clergy, in case of Felony not
especially excepted by some other Statute. Brook, tit. Clergy.

Bilanciis deferendis, Is a Writ directed to a Corporation, for the carrying of
Weights to such a Haven, there to weigh the Wools that such a Man is licenced
to transport. Reg. of Writs, fol. 270. a.

Bilawes or rather Bylaws (from the Gothish By, pagus and lagen. Lex, or from
the Sax. Bilage, i. Leges obiter and pro re nata conditae) are particular
Orders made in Court Leets or Court Barons by common assent of the Resiants,
for the good of those that make them, in some particular Cases, whereto the
Public Law does not extend. Coke, Vol. 6. fol. 63. Kitchen, fol. 45 and 79. In
Scotland they are called Laws of Burlaw or Birlaw, which are made and
determined by consent of Neighbors, elected by common consent in the Birlaw
Courts, wherein Knowledge is taken of Complaints betwixt Neighbor and Neighbor;
which men, so chosen are Judges and Arbitrators to the effect aforesaid, and
are called Birlaw-men. For Bawr or Bawrsman in Dutch, is Rusticus, and so
Birlaw or Burlaw, Leges Rusticorum. Skene. By Stat. 14 Car. 2. cap. 5. the
Wardens and Assistants for making and regulating the Trade of Norwich Stuffs,
are empowered to make Bylaws, etc. Anno 20 Car. 2. cap. 6.

Bilinguis, Signifies in the generality a double-tongued Man, or one that can
speak two Languages; yet it is used for that Jury which passes in any Case,
betwixt an Englishman and an Alien, whereof part must be Englishmen, and part
strangers. Anno 28 Edw. 3. cap. 13.

Bill (Billa) Is diversely used: First, it is a security for Money under the
Hand and Seal of the Debtor, and is without condition or forfeiture for
non-payment. 2. Bill is a Declaration in Writing, expressing either the wrong
the Complainant has suffered by the party complained of, or else some fault
committed against some Law or Statute of the Realm. This Bill is most commonly
addressed to the Lord Chancellor of England, especially for unconscionable
wrongs done; sometimes to others having Jurisdiction, according as the Law,
whereon they are grounded, does direct: It contains the Fact complained of, the
Damages thereby sustained, and Petition of Process against the Defendant for
redress. See more in West. par. 2. Symbol. tit. Supplications.

Bill of Store, Is a kind of License granted at the Custom-house to Merchants,
or others, to carry over such Stores or Provision as are necessary for their
Voyage, Customfree.

Bill of Sufferance, Is a License granted at the Custom-house to a Merchant, to
suffer him to trade from one English Port to another, without paying Custom.
Anno 14 Car. 2. cap. 11.

Billa vera (Lat.) The Bill is true. The Grand Enquest, Empanelled and sworn
before the Justices of Air, etc. Endorsing a Bill (whereby any crime
punishable in that Court is presented to them) with these two words, signify
thereby that the presentor has furnished his presentment with probable
Evidence, and worthy further consideration. Whereupon, the party presented, is
said to stand indicted of the Crime, and tied to make answer to it, either by
confessing or traversing the Indictment: And if the Crime touch his Life, it is
yet referred to another Enquest, called the Enquest of Life and Death, by whom,
if he be found guilty, then he stands convict of the Crime, and is by the Judge
to be condemned to Death. See Ignoramus and Indictment.

Billets of Gold (Fr. Billot) Wedges or Ingots of Gold, mentioned 27 Edw. 3.
Stat. 2. cap. 14.

Bissextile (Bissextilis) Leap-year so called, because the sixth Calends of
March are in that year twice reckoned, viz. On the 24 and 25 of February. So
that Leap-year has one day more than other years, and is observed every fourth
year, being first devised by Julius Caesar, to accommodate the year with the
course of the Sun. And to prevent all doubt and ambiguity, that might arise
hereupon, it is provided by the Statute de Anno Bissextili, 21 Hen. 3. That the
day increasing in the Leap-year, and the day next before, shall be accounted
for one day, etc. Britton. fol. 209. and Dyer, 17 Eliz. 345.

Birlaw. See Bilaw and Byrlaw.

Black maile (Fr. Maille, i A Link of Mail, or a small piece of Metal or Money)
Signifies in the Counties of Cumberland, Northumberland, and Westmerland, a
certain rate of Money, Corn, Cattle, or other consideration, paid to some
inhabiting upon, or near the borders, being persons of name and power, allied
with certain Moss-Troopers, or known Robbers within the said Counties; to be
thereby by them freed and protected from the danger of those Spoil-takers. Anno
43 Eliz. cap. 13. See Mail.

Black Rod, or Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, is chief Gentleman Usher to
the King. He is called in the Black Book, fol. 255 Lator virgae nigrae, and
Hostiarius; and elsewhere Virgi-bajulus: His duty is Ad port andam Virgam coram
Domino Rege, ad Festum Sancti Georgii infra Castrum de Windesore. He has also
the keeping of the Chapter House Door, when a Chapter of the Order of the
Garter is sitting; and, in the time of Parliament, attends on the House of
Peers.

He has a like habit with the Register of the Order, and Garter King of Arms;
which he wears at the Feast of S George, and all Chapters. He bears a Black
Rod, on the top whereof sits a Lion, Gold; which Rod is instead of a Mace, and
has the same power and authority. His Fee is now 30 l. per annum. This Officer
has been anciently constituted by Letters Patent under the Great Seal.

Blade (Bladum, Fr. Bled) Nostro foro, de segete tantum intelligitur,
praesertim etiam in herba. Spel. But the Saxon Blaed signifies more generally
Fruit, Corn, Hemp, Flax, Herbs, etc. or the Branches or Leaves of Trees or
Herbs. Universis -- Will. de Mohun salutem, Sciatis me relaxasse and quietum
clamasse Domino Reginaldo de Mohan fratri meo totum Manerium meum de Torr --
Salvo mihi instauro meo and blado, etc. (sine dat.) i. e. Excepting my Stock
and Corn on the Ground. Hence Bladier is taken for an Ingrosser of Corn or
Grain. Sciant -- quod ego Willielmus Alreton, consensu and voluntate Beatriciae
Uxoris meae, Dedi -- Agathae Gille pro duabus Marcis Argenti and una mensura
bladi, duas solidatas reditus in villa Leominstr. illas scil. quas Walterus de
Luda solebat mihi reddere pro quadam terra quae est inter soldas Adae
Talcurteis and Feodum Johannis Rading. Habend etc. (sinc dat.) Ex libro Cartar.
Priorat. Leominstriae.

Blancks (Fr. Blanc. i. candidus) A kind of Money, coined by King Henry the
Fifth, in the parts of France, which were then subject to England, the value
whereof was 8 d. Stows Annals, page 586. These were forbidden to be current in
this Realm, 2 Hen. 6. cap. 9. The reason why they were called Blanks, was,
because at the time these were coined in France, there was also a piece of Gold
coined, called a Salus; from which, this of Silver, was in name distinguished
by the color.

Blanck-Bar, Is the same with that we call a Common Bar, and is the name of a
Plea in Bar, which in an Action of Trespass is put in to compel the Plaintiff
to assign the certain place where the Trespass was committed: It is most used
by the practisers in the Common Bench, for in the Kings Bench the place is
commonly ascertained in the Declaration. Croke, 2 Part. fol. 594.

Blench, To hold Land in Blench, is, by payment of a Penny, Rose, Pair of Gilt
Spurs, or such like thing, if it be demanded; In name of Blench, i. Nomine
albae firmae. See Alba firma.

Blockwood. See Logwood.

Blomary (Anno 27 Eliz. cap. 19.) The first Forge man Iron Mill, through which
the Iron passes, before it comes to the Finary.

Bloated Fish or Herring (Anno 18 Car. 2. cap. 2.) Are those which are
half-dried.

Bloudy-hand. See Backberend.

Bloudwit or Blodwite (compounded of two Saxon words Blod, i. sanguis, and
wita, mulcta,) Is a word used in ancient Charters of Liberties, and signifies
an Amercement for shedding Blood; so that whosoever had it given him in his
Charter, had the penalty due for Bloodshed. Skene writes it Bloudveit, and
says veit in English, is injuria, and that Bloudveit is an Amerciament or unlaw
(as the Scotch call it) for wrong or injury, as Bloodshed is: For he that has
Bloodveit granted him, has free liberty to take all Amerciaments of Courts for
Effusion of Blood. Fleta says, Quod significat quietantiam misericordiae pro
effusione sanguinis, Lib. 1. cap. 47. Blodwite, i. Si aliqui pugnantes ad
invicem in Rudnam and extraxerint sanguinem, Prior habebit inde amerciamenta in
Curia sua. Ex Reg. Priorat. de Cokesford.

Blubber (Anno 12 Car. 2. cap. 18.) A kind of Whale-Oyl, so called; before it
is thoroughly boiled and brought to perfection.

Boc-hord (Sax.) A place where Books, Evidences, Writings, or other like
Monuments are kept, as the Rolls, quasi, Librorum horreum.

Bocland (Sax.) Terra haereditaria vel testimentalis, quasi, Book-land. A
Possession, an Inheritance; a Territory, Farm, or House with Land belonging to
it, held by Evidence in Writing. Bocland vero ea possidendi transferendique
lege coercebatur, ut nec dari licuit nec vendi, sed haeredibus relinquenda
erat, in scriptis a liter permitteretur; Terra inde Haereditaria nuncupata. LL.
Aluredi, cap. 36. See Charterland, and Landboc. And see Glossarium in december
Scriptores.

Bodies Politic. See Corporation.

Boilary or Bullary of Salt (Salina) A Salt-house, or Salt-pit, where Salt is
boiled and made. Coke on Littl. fol. 4. b. From the Fr. Bovillon, a Boiling or
Bubbling.

Bolting, At Greys-Inn the manner is thus, An Ancient, and two Barrasters sit
as Judges, three Students bring each a Case, and the Judges choose which of them
shall be argued; which done, the Students first argue it, then the Barrasters.
It is inferior to Mooting, and may be derived from the Saxon Bolt, a House;
because done privately in the House for instruction.

Bona fide, i. With a good Faith; we say that is done Bona fide, which is done
really, with a good Faith, without dissimulation or fraud. It is used Anno 12
Car. 2. cap. 18. and 15 Car. 2. cap. 5.

Bonaght or Bonaghty, Was an Exaction in Ireland, imposed on the Subjects at
the Will of the Lord, for relief of the Knights called Bonaghti, who served in
the Wars. Antiq. Hibern. page 60. Camden (in his Britan. tit. Desmond) says,
James Earl of Desmond imposed upon the People those most grievous Tributes of
Coin, Livery, Cocherings, Bonaghty, etc.

Bona notabilia; Where the party dying has, at time of his death, Goods, or
good Debts in any other Diocese, or peculiar jurisdiction within that Province,
besides his Goods in the Diocese where he dies, amounting to the value of 5 l.
at the least, he is said to have Bona notabilia; and then the Probat of his
Will, or granting Administration belongs to the Archbishop of the Province,
whether it be within that of Canterbury, or York. But this does not prejudice
those Diocesses, where, by Composition or Custom, Bona notabilia are rated at a
greater sum. Book of Canons, 1 Jac. Can. 92, 93. Perkins, sect. 489. See Probat
of Testaments.

Bona Patria, An Assise of Contrymen or good Neighbors; sometimes it is
called Assisa bonae patriae, when twelve or more Men are chosen out of any part
of the Country to pass upon Assise; otherwise called Juratores, because they
are to swear judicially in presence of the party, etc. Skene. See Assisors.

Bond, Bondage, and Bondmen. See Nativus. Bondmen in Doomsday are called Servi,
and differed from Villani. -- Et de toto tenemento, quod de ipso tenet in
Bondagio in Soca de Nortone cum pertin. Mon. Angl. 2. par. fol. 609. a.

Bonis Arrestandis, Is a Writ, which see in Arrestandis bonis.

Bonis non amovendis, Is a Writ to the Sheriffs of London, etc. to charge them,
that one, against whom a Judgment is obtained in an Action, and who prosecutes
a Writ of Error, be not suffered to remove his Goods, till the Error be tried.
Reg. of Writs, fol. 131. b.

Booting or Boting Corn, Certain Rent-Corn anciently so called: The Tenants of
the Manor of Haddenham in Com. Bucks, heretofore paid Booting Corn to the
Prior of Rochester. Antiquity of Purveyance, fol. 418. Perhaps it was so
called, as being paid by the Tenants, by way of Bote (Boot we still call it) or
compensation to the Lord, for his making them Leases, etc. See Bote.

Bordagium, The Tenure of Bord-lands, which see. Item ordinatum est, quod omnes
qui terras and tenementa tenent per Bordagium, habeant super singulis
Bordagiis, quae per praedictum servicium tenentur, capitalem quandam mansionem
in loco ad hoc consueto, etc. Ordinac. Justic. Itin. in Insula de Jersey.

Bordarii seu Borduanni, Often occur in Domesday; by some esteemed to be Bores,
Husbandmen, or Cotagers; which are there always put after Villains. Dicantur
Bordarii vel quod in tugurio (quae Cottagia vocant) habitabant, seu villarum
limitibus, quasi Borderers. Spelm. Tenentes per servitia plus servilia quam
villani, and qui tenent nisi paucas acras. M. S. but see Bordlands.

Bord-halfpeny (Sax. Board, tabula, and hafpeny, obolus) Is Money paid in Fairs
and Markets for setting up Tables, Bords, and Stalls, for sale of Wares. In
antiquis Chartis multi immunes fiunt ab ista solutione, says Spelman. It is
corruptly written Borthalpeny and Brodhalpeny in some Authors.

Bord-lands, The Lands which Lords keep in their hands for maintenance of their
Board or Table. Est Dominicum quod quis habet ad mensam suam and proprie, sicut
sunt Bord-lands, Anglice, i. Dominicum ad mensam. Bract. lib 4. tract. 3. cap.
9. number. 5. Which possession was anciently termed Bordage. Sax. Dict. verbo
Board. And the Bordarii (often mentioned in Domesday) were such as held those
Lands, which we now call Demain Lands. See Antiq. of Purveyance, fol. 49.

Borow or Borough (Sax. Borhoe, Fr. Burg) Signifies a Corporate Town, which is
not a City. Anno 2 Edw. 3. cap. 3. As also such a Town or place as sends
Burgesses to Parliament, the number whereof you may see in Cromp. Jurisd. fol.
24. Probably Borhoe was anciently taken for those Companies, consisting of Ten
Families, which were combined to be one another Pledge. See Bracton, lib. 3.
tract. 2. cap. 10. and Lamberts Duty of Constables, page 8. Verstegan says,
That Burg or Burgh, whence we say Borough, signifies a Town, having a Wall or
some kind of Enclosure about it; and that those places which in old time had
among our Ancestors the name of Borough, were one way or other, fenced or
fortified. See Head-borow and Borow-head.

Borow-head alias Head-borow (from the Sax. Borhoe and Head) signifies
(according to Lambert, in his Treatise of Constables) the Head-man or chief
pledge of the Decury or Borow, chosen by the rest to speak and act in their
name, in those things that concerned them.

Borow-holders alias Bursholders, quasi Borhoe-ealders, are the same with
Borowheads. Bracton calls them Borghy-Alders, Lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10.

Borow-English (Sax. Borhoe Englisc) Is a customary Descent of Lands, whereby
in all places, where this Custom holds, Lands and Tenements descend to the
youngest Son; or, if the owner have no issue, to his youngest Brother, as in
Edmunton. Kitchen, fol 102. And the reason of this Custom (according to
Littleton) is, For that the youngest is presumed in Law, to be least able to
shift for himself.

Borow Goods Divisable. These words are found in the Statute of Acton Burnel,
11 Edw. 1. As, before the Statutes of 32 and 34 Hen. 8. no Lands were Divisable
at the Common Law, but in ancient Baronies; so perhaps, at the making the
foresaid Statute of Acton-Burnel, it was doubtful, whether Goods were
Divisable, but in ancient Borows. For it seems by the Writ De rationabili part
bonorum, anciently the Goods of a Man were partable between his Wife and
Children.

Borthalpeny. See Bord-halpeny.

Boscage (Boscagium) Is used for that Food, which Wood and Trees yield to
Cattle, Mast: From the Gr. (...). Pascere.

Boscaria -- Ut ipsi possunt domos and Boscaria satis competentia aedificare --
Mon. Angl. 2 p. fol. 302. It may either signify Wood-houses, from Boscus; or
Ox-houses, from Bos.

Boscus, Is an ancient word used in the Law of England, for all manner of Wood.
The Italian uses Bosco in the same sense, and the French, Boys. Boscus is
divided into Highwood or Timber (Haut-bois) and Copice or Under-wood
(Sub-Bois.) High-wood is properly called Saltus, and in Fleta, Maeremium.

Bosinnus (From the Fr. Bouzine, A Rustical Trumpet or Wind-instrument, made of
Pitched Barks.) By Inquisition after the death of Laurence Hastings, Earl of
Pembroke, 22 Edw. 3. The Manor of Aston Cantlow (de Cantelupo) in Com. War. is
returned to be held in Capite of the King by these words. Quod quidem Manerium
per se tenetur de Domino Rege in Capite per servitium inveniendi unum hominem
peditem cum quadam Ar^u sine Corda, cum uno Bosinno sine tappa per xl. dies
sumptibus propriis, quoties fuerit guerra in Wallia. Ex Record. Turris Londini.

Quaere, If Tappa (from the Fr. Tapon, i. the Bung or Stopple) be not the
Buckhole or Stopple of the Instrument where they blow.

Bote (Sax.) Compensation, recompense, satisfaction, or amends. Hence Man-bote
alias Mon-bote, compensation or amends for a Man slain, who was bound to
another: In King Ina's Laws set out by Lambert, cap. 96. you may see what rate
was ordained for expiation of this offense. Hence also our common phrase to
boot. i. compensationis gratia. See Hedge-bote, Plow-bote, House-bote; and see
Skene, verbo, Bote.

Boteless. i. Sine emenda. Int. Plac. Trin. 12 Edw. 2. Ebor. 48. We retain the
word still in Common Speech.

Botha, A Booth, Stall, or Standing, made in Fairs or Markets. -- Et duas
mansuras liberas ad Bothas suas faciendas. Mon. Angl. 2 p. fol. 132.

Botiler Of the King (Pincerna Regis) Anno 43 Edw. 3. cap. 3. Is an Officer
that provides the Kings Wines; who (according to Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 21.) may
by virtue of his Office out of every Ship laden with Sale-Wines, Unum dolium
eligere in prora navis ad opus Regis, and aliud in puppi, and pro qualibet
pecia reddere tantum 20 solid. Mercatori. Si autem plura inde habere voluerit,
been licebit, dum tamen precium fide dignorum judicio pro Rege apponatur.

Bottomry or Botomary (Anno 16 Car. 2. cap. 6.) Is, when the Master of a Ship
borrows Money upon the Kiel or Bottom of his Ship, and binds the Ship it self,
That if the Money be not paid by the day assigned, the Creditor shall have the
Ship. Ceo Bottomage est quand argent est borrow sur le Keil del Neif, and le
Neif oblige al payment de ceo. Viz. Si ne soit pay al temps, que l'auter avera
le Neif Latches Rep. fol. 252. Scarboroughs Case.

Others define it thus, When I. S. lends Money to a Merchant, that wants it to
Traffic, and is to be paid a greater sum at the return of the Ship, standing
to the hazard of the Voyage; and though the profit be above six per cent, it is
not reckoned Usury.

Bovata terrae, Is as much as one Ox can Plough. Octo bovatae terrae faciunt
carucatam terrae, octo carucatae faciunt unum Feodum Militis. XVIII acrae
faciunt Bovatam terrae. M. S. cum notis in Statut. See Oxgang.

Bouche of Court, or as the vulgar call it Budge of Court, Is to have meat and
drink scot free there: For so is the Fr. Avoir Bouche a Court, to be in
Ordinary at Court. And this anciently extended as well to the Court of
Noblemen, who were Subjects, as to the Kings Court. As appears by this Deed.

CEste Endenture faite parentre lui Nobles hommes Monsieur Tho. Beauchamp,
Count de Warwyke, d une part, and Monsieur Johan Russell de Strengesham
Chivalier d'autre part, tesmoigne que le dit Mounsieur Johan est demoure ove le
dit Count pur term de sa vie, pur la pees and pur guerre, and prendra pur la
pees du dit Count annuelement vynt livres, de la vie du dit Mounsieur Johan,
del Manoir le dit Count de Chedworth en le Countee de Gloucestre, and pur la
guerre quarant livres, and serra pay annuelement as terms de la Nativitee
Seinte John le Baptiste and de Nowel per ovels portions des issues du dit
Manoir de Chedworth, per les mains del gardeyn de mesme le Manoir, and avera le
dit Mons. Johan pur la pees, quant il serra maunde de venir al dit Count,
Bouche au Court pur lui mesme, un Chamberlein and un Garson, feyn, provendre
and Ferrure pur trois Chivaulx pur la temps de sa demoure, Et pur la guerre le
dit Mons. Johan Mountra lui mesme covenablement, and avera Bouche au Court, ou
liverie pur lui mesme, une Chamberlein and trois Garsons, ou gages al afferant
and feyn, provendre and Ferrure pur cynk chivaulx en manner come autre de son
estat, ove le dit Count, prendront. Et si il preigne prisoner, soit enter le
dit Count and le dit Mons. Johan, si come il fait parentre lui and autres
Bachulers de sa retenue pur term de vie. Et voet and grante le dit Count per
cestes presents Lettres, que si la dite rent annuele de xx l. pur la pees, ou
de xl l. pur laguerre soit a derere and nyent pay pur un moy apres ascun des
terms avantditz, que bien lise au dit Mons. Johan ou a son Attornie en celle
party en le dite Manoir de Chedworth destreindre pur les arrerages de la dite
rent, etc. Done a nostre Chastel de Warwyke le xxix. jour del moys de Marcz
l'an du regne le Roy Richard Second, puis le Conquest, sisme.

Boveria, An Ox-house or Ox-stall -- Ad faciendum ibi Boverias suas and alias
domos usibus suis necessarias, etc. Mon. Angl. 2. par. fol. 210. a. Loca ubi
stabulantur Boves; according to Gloss. in x. Seriptores.

Bound (Bunda) -- Secundum metas, maeras, bundas, and Marchias Forestae, 8 Edw.
3. Itin. Pick. fol. 6. Sir Edw. Coke in 4 Inst. fol. 318. derives it from the
Saxon, Bunna, but the Saxon Dictionary affords no such word.

Bow-bearer, Is an under Officer of the Forest, whose Oath will inform you the
nature of his Office, in these words.

I Will true Man be to the Master of this Forest, and to his Lieutenant, and in
their absence I shall truly over-see, and true Inquisition make, as well of
sworn Men as unsworn in every Bailiwick, both in the North Bail, and South Bail
of this Forest, and of all manner of Trespass done, either to Vert or Venison,
I shall truly endeavor to attach, or cause them to be attached, in the next
Court of Attachment, there to be presented, without any concealment had to my
knowledge. So help me God. Crompt. Jurisd. fol. 201.

Bozones. See Busones.

Brandy, A kind of Spirit or Strongwater, made chiefly in France, and
extracted from the Lees of Wine or Cider, mentioned in the Act, 20 Car. 2. cap.
1. Upon an Argument in the Exchequer, Anno 1668. Whether Brandy were a
Strong-water or Spirit, It was resolved to be a Spirit. But 25 Nov. 1669. by a
Grand Committee of the whole House of Commons, it was voted to be a
Strong-water, and not a Spirit.

Brasium, Malt: In the ancient Statutes Brasiator is taken for a Brewer, from
the Fr. Brasseur; and at this day also for a Malster or Malt-maker. It was
adjudged, 18 Edw. 2. Quod venditio Brasii non est venditio victualium, nec
debet puniri sicut venditio Panis, vini and Cervisiae and hujusmodi contra
formam Statut.

Breach Carnium. Per Breach Carnium Thomas Crew, (Magister Hospitalis Sancti
Johannis Baptistae extra portam borealem Cestriae) clamat, quod omnes tenentes
sui infra eorum libertates residentes sint quieti de venditione carnium. Pla.
in Itin. apud Cestriam 14 Hen. 7.

Bread of Treet or Trite. (Panis Tritici, Wheaten Bread) Was one of those sorts
of Bread mentioned in the Statute of Assise of Bread and Ale, 51 Hen. 3. Stat.
1. where we read of Wastel Bread, Cocket Bread and Bread of Treet, which I
think do gradually correspond with what we now call White, Wheaten, and Boulted
or Course Bread. See Cocket.

Bred, Is used by Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 15. for Broad, as, Too long
and too bred.

Brehon, The Irish call their Judges Brehones, and thereupon the Irish Law is
called the Brehon Law. See 4 Inst. fol. 358.

Bretoyse or Bretois -- Sciant -- quod ego Henricus de Penebrugge Dedi --
Omnibus liberis Burgensibus meis Burgi mei de Penebrugge omnes libertates and
liberas consuetudines secundum legem de Bretoyse nundinis and seriis appurtin.
secundum tenorem Chartae Domini Henrici Regis quam habeo. Habendum, etc. sine
dat. Secundum legem de Bretoyse, must certainly signify, Legem Marchiarum; or,
The Law of the Britains, or Welshmen: For Penebrugge (now Pembridge) is a Town
in Herefordshire, bordering upon Wales.

Brevibus and Rotulis liberandis, Is a Writ or Mandat to a Sheriff to deliver
unto the new Sheriff, chosen in his Room, the County and the appurtenances,
with the Rolls, Briefs, Remembrances, and all other things belonging to that
Office. Reg. of Writs, fol. 295. a.

Bribery (from the Fr. Briber, to devour or eat greedily) Is a great
misprision, when any Man in judicial place takes any Fee, Pension, Gift,
Reward, or Brocage, for doing his Office, but of the King only. Fortescu, cap.
51. and 3 Instit. fol. 145.

Bribour (Fr. Bribeur, i. a Beggar) Seems to signify in some of our old
Statutes, one that Pilfers other Men's Goods, as Clothes out of a Window, or the
like.

Brief (breve) Signifies a Writ, whereby a Man is summoned or attached to
answer any Action; or (more largely) any Writ in writing, issuing out of any of
the Kings Courts of Record at Westminster, whereby any thing is commanded to be
done in order to Justice, or the Kings command, and is called a Brief, or
Breve; Quia Breviter and paucis verbis intentionem proferentis exponit and
explanat, sicut regula juris rem quae est Breviter enarrat, says Bracton, lib.
5. tract. 5. cap. 17. number. 2. Also Letters Patent or a License from the King or
Privy Council, granted to any Subject to make a Collection for any public or
private loss, is commonly styled a Brief.

Briga (Fr. Brigue, i. debate or contention) -- Et posuit terram illam in
Brigam and causam intricandi terram, scilicet, per diversa fraudulenta
Feoffamenta; Ideo committitur Maresc. Ebor. Hill. 18 Edw. 3. Rot. 28.

Brigandine (Fr.) A Coat of Mail, or a fashion of ancient Armor, consisting of
many joynted and Scale-like Plates, very pliant unto, and easy for the Body,
mentioned Anno 4 and 5 Phil. and Ma. cap. 2. Some confound it with Haubergeon;
and some with Brigantine, (in writing which, there is only the d turned into
t) which signifies a low, long, and swift Sea-Vessel, having some twelve or
thirteen Oars on a side.

Brig-bote or Brug-bote, Significat quietantiam reparationis Pontium. Fleta,
lib. 1. cap. 47. Pontis refectio vel restauratio. It is Compounded of (Brig) a
Bridge, and (Bote) which is a yiedling of amends, or supplying a defect. See
Bote and Seldens titles of Honor, fol. 622. Arcis pontisque constructio.

Brocage, (Anno 12 Rich. 2. cap. 2.) Means used by a Spoaksman; the Wages,
Hire, or Trade of a Broaker. Anno 1 Jac. cap. 21. it is written Brokerage. Anno
11 Hen. 4. number. 28. not Printed.

Brochia (from the Fr. broc, Quod lagenam majorem aut cantharum significat.) Si
quis teneat per servitium inveniendi Domino Regi, certis locis and certis
temporibus, unum hominem and unum equum and saccum cum Brochia pro aliqua
necessitate, vel utilitate exercitum suum contingentem. Bracton, lib. 2. tract.
1. cap. 6. By which it should seem Saccus was to carry the dry, and Brochia the
liquid things. See Saccus.

Brodehalfpeny, Rectius Bordhalfpeny, Signifies a small Toll, by Custom paid to
the Lord of the Town, for setting up Tables, Bords, or Booths, in a Fair or
Market: From which, they who are freed by the Kings Charter, had this word in
their Letters Patent; in so much, as now the freedom it self (for shortness of
Speech) is termed Bordhalfpeny. See Bordhalpeny.

Broggers. Vide Brokers.

Brokers (Brokarii) Are of two sorts, the one an Exchange-Broker, whose Trade
is to deal in matters of Money and Merchandise between Englishmen and
Stranger-Merchants, by drawing the Bargain to Particulars, and the Parties to
Conclusion; for which they have a Fee or Reward. These are called Broggers;
Anno 10 Rich. 2. cap. 1. and in Scotland Broccarii, that is (according to
Skene,) Mediators or Intercessors in any Transaction, Paction, or Contract, as
in Buying, Selling, or Contracts of Marriage. Broggers of Corn, Are used in a
Proclamation of Q. Elizabeth for Badgers, Bakers Chron. fol. 411. He that would
know what these Brokers were wont, and ought to be, let him read the Statute of
1 Jac. cap. 21. The other is the Pawn-broker, who commonly keeps a Shop, and
lets out Money to poor and necessitous people upon Pawns, not without Extortion
for the most part: These are more properly called Friperers or Pawn-takers, and
are not of that antiquity or credit, as the former; nor does the said Statute
allow them to be Brokers, though now commonly so called.

Brothel-houses. King Henry the Eighth, by Proclamation 30 Martii. 37 of His
Reign, suppressed all the Stews or Brothel-houses, which long had continued on
the Bankside in Southwark; for that they were prohibited by the Law of God, and
Law of this Land. 3 Inst. fol. 205. And Rot. Parl. 14 R. 2. number. 32.

Bruck-bote (from the Germ. Bruck, i. Bridge and Bote, i. Compensation)
Signifies a Tribute or Contribution toward the mending or reedifying of
Bridges, whereof many are freed by Royal Charter; and thereupon the word is
used for the very Liberty or Exemption it self. See Pontage and Brig-bote.

Bru^ere (Fr. Bruyere, Lat. Bruyrium, erica, quasi ericetum) Heath and
Heath-ground. Pastura xi quarentenarum and dimid. longitudine and latitudine.
Bruaria 2 leucarum longitudine and latitudine. Domesd. Tit. Dorset Eccles.
Creneburn. Ingelingham. Hac autem appellatione Forenses vocant steriles
camporum solitudines, licet ^ricam non edant, Heath-ground. Spel.

Buckstall. -- Et sint quieti de Chevagio, Hondpeny, Buckstall, and Tristris,
and de omnibus misericordiis, etc. Privileg. de Semplingham. By the Stat. 19
Hen. 7. cap. 11. it seems to be a Deer-hay, Toil, or great Net to catch Deer
with; which by the said Statute is not to be kept by any man that has not a
Park of his own, under pain of 40 l.

To be quit of Buckstals, i. Ubi homines convenire tenentur, ibidem convenire
ad stableiam faciendam circa feras and ad easdem congregand. quietum esse de
hoc servitio, quando Dominus chaseaverit. 4 Inst. fol. 306.

Buck-wheat (Mentioned in the Statute 15 Car. 2. cap. 5.) Is otherwise called
French Wheat, and well known.

Budge of Court. See Bouche.

Buggery (According to Sir Edward Coke, Rep. 12. page 36.) Comes from the Ital.
Buggerare, to Bugger, and is described to be Carnalis copula contra naturam,
and haec vel per confusionem specierum, sc. A Man or a Woman with a bruit
Beast, vel sexuum; A Man with a Man, or a Woman with a Woman. This offense
committed with Mankind or Beast, is Felony without Clergy; it being a sin
against God, Nature, and the Law, and was brought into England by the Lombards,
as appears by Rot. Parl. 50 Edw. 3. number. 58. See the Stat. 25 H. 8. cap. 6.
revived 5 Eliz. 17. Fitzh. Not. Br. fol. 269. b. In ancient time such Offenders
were burnt by the Common Law. This most detestable sin was justly excepted out
of the Act of General Pardon, 12 Car. 2. cap. 8.

Bull (Bulla, Ital. Bolla) was a Gold Ornament or Jewel for Children, hollow
within, and made in fashion of a Heart to hang about their Necks; but now it is
most usually taken for a Brief or Mandate of the Pope, or Bishop of Rome, from
the Lead or sometimes Golden Seal affixed thereto; which Matthew Paris Anno
1237. thus describes. In Bulla Domini Papae stat imago Pauli a dextris Crucis
in medio Bullae figuratae, and Petri a sinistris. The word is often used in our
Statutes, as 28 Hen. 8. cap. 16. And 1 and 2 Phil. and Ma. cap. 8. -- 13 Eliz.
cap. 2. Non solum sigillum significat imprimens and impressum, sed ipsas etiam
literas bullatas and interdum schedulam seu billam. Misit quoque Archiepiscopus
(Cantuariae) Regi and Concilio suo schedulam sive Bullam, in hunc modum
continentem, etc. Spelm William de Brinckle recovered at the Common Law by
Verdict against Otho, Parson of the Church of Beston x l. Pro substractione
unius Bullae Papalis de Ordinibus, alterius Bullae de legitimatione, and
tertiae Bull ae de veniam exorantibus pro animabus antecessorum suorum. Trin. 4
Edw. 3. Rot. 100. Bulla, Olim sigillum significans. Gloss. in x. Scriptores.

Bullenger. The Commons do Petition, that certain Commissions lately sent to
Cities for the making of certain Boats and Bullengers, being done without
consent of Parliament, might be repealed. Rot. Parl. 2 Hen. 4. number. 22.

Bullion (Fr. Billon, i. The Metta^ whereof base Coin is made) Signifies with
us Gold or Silver, in Mass or Billet. Anno 9 Edw. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 2. And
sometimes the Kings Exchange or place, whither such Gold in the Lu^p is brought
to be tried or exchanged. 27 Edw. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 14. And 4 Hen. 4. cap. 10.

Bullion seems also to signify of old, a quantity of Salt, according to
Gervase of Tilbury, writing of the Salt Springs in Worcestershire.

Bultel, Is the refuse of the Meal, after it is dressed by the Baker; also the
Bag wherein it is dressed. I find the word mentioned in the Statute,
entitled, Assisa panis and Cervisiae. Anno 51 Hen. 3. Hence Bulted Bread,
Course Bread.

Bunda. See Bound.

Burcheta (from the Fr. Berche) A kind of Gun, mentioned in the Forest Records.

Burgage (Burgagium, Fr. Bourgage) Is a tenure proper to Borows, whereby the
Inhabitants by ancient Custom hold their Lands or Tenements of the King, or
other Lord, at a certain yearly Rent. It is a kind of Soccage, says Swinburn,
pa. 3. Sect. 3. number. 6. Ad militiam non pertinet, habetur ideo inter ignobiles
tenuras. Mentioned 37 Hen. 8. cap. 20. It was also anciently used for a
Dwelling House in a Borow-Town.

Sciant -- Quod ego Editha filia Johannis de Aula in ligea virginitate and
potestate mea dedi -- Deo and Beatae Mariae and omnibus Sanctis and
Ele^mosinariae Leominstr. pro salute Animae meae -- In liberam puram and
perpetuam Eleemosinam totum illud Burgagium cum edificiis and pertin. suis quod
jacet in Villa Leominstr. Ex libro cartarum Priorat. Leom.

Burghbrech alias Borgbrech (Sax. Burhbryce, i. Fidejussionis fractio, vel
plegii violatio) Angli omnes decemvirali olim fidejussione pacem regiam
stipulati sunt; quod autem in hanc commissum est, Burghbrech dicitur, ejusque
cognitio and vindicta, Regiis Chartis, plurimis credebantur, pro quorum
dignitate, mulcta alias levior fuit, alias gravior. Vide LL. Canuti, cap. 55.
Burghbrich, i. Laesio libertatis aut septi. Gallice, blesmure de Court ou de
close. Polychron, lib. 1. cap. 50.

Burgbote (Sax. Burg, Burh, Burgus, and Bote, compensatio) A Tribute or
Contribution, toward the building or repairing of Castles or Walls of Defense;
or toward the building of a Burow or City. From which diverse had exemption by
the ancient Charters of the Saxon Kings; whence it is ordinarily taken for the
liberty or exemption it self. Rastal. Significat (says Fleta) quietantiam
reparationis murorum civitatis vel Burgi. Lib. 1. cap. 47.

Burgheristh. -- Istae consuetudines pertinent ad Taunton, Burgheristh,
Latrones, Pacis infractio, Hanifare, Denarii de Hundret and Denarii S. Petri,
etc. Quaere. M. S. Camdeni penes Will. Dugdale Ar.

Burgemote (Sax.) Curia vel conventus Burgi vel Civitatis; the Borow-Court. --
Et habeatur in anno ter Burgesmotus, and Schiremotus bis, nisi saepius sit, and
intersit Episcopus and Aldermannus, and doceant* ibi Dei rectum and seculi. LL
Canuti. M. S. cap. 44.

Burgesses (Burgarii and Burgenses) Are proper^y Men of Trade, or the
Inhabitants of a Borow or Walled Town; yet we usually apply this name to the
Magistrates of such a Town, as the Bailiff and Burgesses of Leominster. But we
do now usually call those Burgesses who serve in Parliament, for any such Borow
or Corporation. Filius vero Burgensis aetatem habere tunc intelligitur, cum
discrete sciverit Denarios numerare, and pannos ulnare and alia paterna negotia
similiter exercere. Glanvile, lib 7. cap. 9. In Germany, and other Countries,
they confound Burgess and Citizen; but we distinguish them, as appears by the
Stat. 5 Rich 2. cap. 4. where the Classes of this Commonwealth are thus
enumerated. Count, Baron, Baneret, Chivaleer de Countee, Citezein de City,
Burgess de Burgh. See the Statute of Merton, cap 7. And Coke on Littl. fol. 80.

Burglary (from the Fr. bourg, i. pagus, villa; and larecin, i. furtum; or,
laron, fur. Coke, lib. 4. fol. 39.) Is a felonious entering into another Man's
Dwell^ng-house, wherein some person usually inhabits, or into a Church in the
night time, with intent to commit some Felony therein; as to ki^l some Man,
steal somewhat thence, or to do some other fe onious act, though he execute it
not.

Burglary in the natural signification of the word, is nothing but the robbing
a House by night, or breaking in with an intent to rob, or do some other
Felony. The like offense by day, we call House-robbing or House-breaking, by a
particular name. How many ways Burglary may be committed, see Cromp. Just. of
Peace, fol. 28, 29, 30. and 3 Part. Inst. fol. 363. It shall not have benefit
of Clergy, Anno 18 Eliz. cap. 7.

Burghware (q. burgi vir) A Citizen or Burgess. Willielmus Rex salutat
Willielmum Epis opum and Goffredum Portgresium and omnem Burghware infra
London. Charta Willielmi ^^n. Londoniensibus confecta.

Burlimen. See Sucking.

Bursa, A Purse. -- Reddendo inde ad Bursam Abbatis vi d. ad festum Sancti
Michaelis, etc. Ex lib. Ca^tarum Priorat. Leominstr.

Busca or Buscus, Under-wood or Brushwood.

Busones Comitatus. Justiciarii, vocatis ad se qua^^or vel sex vel pluribus de
Majoribus Comitatus, qui dicuntur Busones Comitatus, and ad quorum nutum
dependent vota aliorum, etc. Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 1. number. 1. Quare.

But (Butticum) Every But of Malmesey to contain at the least 126 Gallons. Anno
1 Rich. 3. cap. 13.

Butlerage of Wines, Signifies that Imposition upon Sale-Wine brought into the
Land, which the Kings Butler, by virtue of his Office, may take of every Ship;
that is, Two shillings of every Tun of Wine imported by Strangers. Anno 1 Hen.
8. cap. 5. See more in Botiler of the King, and Prisage. The Stat. 12 Car. 2.
cap. 24. for taking away of Purveyance, Does not extend to prejudice the
ancient duties of Butlerage, and Prisage of Wines, but they are to continue as
before the making this Act. See Calthrops Reports of Special Cases, page 23.
and 4 Inst. fol. 30.

Buzcarles or Buscarles (Buscarli and Buthsecarli) Sunt qui portus nauticos
custodiunt: Mariners or Scamen. Quando Rex ibat in expeditionem vel terra vel
mari, habebat de hoc Manerio aut xx sol. ad pascendos suos Buzecarl, aut unum
hominem ducebat secum pro honor quinque Hidarum Domesd. tit. Wiltsc. Wilton.
And Seldens Mare clausum, fol. 184. where it is written Butsecarli.

Buzones Judiciorum. Placita de temp. Johannis Regis. Gloc. 139. See Busones
Comitatus.

Bydalle. (Anno 26 Hen. 8. cap. 6.) See Bid-ale.

Byrlaw or Laws of Burlaw (Leges Rusticorum, from the Germ. Baur, i. Rusticus,
and Lauch, Lex.) Laws made by Husbandmen, concerning Neighborhood, to be kept
among themselves. Skene, page 33. See Bylaws.

C.
THe Letter C among the Ancients, denoted Condemnation. See Ignoramus.

Cablish (Cablicia) among the Writers of the Forest Laws, signifies Brush-wood,
or Browse-wood. Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 163. But Sir Henry Spelman thinks, it more
properly signifies Wind-faln-wood, because 'twas written of old Cadibulum, from
cadere: or, if derived from the Fr. Chablis, it also signifies Wind-falnwood.

Cabo bona speransa. See Cape bona esperanza.

Cade of Herrings, Is 500. Of Sprats 1000. Book of Rat^s, tol. 45. Yet I find
anciently 600. made the Cade of Herring, 120 to the hundred.

Calandring of Worsted-stuffs (mentioned 5 Hen. 8. cap. 4. and 25 ejusdem. cap.
5.) signifies to smooth, trim, and give them a gloss; it is a Trade both in
London and Norwich.

Calangium, Challenge, claim, or dispute. Sciant -- quod ego Godefridus de
Doddensull, cum assensu Amiliae uxoris meae, dedi. -- Deo and Beatae Mariae and
Dominis meis Priori and Conventui Wigorn. in pura and perpetua cl^emosina unam
acram terrae -- sine aliqua reclamatione seu calangiv, etc. sine dat. penes
Thomam Child Arm. -- Boscum, qui suit in calengio inter ipsum and Walterum.
Mon. Angl. 2. par. fol. 252. b.

Calcetum and Calceata, a Causey or Causway. See Causey.

Calends (Calendae) properly the first day of every Month, being spoken by it
self, or the very day of the New Moon, which commonly fall out together: If
Pridie be placed before it, then it signifies the last day of the foregoing
Month, as Pridie Calend. Maii, is the last day of April: If any number be
placed with it, it signifies that day in the former Month, which comes so much
before the Month named; as the Tenth Calends of October, is the Twentieth day
of September, because, if one begin at October, and reckon backwards, that
Twentieth day of September is the Tenth day before October. In March, May,
July, and October, the Calends begin at the Sixteenth day, in other Months at
the Fourteenth; which Calends must ever bear the name of the Month following,
and be numbered backward from the First day of the said following Months. See
more in Hoptons Concordance, page 69. And see Ides. Dictum de Kenelworth is
dated the day before the Calends of November, Anno 1256. In the Dates of Deeds,
the day of the Month, by Nones, Ides, or Calends, is sufficient. 2 Inst. fol.
675.

Campfight. See Champion, and 3 Instit. fol. 221.

Candlemass-day, (Sax. Candelmaesse) The Feast of the Purification of the
Blessed Virgin Mary (2 Febr.) instituted in memory and honor, both of the
Presentation of our Blessed Lord, and the Purification of the Blessed Virgin in
the Temple of Jerusalem, the Fortieth day after her happy Childbirth,
performed according to the Law of Moses, Levit. 12. 6. It is called Candlemass,
or a Mass of Candles, because before Mass was said that day, the Church
blessed, that is, deputed or set a part for sacred use, Candles for the whole
year, and made a Procession with hallowed Candles in the hands of the faithful,
in memory of the Divine Light, wherewith Christ illaminated the whole Church at
his Presentation, when old Simeon styled him, A light to the Revelation of the
Gentiles, and the Glory of his people Israel, S. Luke 2. 32. This Feastival-day
is no day in Court, and is the Grand day of Candlemass Term in the Inns of
Court.

Cantel (among the Statutes made in the Reigns of Henry the Third, Edward the
First or Second, but uncertain which, set down in Poulton, fol. 110. cap. 4.
and 9. -- Toll shall be taken by the Raze, and not by the Heap or Cantel; which
seems to signify the same we now call the Lump; as to buy by Measure, or by
the Lump.

Cantred, or rather Cantref, (Cantredus) Signifies an Hundred Villages, being a
British word compounded of the Adjective Cant, i. An Hundred, and Tref, a Town
or Village. In Wales the Counties are divided into Cantreds, as in England into
Hundreds. The word is used Anno 28 Hen. 8. cap 3.

Capacity (capacitas) An aptness to contain or receive. Our Law allows the King
two Capacities, A Natural, and a Politic: In the first, He may purchase Lands
to Him and His Heirs; in the later, to Him and His Successors. And a Parson
has the like.

Cape of Good Hope (Cabo de bon' speranza) A Promontory or Elbow of Land that
lies in Cafraria, a Province of Aethiopia Inferior, and was first discovered by
the Portugals, under the command of Bartholomew Diaz. Helyns Cosmog. fol. 984.
and is mentioned in the Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 18.

Cape (Lat.) Is a Writ Judicial touching Plea of Land or Tenements; so termed
(as most Writs are) of that word, which carries the especial est intention, or
end of it. And this Writ is divided into Cape Magnum and Cape Parvum: Both
which (as is before said in Attachment) take hold of things immovable, and
seem to differ in these points. First, Because Cape Magnum or the Grand Cape
lies before appearance, and (Cape Parvum) afterward. Secondly, The (Cape
Magnum) summons the Tenant to answer to the Default, and over to the Demandant.
Cape Parvum Summons the Tenant to answer to the Default only; and therefore is
called Cape Parvum or Petit Cape. Old Not. Br. fol. 161, 162. Yet Ingham says,
it is called Petit Cape, not because it is of small force, but that it consists
of few words.

Cape Magnum in the Old. Not. Br. is thus defined; Where a Man has brought a
Praecipe quod Reddat of a thing that touches Plea of Land, and the Tenant makes
default at the day to him given in the Original Writ, then this Writ shall go
for the King, to take the Land into His hands; and if the Tenant come not at
the day given him thereby, he loses his Land, etc. A Form of this Writ, you
may see in the Reg. Judicial, fol. 1. b. Of this Writ, and the Explication of
its true force and effect, read Bracton, lib 3. tract. 3. cap. 1. number. 4, 5,
and 6.

Cape Parvum or Petit Cape (in Old. Not. Br. fol. 162.) Is thus defined; Where
the Tenant is summoned in Plea of Land, and comes at the Summons, and his
appearance is of Record; and at the day given him, prays the View, and having
it granted, makes default, then shall Issue this Writ for the King, etc. The
difference betwixt the Grand Cape and Petit Cape (which in effect or
consequence, are alike) is, that the Grand Cape is Awarded upon the Defendant
or Tenants not appearing or demanding the View in such Real Actions, where the
Original Writ does not mention the parcels or particulars demanded: And the
Petit Cape, after Appearance or View granted. Its Form see in Reg. Jud. fol. 2.
and Fleta, lib. 6. cap. 44.

Cape ad Valentiam, Is a Species of Cape Magnum, so called of the end whereto
it tends, and (in Old Not. Br. fol. 161.) thus described. Where I am impleaded
of Lands, and I vouch to warrant another, against whom the Summons Ad
Warrantizandum has been Awarded, and the Sheriff comes not at the day given;
then, if the Demandant recover against me, I shall have this Writ against the
Vouchee, and shall recover so much in value of the Lands of the Vouchee, if he
has so much, if not, then I shall have execution of such Lands and Tenements
as descend to him in Fee; or, if he purchase afterward, I shall have against
him a Resummons; and if he can say nothing, I shall recover the value. This
Writ lies before Appearance. Of these, and their diverse uses, see the Table of
the Reg. Judicial, verbo, Cape.

Capias, is a Writ of two sorts, one before Judgment, called Capias ad
Respondendum, where the Sheriff, upon Original, or other Writ in a Personal
Action returns Nihil habet in Baliva nostra. The other is a Writ of Execution
after Judgment, being also of diverse kinds; as Capias ad Satisfaciendum,
Capias pro Fine, Capias Utlagatum, after Judgment, etc.

Capias ad Satisfaciendum, Is a Writ of Execution after Judgment, lying where a
Man recovers in an Action Personal; as for Debt, Damages, Detinue, etc. in the
Kings Court: In which case, this Writ Issues to the Sheriff, commanding him to
take the body of him, against whom the Debt is recovered, who shall be put in
prison, till he make satisfaction.

Capias pro Fine, Is where one, being by Judgment fined to the King, upon some
offense committed against a Statute, does not discharge it, according to the
Judgment: By this therefore is his body to be taken and committed to prison,
until he pay the Fine. Coke, lib. 3. fol. 12. Or where, upon a Non est factum
pleaded, his Plea is, by evidence or his own after-acknowledgment, not made out
or verified, and the like.

Capias Utlagatum, Is a Writ which lies against him, who is outlawed upon any
Action Personal or Criminal, by which the Sheriff apprehends the party
outlawed, for not appearing upon the Exigend, and keeps him in safe custody
till the day of return, and then presents him to the Court, there farther to be
ordered for his contempt; which (if in the Common Pleas) was in former times to
be committed to the Fleet, there to remain till he had sued out the Kings
Charter of Pardon, and appeared to the Action. At present, in the Kings Bench,
the Outlary cannot be reversed, unless the Defendant appear in person, and by a
present of Gloves to the Judges, implore and obtain their savor to reverse it.
And in the Common Pleas, the Defendant (not being an Executor or Administrator)
is now to give good Bail (which he is allowed to do by Atturny) to answer the
Action, if the Debt or Damage demanded be 20 l. or above, and to pay the
Plaintiffs charges, before the outlary be reversed. And, by a special Capias
Utlagatum in the same Writ, the Sheriff is commanded, and may seize all the
Defendants Lands, Goods, and Chattels for the contempt to the King; and the
Plaintiff may (after an Inquisition taken thereupon, and returned into the
Exchequer) obtain a Lease of the Lands extended, and a grant of the Goods,
whereby to compel the Defendant to appear; which, when he shall do and reverse
the Utlary, are to be restored to him. See Old Not. Br. fol. 154. and Table of
Reg. Judic. verbo, Capias.

Capias in Withernamium de Averiis, Is a Writ lying for Cattle in Withernam.
Reg. of Writs, fol. 82. and 83. See Withernam.

Capias in Withernamium de Homine, Is a Writ that lies for a Servant in
Withernam. Reg. fol. 79. and 80. See Withernam.

Capias conductos ad proficiscendum, Is an Original Writ, which lies, by the
Common Law, against any Soldier that has covenanted to serve the King in his
War, and appears not at the time and place appointed, directed to two of the
Kings Sergeants at Arms to arrest, and take him wheresoever he may be found,
and to bring him Coram Consilio nostro; with a Clause of Assistance, 4 Inst.
fol. 128.

Capite (from Caput, i. Rex, unde tenere in Capite, i. Tenere de Rege, omnium
terrarum Capite) Was a Tenure which held of the King immediately, as of his
Crown, were it by Knights Service or Soccage. Broke tit. Tenures, 46, 94. Dyer,
fol. 123. number. 38. But, by Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. all Tenures by Knights
Service of the King, or of any other person, Knights Service in Capite, or
Soccage in Capite of the King, and the Fruits and consequences thereof, are
taken away and discharged from 24 Febr: 1645. And all Tenures of all Manors,
Lands, etc. held either of the King, or of any other person from that time,
shall be construed and taken for ever to be turned into free and common
Soccage. And all Tenures hereafter to be created by the King, upon any Gifts or
Grants of Manors, Lands, etc. are by that Statute ordained to be in free and
common Soccage only, and not by Knights Service, or in Capite, and are to be
discharged of all Wardship, etc.

Caption (Captio) When a Commission is executed, and the Commissioners names
subscribed to a Certificate, declaring when and where the Commission was
executed, that is called the Caption; which commonly begins thus -- Virtute
istius Commissionis nos, etc. Or Executio istius Commissionis patet in quadam
Schedula annexata, etc

Capture (Captura) The taking a prey, a little gain; an Arrest, or Seizure.
Anno 14 Car. 2. cap. 14.

Caput Baroniae, Is the Castle or chief Seat of a Nobleman, which is not to be
divided among Daughters (if there be no Son) but must descend to the eldest
Daughter, Caeteris filiabus aliunde satisfactis.

Carecta and Carectata, (Sax. Cret, unde Cart) A Cart, or Cart-load. -- Facient
precarias de Caruca and Carecta, i. De aratro and carro. Custumar. Prior.
Jews, M. S. -- Quinque Carectatas clausturae, ad praedictae terrae clausturam
sustinendam. Mon. Angl. 2. par. fol. 340. a.

Caretarius, A Carter. Sciant -- quod ago Herewardus Pril Dedi -- In liberam
puram and perpetuam Eleemosinam Deo and Altari B. Mariae in Conventuali
Ecclesia Leominstr. xii d annui reditus provenientes de quodam Mesuagio in
Marisco quod fuit Ricardi Caretarii, etc. sine Dat. Ex libro Cart. Priorat.
Leominstr. See Carreta.

Cark, Is a quantity of Wool, thirty whereof make a Sarpler. Anno 27 Hen. 6.
cap. 2. See Sarpler.

Carno, Seems to signify an immunity or privilege. Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 191.
Prior de Melton se and homines suos immunes clamat ab omnibus Amerciamentis in
Foresta and ab omnibus Geldis, Footgeldis, Buckstals, Tritis, Carno and Sumag.
etc. Itin. Pick. fol. 168. b. Quaere.

Carpemeals, A course kind of Cloth, made in the North of England; and
mentioned Anno 7 Jac. cap. 16.

Carreta (alias Carrecta) Was anciently used for a Carriage, Wain or Cart-load.
Sciant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Henricus de Ribesford Dedi -- Rogero
filio Ade Pistonis pro Homagio and Servicio suo totum pratum meum de Wiggemore.
Reddend. inde annuatim mibi and haeredibus meis ipse and haredes sui unam
Carretam soeni rationabilem and been foenatam, etc. Sine dat. Penes Tho.
Bridgwater genesis

Carrick or Carrack (Carrucha) A Ship of great burden; so called of the Italian
word Carico or Carco, a burden or charge. Mentioned 2 Rich. 2. cap. 4.

Cartel. See Chartel.

Carucage (Carucagium) As Hidage was a Taxation by Hides of Land; so Carucage
was, by Carucata s of Land. -- Dederunt S. Edmundo de qualibet Carucata terrae
in toto Episcopatu quatuor Denarios annuos, quod usque modo, ea de causa,
Carucagium est appellatum. Mon. Angl 1 par. fol. 294. a.

Carrucate or Carve of Land (Carrucata terrae, of the Fr. Charrue, i. aratrum)
Is a certain quantity of Land, by which the Subjects have sometimes been taxed;
whereupon the Tribute so levied, was called Carvagium. Bracton, lib. 2. cap.
26. number. 8.

Carucata t^rrae, A Plough Land, may contain Houses, Mills, Pasture, Meadow,
Wood, etc. Coke on Littl. Sect. 119. Carrucata is sometimes also used for a
Cart-load, -- Una Carrucata ligni in Foresta nostra, quae appellatur defensa.
Mon. Angl. 2. par. fol. 311. a. Littleton, cap. Tenure in Soccage, says that
Soca idem est quod Caruca, a Soke or Plough-Land are all one. Yet Stow in his
Annals, page 271. says, The same King Henry took Carvage, that is two Marks of
Silver of every Knights Fee, toward the Marriage of His Sister Isabel to the
Emperor: Where Carvage cannot be taken for a Plough-Land, except there were
some other farther division, whereby to raise of every Plough-Land so much, and
so consequently of every Knights Fee, that is, of every 680 Acres, two Marks of
Siver. Rastal, in his Exposition of Words, says, Carvage is to be quit, if the
King shall tax all the Land by Carves, that is, a privilege, whereby a Man is
exempted from Carvage. Skene says, it contains as great a Portion of Land as
may be labored and tilled in a year and day by one Plough, which also is called
Hilda or Hida terrae, a word used in the old British Laws. Lamb. in the end of
his Eirenarcha translates Carrucatam terrae, a Plough-Land. The word Carve is
mentioned in the Statutes of Wards and Relief, made 28 Edw. 1. And in Magna
Char. cap. 5. Anno 1200 facta est Pax inter Johannem Regem Angliae and P. Regem
Franciae, etc. Et mutuavit Regi Franciae 30 millia Marcarum, pro quibus
collectum est Carvagium in Anglia, scil. iii s. pro quolibet aratro. Ex
Registro Priorat. ^e Dunstaple in Bibl. Cotton. See Coke on Littl. fol. 69. a.

Cassatum and Cassata, Habitaculum cum terra idonea ad unam familiam alendam;
alias Casamentum; Saxonibus nostris ride; Beda, Familia.

Ego Forterus, famulus famulorum Dei, pro redemptione animae meae, unum
Cassatum dedi Aldberto Abbati, quae sita est juxta fluvium Aesee, ad portam
quae dicitur Bledenithe ad insulam parvam, and ad Ecclesiam beati Martini
Confessoris in propriam substantiam. Habendum, Donandumque cuicunque voluerit.
Qui hanc cartam infringere temptaverit, sciat seipsum a Communione Sanctorum
separatum and ab omnipotenti Deo. + Ego Forterus consensi and subscripsi. Acta
est autem haec donatio Anno DCC. XII. Indictione prima. Ex Reg. Glaston:
Caenob. penes Rad. Sheldon Arm.

Castle (Castellum) Is well known. Certum est Regis Hen. 2. temporibus Castella
1115 in Anglia Extitisse. Every Castle contains a Manor, so as every Constable
of a Castle, is Constable of a Manor. 2 Part. Instit. fol. 31.

Castellain (Fr. Chastellain) The Lord, Owner, or Captain of a Castle, or
sometimes the Constable of a Castle, or Fortified House. Bracton, lib. 5.
tract. 2. cap. 16. and Lib. 2. cap. 32. number. 2. And used in like sense, 3 Edw.
1 cap. 7. It is sometimes taken for him that has the custody of one of the
Kings Mansion Houses, though not a Castle or place of Defense. 2 Part. Inst.
fol. 31. Manwood, Part. 1. page 113. says, There is an Officer of the Forest
called Castellanus, who had the command of all or part of the Forest. Of the
use and extent of this Officer in France, see Cotgraves Dictionary, verbo
Chastellain.

Castelward (Castelgardum vel Wardum Castri) Is an Imposition laid upon such as
dwell within a certain compass of any Castle, toward the maintenance of such
as watch and ward the Castle. Magna Charta, cap. 20. and 32 Hen. 8. cap. 48. It
is sometimes used for the very circuit it self, which is inhabited by such as
are subject to this service; As in Stows Annals, page 632. -- Et capere ibidem
Castleward, viz. De qualibet districtione infra feodum ipsius Ducis capt. ad
Castrum (de Halton) ducti and ibidem una de causa, si per solam noctem
pernoctaverit, quatuor Denar. Pl. apud Cestriam, 31 Edw. 3.

Casu consimili, Is a Writ of Entry, granted, where Tenant by Courtesy, or
Tenant for Life, or for another Life, Aliens in Fee or in Tail, or for term of
another life. And it takes name from this, that the Clerks of the Chancery
did, by their common consent, frame it to the likeness of the Writ called in
Casu Proviso, according to the Authority given them by the Stat. Westminster. 2. cap.
24. Which (as often as there happens any new Case in Chancery, something like a
former, yet not specially fitted by any Writ) authorizes them to lay their
Heads together, and to frame a new form, answerable to the new Case, and as
like some former, as they may. And this Writ is granted to him in Reversion,
against the party to whom the said Tenant so Aliens to his prejudice; and in
the Tenants life time. The form and effect whereof, read more at large in Fitz.
Not. Br. fol. 206.

Casu Proviso, Is a Writ of Entry, given by the Statute of Gloucester, cap. 7.
in case where a Tenant in Dower, Aliens in Fee, or for Term of Life, or in
Tail, and lies for him in Reversion against the Alienee, Fitzh. Not. Br. fol.
205.

Catals. See Chatels.

Catallis captis nomine districtionis, Is a Writ that lies within a Borough, or
within a House, for Rent going out of the same; and warrants a Man to take the
Doors, Windows, or Gates, by way of Distress for the Rent. Old Not. Br. fol 66.

Catallis Reddendis, Is a Writ which lies, where Goods, being delivered to any
Man to keep till a certain day, and are not upon demand delivered at the day.
It may be otherwise called a Writ of Delivery. See more of it in the Reg. of
Writs, fol. 139. and in Old Not. Br. fol. 63. This is answerable to Actio
Dispositi in the Civil Law.

Catchpol (Chachepollus and Cacepollus, quasi, One that catches by the Poll)
Though now taken as a word of Contempt, yet in ancient times, it was used,
without reproach, for such as we now call Sergeants of the Mace, Bailiffs, or
any other that use to Arrest Men upon any Action. Anno 25 Edw. 3. Stat. 4. cap.
2. -- Hospitalarii Tenent in Hereford unum Mesuagium quod Philippus filius
Odonis tenuit per Seriantiam Chachepolli, quod eis legavit in puram
eleemosynam. Rot. de Seriantiis in Heref. temp. Hen. 3. in custod. Camerar.
Scaccarii.

Cathedral. See Church.

Cathedratick (Cathedraticum) Is a Sum of 2 s. pa^d to the Bishop by the
Inferior Clergy, In Argumentum subjectionis and ob honorem Cathedrae. See Hist.
of Procurations and Synodals, page 82.

Caulceis (Anno 6 Hen. 6. cap. 5.) Caucies, (1 Edw. 4. 1.) I think it should be
written Causways from the old French word Cauz, now Caillon, a Flint, and is
well known to signify ways pitched with Flint, or other Stone; in Lat. Calceta
-- pro ponte and calceto reparand. Pat. 18 Hen. 6. page 2. m. 22. I have also
seen it written Calceya, Casea, and Calsetum, in old Records.

Caursines (Caursini) Were Italians by Birth, and came into England about the
year 1235, terming themselves the Popes Merchants, driving no other trade then
letting out Money, and had great Banks thereof in England, and differed little
from Jews, save that they were rather more merciless to their Debtors. Some
will have them called Caursines, quasi, Causa ursini, Bearish and cruel in
their Causes; others Caursini, quasi, Corrasini, from scraping all together.
The theu Bishop of London excommunicated them. See Matthew. Paris, p. 403.

Causam nobis significes, Is a Writ directed to a Major of a City, or Town,
etc. who was formerly by the Kings Writ, commanded to give seifin to the Kings
Grantee of any Lands or Tenements, and delays to do it, willing him to show
cause, why he so delays the performance of his duty. Coke, lib. 4. Casu,
Communaltie des Sadlers, fol. 55. b.

Causa Matrimonii Praelocuti, Is a Writ, which lies in case where a Woman gives
Lands to a Man in Fee, to the intent he shall marry her, and refuses to do it
in reasonable time, being thereunto required. The form and further use of it,
see in Reg. of Writs, fol. 233. and Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 205.

Cautione admittenda, Is a Writ that lies against a Bishop, holding an
excommunicate person in prison for his contempt, notwithstanding he offers
sufficient Caution or Assurance to obey the Orders and Commandments of Holy
Church from thenceforth. The form and further effect whereof, see in Reg. of
Writs, page 66. and Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 63.

Caya, A Key, or Water-lock; from the Sax. Caeg. See Kay.

Ceapgild (Sax. Ceap, pecus and gild, solutio) Pecudis seu catalli restitutio.

Cellerarius alias Cellarius, Officialis est in Monasterio qui fratrum
stipendia servat and administrat. M. S.

Century. See Hundred.

Cepi Corpus, Is a Return made by the Sheriff, upon a Capias or other Process
for the like purpose, that he has taken the Body of the party. Fitz. Not. Br.
fol. 26.

Cerage (Ceragium) See Waxshot.

Cert Money (quasi, Certain Money) Headmoney or Common Fine, paid yearly by the
Resiants of several Manors to the Lords thereof, Pro certo Letae, for the
certain keeping of the Leet, and sometimes to the Hundred. As the Manor of
Hook, in Dorsetshire, pays Cert-money to the Hundred of Egerdon. This in
ancient Records is called Certum Letae. See Common Fine.

Certificat (Lat.) Is used for a Writing made in any Court to give notice to
another Court of any thing done therein. For example, a Certificat of the cause
of Attaint is a Transcript made briefly by the Clerk of the Crown, Clerks of
the Peace, or of Assise, to the Court of Kings Bench, containing the Tenor and
Effect of every Indictment, Outlary, or Conviction, or Clerk attainted, made or
pronounced in any other Court, Anno 34 H. 8. cap. 14. Broke, fol. 119.

Certification of Assise of Novel Disseisin, etc. (Certificatio Assisae novae
Disseisinae, etc. (Is a Writ granted for the reexamining or review of a matter
passed by Assise before any Justices. Of which see Reg. of Writs, f. 200. And
the New Book of Entries, verbo, Certificat of Assise. This is used, when a Man
(appearing by his Bailiff to an Assise brought by another, has lost the day;
and having something more to plead for himself, as a Deed of Release, etc.
which the Bailiff did not, or might not plead for him) desires a farther
examination of the cause, either before the same Justices, or others; and
obtains Letters Patent to them to that effect. (The Form of which Letters, see
in Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 181.) and that done, brings a Writ to the Sheriff, to
call, both the party for whom the Assise passed, and the Jury that was empaneld
on the same, before the said Justices at a certain day and place. And it is
called a Certificat, because therein mention is made to the Sheriff, that upon
the parties complaint of the Defective Examination, or Doubts yet remaining
upon the Assise pa^sed, the King has directed His Letters Patent to the
Justices, for the better certifying themselves, whether all Points of the said
Assise were duly examined. Of this read Bracton, lib. 4. cap. 19. number. 4. and
Horns Mirror, lib. 3.

Certificando de recognitione Stapulae, Is a Writ directed to the Major of the
Staple, etc. commanding him to certify the Lord Chancellor of a Statute Staple
taken before him, in case where the party himself detains it, and re^use h(...)
bring it in. Reg. of Writs, fol. 152. b. The like may be understood of
Certificando de Statuto Mercatorio, fol. 148. And De Certificando in
Cancellariam de Inquisitione de Idemptitate nominis, fol. 195. And Certificando
quando Recognitio, etc. And Certificando quid actum est de brevi super Statutum
Mercatorium, fol. 151. And Certificando si loquela Warrantiae, fol. 13

Certiorari, Is a Writ, issuing out of the Chancery to an Inferior Court, to
call up the Records of a Cause there depending, that conscionable Justice may
be done therein, upon complaint made by Bill, that the party, who seeks the
said Writ, has received hard dealing in the said Court. See the diverse Forms
and Uses of it in Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 242. As also the Register, both Original
and Judicial in the Tables, verbo, Certiorari. Crompton, in his Justice of
Peace, fol. 117. says, This Writ is either returnable in the Kings Bench, and
then has these words (Nobis mittatis) or in the Chancery, and then has in
Cancellaria nostra, or in the Common Bench, and then, Justiciariis nostris de
Banco.

Cessavit, Is a Writ that lies in diverse Cases, as appears by Fitz. Not. Br.
fol. 280. Upon this general ground, i. That he against whom it is brought, has
for two years neglected to perform such Service, or to pay such Rent, as he is
tied to by his tenure, and has not upon his Land or Tenements sufficient Goods
or Cattle to be distrained. See Fleta, lib. 5. cap. 34. sect. visa sunt. See
Cessavit de Cantaria. Cessavit de feodi firma. Cessavit per biennium, in Reg.
of Writs, fol. 237, 238. And New Book of Entries, verbo, Cessavit. It lies not,
but for Annual Service, as ^eat, and such like, not for Homage or Fealty.

Cesses (Anno 22 Hen. 8. cap. 3.) Seems to signify Assessments or Taxes. Cesse
or Cease in Ireland, is an exaction of Provision of Victuals at a certain rate
for the Deputies Family, and the Soldiers in Garrison. Sir Rich. Bakers Chron.
fol. 376.

Cession (Cessio) A ceasing, yielding up or giving over. Si un Farson ou Dean
en Angliterre prist un Evesquery en Ireland, ceo fait le primier Esglise void
per Cession. Latches Rep. fol. 234. -- Ratione vacationis Prioratus praedicti,
per Cessionem Fratris Rogeri de Wellington, ultimi Prioris, etc. Claus. 13 Edw.
3. page 1. m. 38.

Cessor (Lat.) A loyterer or idle fellow; but we use it for him who cease, or
neglects so long to perform a duty belonging to him, as he thereby incurs the
danger of Law, and is liable to have the Writ Cessavit brought against him. Old
Not. Br. fol. 136. And note where it is said The Tenant cesseth, without any
more words, is to be understood, that the Tenant cease to do what he ought,
or is bound to do by the Tenure of his Lands or Tenement.

Cessure or Cesser, Is also used for a ceasing; giving over, or departing from.
Westminster. 2. cap. 41.

Cestui qui vie (in true French, Cestui a vie de qui) Is he for whose life any
Land or Tenement is granted. Perkins, tit. Grants, 97.

Cestui que use (an Abstract of the Fr. Cestui al use de qui) Is an usual
phrase, signifying him to whose use any other Man is enfeoffed in any Lands or
Tenements. See the New Book of Entries, verbo, Uses. And in Replevin, fol. 508.
colum. 3. and, verbo, Trespass, fol. 606. and fol. 123. a, b. col. 3. number. 7.
Anno 1 Rich. 3. cap. 1. and Coke, lib. 1. fol. 133. Anno 12 Car. 2. cap. 30.

Cestui qui trust, Is he who has a trust in Lands or Tenements committed to
him for the benefit of another. Anno 12 Car. 2. cap. 30.

Chafewax, Is an Officer in Chancery, that fits the Wax for the Sealing of the
Writs, and such other Instruments as are there made to be issued out. So in
France, Calefactores cerae sunt, qui regiis literis in Cancellaria ceram
imprimunt. Corasius.

Chaffers (Anno 3 Edw. 4. cap. 4.) Seem to signify Wares or Merchandise; for
Chaffering is yet used for buying and selling.

Chaldron or Chalder of Coals, Contains Thirty six Bushels heap up, and
according to the Bushel sealed for that purpose at Guildhal in London. Annis 16
and 17 Car. 2. cap. 2. It is written Chawdren, Anno 9 Hen. 5. cap. 10. perhaps
from the Fr. Chaud, i. hot.

Challenge (from the Fr. Chalenger, i. sibi asserere) Is used for an Exception
taken, either against persons or things; Persons, as, in Assise, to the Jurors,
any one, or more of them; or in case of Felony, by the Prisoner at the Bar,
Bracton, lib. 2. tract. 2. cap. 22. Things, as against a Declaration. Old Not.
Br. fol. 76.

Challenge to the Jurors, Is either made to the Array, or to the Polls: To the
Array is, when the whole number is excepted against, as partially empanelled:
To, or by the Poll, is when some one or more are excepted against, as not
indifferrnt. Challenge to the Jurors, is also divided into Challenge Principal,
and Challenge per Cause, i. Upon Cause or Reason. Challenge Principal,
otherwise called Peremptory, is that which the Law allows without cause
alleged, or further examination. Lamb. Eiren. lib. 4. cap. 14. As a prisoner
at the Bar, arraigned upon Felony, may peremptorily Challenge 20, one after
another, of the Jury empanelled upon him, alleging no cause, but his own
dislike, and they shall be still put off, and new taken in their places. But in
case of High Treason, no Challenge Peremptory is allowed. Anno 33 Hen. 8. cap.
23. Yet there seems to be a difference between Challenge Principal, and
Challenge Peremptory; this being used only in matters criminal, and barely
without cause alleged, more then the prisoners own fancy. Stams. Pl. Cor. fol.
124. That, in civil actions for the most part, and with assigning some such
cause of Exception, as, being found true, the Law allows. For example, if
either party allege, That one of the Jurors is the Son, Brother, Cousin, or
Tenant to the other, or married his Daughter; this Exception is good (if true)
without further examination of the parties credit. How far this Challenge upon
Kindred extends, see in Plowden, Casu Vernon, fol. 425.

Also in the Plea of the Death of a Man, and in every Real Action, and in every
Action Personal, where the Debt or Damages amount to forty Marks, it is a good
Challenge to any Juror, that he cannot dispend 40^ per annum of Freehold, Anno
11 Hen. 7. cap. 21. The ground of this Challenge, you may see in Fleta, lib. 4.
cap. 8. Challenge upon Reason or Cause, is, when the party does allege some
such Exception against one, or more of the Jurors, as is not forthwith
sufficient, upon acknowledgment of the truth of it, but rather arbitrable and
considerable by the rest of the Jurors; as, if the Son of the Juror have
married the Daughter of the adverse party. Kitchen, fol. 92. where you may
read, what Challenges are commonly accounted Principal, and what not. See the
New Book of Entries, on this word Challenge; which was anciently Latined by
Calumnia, as appears by Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 18. See Coke on Littl.
fol. 156, 157, etc. and Calangium.

Chamberdekins or Chaumberdakins, Were certain Irish begging Priests, banished
England. Anno 1 Hen. 5 cap. 7, 8.

Chamberer, Is used for a Chambermaid. Anno 33 Hen. 8. cap. 21.

Chamberlain (Camerarius) Is diversely used in our Chronicles, Laws, and
Statutes; as Lord Great Chamberlain of England, Lord Chamberlain of the Kings
House; the Kings Chamberlain (Anno 13 Edw. 3. cap. 41. -- 17 Rich. 2. cap. 6.)
to whose Office it especially appertains to look to the Kings Chambers and
Wardrobe, and to govern the under Officers belonging thereto. Fleta, lib. 2.
cap. 6, 7. Chamberlain of any of the Kings Courts, 7 Edw 6. cap. 1. Chamberlain
of the Exchequer, 51 Hen. 3. Stat. 5. and 10 Edw. 3. cap. 11. Chamberlain of
North Wales. Stow, page 641. Chamberlain of Chester, and Chamberlain of the
City of London. Crompt. Jurisd. fol. 7. To which Chamberlainships of London and
Chester, do belong the receiving all Rents and Revenue appertaining to those
Cities; and to the Chamberlain of Chester, (when there is no Prince of Wales,
and Earl of Chester) the receiving and return of all Writs coming thither out
of any of the Kings Courts.

There are two Officers of this name in the Exchequer, who keep a Controlment
of the Pells of Receipt and ^xitus, and certain Keys of the Treasure and
Records, and the Keys of the Treasury, where the Leagues of the Kings
Predecessors, and diverse ancient Books, as Domesday, and the Black Book of the
Exchequer remain. This Officer is mentioned in the Statute 34 and 35 Hen. 8.
cap. 16. There are also Under Chamberlains of the Exchequer, which see in Under
Chamberlain. The Latin word seems to express the Function of this Officer; For
Camerarius dicitur a Camera (i. Testudine sive fornice) quia custodit pecunias,
quae in Cameris praecipue reservantur.

Champarti (from the Fr. Champ, a Field and Parli, divided; because the Field
or Land in question, is commonly divided between the Champartor, who maintains
the suit, and the person in whose name and right he sues) Signifies a
Maintenance of any Man in his suit, upon condition to have part of the thing
(be it Land or Goods) when it is recovered. This seems to have been an ancient
grievance in our Nation; for nowithstanding the several Statutes of 3 Edw. 1.
cap. 25. -- 13 Edw. 1. c. 49. -- 28 Edw. 1. c. 11. 33 Edw. 1. Stat. 2 and 3.
and 1 Rich. 2. cap. 4. And a Form of Writ framed to them; yet 4 Edw. 3. cap.
11. it was again Enacted, That whereas a former Statute provided Redress for
this in the Kings Bench only (which in those days followed the Court) from
thenceforth it should be lawful for Justices of the Common Pleas, and Justices
of Assise, in their Sessions, to enquire, hear, and determine this, and such
like Cases, as well at Suit of the King, as of the Party. How far this Writ
extends, and the diverse Forms of it applied to several Cases, see Fitz. Not.
Br. fol. 171. Reg. of Writs, fol. 183. And New Book of Entries, verbo,
Champarti. Every Champarti implies a Maintenance, Crompt. Jurisd. fol. 39. See
also 2 Part. Inst. fol. 208.

Champartors, Be they, who move Pleas or Suits, or cause them to be moved,
either by their own procurement, or by others. and sue them at their proper
costs, to have part of the Land in variance, or part of the gains. Anno 33 Edw.
1. Stat. 2. in fine.

Champion (campio) Is taken not only for him, that fights the Combat in his
own case, but for him also that does it in the place or quarrel of another.
Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 21. number. 24. who also seems to use this word
for such as held of another by some service; as, Campiones faciunt Homagium
Domiuo suo, lib. 2. cap. 35. Hottoman de verbis feudalibus, Defines it thus,
Campio est Certator pro alio datus in duello, a Campo dictus, qui circus erat
decertantibus definitus. And therefore it is called Campfight. See Combat, and
Sir Edward Bishes Notes upon Upton, where fol. 36. you will find that Henricus
de Fernbureg, for thirty Marks Fee, did by a Charter under his Seal, Covenant
to be Champion for Roger, Abbot of Glastonbury. Anno 42 Hen 3. see 3 Inst. fol.
221.

Champion of the King (Campio Regis) Whose Office is, at the Coronation of our
Kings, to ride into Westminster Hall armed Cap^a^pe, when the King is at dinner
there, and throw down his Gantlet by way of Challenge, pronounced by a Herald;
That if any Man shall deny or gainsay the Kings title to the Crown, he is
there ready to defend it in single Combat, etc. Which being done, the King
drinks to him, and sends him a gilt Cup with a Cover full of Wine, which the
Champion drinks, and has the Cup for his Fee.

This Office (ever since the Coronation of King Richard the Second, when
Baldwin Frevile exhibited his Petition for it) was adjudged from him to Sir
John Dymock, his Competitor (both claiming from Marmion) as producing better
Records and Evidence; and has continued ever since in the worthy family of
Dymock, who hold the Manor of Scrivelsby in Lincolnshire, hereditarily from
the Marmions, by Grand Sergeanty, viz. That the Lord thereof shall be the Kings
Champion, as abovesaid. Camd. in part. Fin. Mich. 1 Hen. 6. Accordingly Sir
Edward Dymock performed this Office at the Coronation of His Majesty, King
Charles the Second, 23 April. 1661.

Chancellor (Cancellarius) This Officer in late times is greatly advanced, not
only in our, but in other Kingdoms: For he is the chief Administrator of
Justice, next to the Sovereign. All other Justices in this Kingdom are tied to
the Law, and may not swerve from it in Judgment; but the Chancellor has the
Kings absolute power to moderate the Written Law, governing his Judgment by the
Law of Nature and Conscience, and ordering all things juxta aequum and bonum.
Wherefore Stanford (in his Praerog. cap. 20. fol. 65.) says, The Chancellor
has two powers, one absolute, the other ordinary; meaning, that, though by his
ordinary power in some cases, he must observe the form of proceeding, as other
Inferior Judges, yet in his absolute power, he is not limited by the Written
Law, but by Conscience and Equity, according the Circumstances of Matter. And
though Polydor Virgil, an alien, undertaking to write the History of England,
supposed he did not mistake, when he makes our William the Conqueror, the
Founder of our Chancellors; yet our industrious Antiquary Mr. Dugdale can show
us his Error in the many Chancellors of England, long before that time, which
are mentioned in his Origines Juridiciales, and Catalogue of Chancellors, whose
great Authorities under their Kings, were in all probability drawn from the
reasonable Customs of Neighbor Nations, and the Civil Law.

He that bears this Magistracy, is called The Lord Chancellor of England, and
is made so Per traditionem magni Sigilli sibi per Dominum Regem, and by taking
his Oath. And by the Statute 5 Eliz. cap. 18. the Lord Chancellor and Keeper,
have one and the same Power; and therefore since that Statute, there cannot be
a Lord Chancellor, and Lord Keeper, at one and the same time, but before there
might, and has been. Yet see Keeper See Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 12, 13. and Cokes
4 Instit. fol. 78, 79. Diverse Inferior Officers are also called Chancellors, As

Chancellor of the Exchequer (Anno 25 Hen 8. cap. 16.) Whose Office has been
thought by many to have been created for the qualifying extremities in the
Exchequer: He sits in the Court, and in the Exchequer Chamber, and with the
rest of the Court, orders things to the Kings best benefit. He is always in
Commission with the Lord Treasurer, for letting the Lands that came to the
Crown by the dissolution of Abbeys, or otherwise; and has by the Statute of 33
Hen. 8. cap. 39. power with others, to compound for the Forfeitures upon Penal
Statutes, Bonds, and Recognizances, entered unto the King: He has also a great
Authority and Jurisdiction in the manage and dispose of the Royal Revenue, and
concerning the First Fruits, as appears by the Acts for uniting them to the
Crown.

Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, (Anno 3 Edw. 6. cap. 1. and Anno 5
Ejusdem, cap. 26.) Whose Office is principal in that Court, to judge and
determine all Controversies between the King, and His Tenants of the
Dutchy-Land, and otherwise to direct all the Kings Affairs belonging to that
Court.

Chancellor of the Order of the Garter. Stows Annals, page 706. Chancellor of
the Universities, Anno 9 Hen. 5. cap. 8. and Anno 2 Hen. 6. cap. 8. Chancellor
of the Court of Augmentations, 27 Hen. 8. cap. 27. -- 32 Ejusdem, cap. 20. and
33 Ejusdem, cap. 39. Chancellor of the First Fruits. 32 Hen. 8. cap. 45.
Chancellor of Courts. 32 Hen. 8. cap. 28. Chancellor of the Diocese, 32 Hen. 8.
cap. 15, etc.

Chance medley (from the Fr. Chance, i. Lapsus and Mesler, i. Miscere)
Signifies the casual slaughter of a Man, not altogether without the fault of
the slayer. Stanf. Pl. Cor. lib. 1 cap. 8. calls it homicide by misadventure.
West calls it Homicide mixed (Part. 2. Symbol. tit. Indictments, Sect. 5.) and
there defines it thus; Homicide mixed is, when the Killers ignorance or
negligence is joined with the Chance; As if a Man lop Trees by a Highway side,
by which many usually travel, and cast down a bough, not giving warning to
beware of it, by which bough one passing by, is by chance slain. In this case
he offends, because he gave no warning, that the party nigh have taken better
heed. See Skene, verbo, Melletum, who says this is called Chaudmelle in
Scotland.

Chancery (Cancellaria) Is the Grand Court of Equity and Conscience, moderating
the rigor of other Courts most strictly tied to the Letter of the Law, whereof
the Lord Chancellor of England, is the chief Judge. Crompt. Jurisd. fol. 41. or
else the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, since the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 18.
The Officers belonging to this Court, are the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the
Great Seal, who is sole Judge here; the Master of the Rolls, (anciently called
Gardein des Rolls) who in the Lord Chancellors absence, hears Causes and
gives Orders, 4 Instit. fol. 97. Twelve Masters of the Chancery, who are
Assistants, and sit by turns on the Bench; the Six Clerks, who have each of
them about Fifteen Clerks under them, in nature of Atturneys in the Court; Two
chief Examiners, who have five or six Clerks a piece; One chief Register, who
has usually four or five Deputies. The Clerk of the Crown, the Warden of the
Fleet, the Usher, Sergeant at Arms, and Crier of the Court; the Cursiters and
their Clerks; the Clerks of the Petty-Bag; the Clerk of the Hanaper, the
Comptroller of the Hanaper; the Clerk of Appeals; the Clerk of the Faculties;
the Scaler, the Chafe-Wax; the Clerk of the Patents, Clerk of Presentations,
Clerk of Dismissions, Clerk of Licenses to alienate, Clerks of the Enrolments,
Clerks of the Protections, Clerk of the Subpenas, Clerk of the Affidavits, etc.
which see described in their several places. See Cokes 4 Inst. fol. 82.

Changer, Is an Officer belonging to the Kings Mint, whose Function chiefly
consists, in exchanging Coin for Bullion, brought in by Merchants, or others.
Anno 2 Hen. 6. cap. 12. where it is written (after the old way) Chaungeour.

Chantry. See Chauntry.

Chapel (Capella) Fr. Chapelle, i. aedicula) Is of two sorts, either adjoining
to a Church, as parcel of it, which persons of quality build, Ut ibidem
familiaria Sepulchra sibi constituant; or else separate from the Mother Church,
where the Parish is wide, and is commonly called a Chapel of Ease; because it
is built for the ease of one or more Parishioners that dwell far from the
Church, and is served by some Inferior Curate, provided at the charge of the
Rector, or of him that has benefit by it, as the Composition or Custom is.

There is also a Free Chapel, which seems to be such as has perpetual
maintenance toward the upholding it, and the Curates stipend, by some Lands or
Rents charitably bestowed on it, without the charge of the Rector or Parish.
Anno 37 Hen. 8. cap. 4. Anno 1 Edw. 6. cap. 14.

Chapelry (Capellania) Is the same thing to a Chapel, as Parish is to a
Church, i. The Precinct and Limits of it. Mentioned in the Stat. 14 Car. 2.
cap. 9. -- Capellania Sancti Oswaldi, Mich. 32 Edw. 1. Coram Rege, Glouc.

Chaperon (Fr.) A Hood or Bonnet, mentioned in the Stat. 1 Rich. 2. 17. And
among Heralds, it is that little Escocheon, which is fixed in the forehead of
the Horses that draw the Hearse at a Funeral.

Chapiters (Lat. Capitula, Fr. Chapiters, i. The Chapters of a Book) Signifies
a Summary or Content of such Matters as are to be enquired of, or presented
before Justices in Eyr, Justices of Assize, or of Peace in their Sessions. This
it is used Anno 3 Edw. 1. cap. 27. -- And that no Clerk of any Justice,
Escheator, or Commissioner in Eyr, shall take any thing for delivering
Chapters, but only Clerks of Justices in their Circuits. And again, Anno 13
Ejusdem, cap. 10. -- The Sheriff shall certify the Chapiters before the
Justices in Eyr, how many Writs he has, and what. etc. Britton (cap. 3.) uses
the word in the same signification. Chapiters are now most usually called
Articles, and are delivered by the Mouth of the Justice in his Charge, to the
Enquest; whereas in ancient time (as appears by Bracton and Britton) they were
(after an Exhortation given by the Justices for the good observation of the
Laws, and Kings peace) first read distinctly in open Court, and then delivered
in writing to the Grand Enquest, which the Grand Jury or Enquest were likewise
to answer upon their Oaths, Affirmatively or Negatively, and, not as they do
now, put the Judges to make long and learned Charges to little, or no purpose,
and forswearing or wilfully not remembering their Knowledge of Transgressors,
against the Design and Enquiry of those Articles, do think their Oaths and Duty
to God and the King, and their Country, well enough satisfied and performed,
if they only present those few, of many more, Misdemeanors, which are brought
unto them by way of Indictments. The same Order of Articles, Lambert wishes
might still be observed. Eiren. lib. 4. cap. 4. page 393. Horn (in his Mirror
of Justices) calls them Articles, and expresses what they were wont to contain.
Lib. 3. cap. Des Articles in Eyr.

Chaplain or Chapellain (Capellanus) Is now most commonly taken for him, who is
depending on the King, or other Noble person, to instruct him and his family in
Spirituals, and say Divine Service in his house, where commonly they have a
private Chapel for that purpose. As Anno 21 Hen. 8. cap. 13. which ordains
what person may privilege one or more Chaplains to discontinue from their
Benefices, in respect of their particular service.

Chapter (Capitulum) Signifies Congregationem Clericorum in Ecclesia
Cathedrali, Conventuali, regulari vel Collegiata, and in another sense, Locum
in quo siunt communes tractatus Collegiatorum. It has other significations,
not worth mentioning here, which you may read in Linwoods Provin. Gloss. verbo,
Capitulum. This Collegiat Company or Corporation, is Metaphorically termed
Capitulum, (signifying originally a little Head) it being a kind of Head, not
only to rule and govern the Diocese, in the Vacation of the Bishopric, but
also in many things to advise the Bishop, when the Sea is full. See Panormitan,
in cap. Capitulum extra de rescriptis. -- Ad Dedicationes, ad Synodos, ad
Capituia vonientibus Sit summa Pax. LL. Edwardi Confess. cap. 3.

Charre of Lead. La Charre de plumbo constat ex 30 form(...)s, and quaelibet
formella continet 6 Petras, exceptis duabus libris, and quaelibet Petra constat
ex 12 libris. Assisa de ponderibus Rob. 3 R. Scot. cap. 22. sect. 2.

Chart (Charta) Paper, Parchment, or any thing to write on; also a Card,
mentioned 14 Car. 2. cap. 33. See Charter.

Chartel (Fr. Cartel) A Letter of Defiance, or a Challenge to a (single)
Combat: In use when those Combats were in practice, to decide difficult, and
not otherwise to be determined Controversies in Law.

Charter (Charta, Fr. Chartres, i. Instrumenta) Is usually taken for written
Evidence of things done between Man and Man. Whereof Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 26.
number. 1. says thus, Fiunt aliquando Donationes in scriptis, sicut in chartis, ad
perpetuam rei memoriam, propter brevem hominum vitam -- And (Number. 12.) and
sciendum quod Chartarum alia regia, alia privatorum; and regiarum, alia
privata, alia communis, and alia universalis. Item, privatorum alia de puro
Feoffamento and simplici, alia de Feoffamento conditionali sive conventionali,
and secundum omnia genera Feoffamentorum fieri potest. Item privatorum alia de
recognitione pura vel conditionali. Item alia de quiet clamantia, and de
confirmatione, etc. Britton likewise in his 39 Chapter, divides Charters into
those of the King, and those of private persons.

Charters of the King, are those whereby the King passes any Grant to any
person or more, or to any Body Politic; as a Charter of Exemption, that a Man
shall not be empanel'd upon any Jury. Kitchen, fol. 314. and 177.

Charter of Pardon, whereby a Man is forgiven a Felony, or other offense
committed against the Kings Crown and Dignity. Brook, tit. Charter of Pardon.

Charter of the Forest, wherein the Laws of the Forest are comprised. Anno 9
Hen. 3. Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 147. Pupilla oculi. par. 5. cap. 22 Manwood, page
1. fol. 1. Where he sets down the Charters of Canutus, and fol. 17. that which
was made 19 Hen. 3. with the Charter of the Forest. Of these Charters you have
also a long discourse in Fleta, lib. 3. cap 14. Who particularly expounds every
substantial part of a Deed of Gift. See Magna Charta.

Charter-land (terra per Chartam) Is such as a Man holds by Charter, that is by
evidence in writing, otherwise called Freehold. Anno 19 Hen. 7. cap. 13. and
Kitchen, fol. 86. This in the Saxons time was called Bocland, which was held
(according to Lambert in his Explication of those words, Verbo, Terra ex
scripto) with more commodious and easier conditions, then Folkland was; that
is, Land held without writing; because that was Haereditaria libera atque
immunis; whereas, Fundus sine scripto censum pensitabat annuum, atque
officiorum quadam servitute est obligatus; Priorem viri plerumque nobiles atque
ingenui, posteriorem rustici fere and pagani possidebant. Illam nos vulgo
Freehold and per Chartam; hanc ad voluntatem Domini appellamus. Thus Lambert.

Charter-party (Lat. Charta partita, Fr. Chartre-parti, i. A Deed or Writing
divided) Is that among Merchants and Sea-^aring men, which we commonly call a
Pair of Indentures, containing the Covenants and Agreements made between them,
touching their Merchandise and Maritime Affairs. Anno 32 Hen. 8. cap. 14. and
12 Car. 2. cap. 18. Latches Rep. fol. 225. Ballo's Case, and 2 Inst. fol. 673.

Chartis Reddendis, Is a Writ which lies against him that has Charters of
Feo^ment entrusted to his keeping, and refuses to deliver them. Old Not. Br.
fol. 66. Reg. of Writs, fol. 159.

Chase, (Fr. Chasse) Signifies two things: First, a driving Cattle to, or from
any place; as to chase a Distress to a Fortlet. Old Not. Br. fol. 45. Secondly,
it is a place of Receipt for Deer, and Wild Beasts, of a middle nature between
a Forest and a Park, being commonly less then a Forest, and not endued with so
many Liberties, as the Courts of Attachment, Swain-mote, and Justice-seat; and
yet of a larger compass, and stored with greater diversity, both of Keepers and
Wild Beasts, or Game, then a Park. Crompton in his Jurisd. fol. 148. says, A
Forest cannot be in the hands of a Subject, but it forthwith loses its name,
and becomes a Chase; and yet fol. 197. he says, A Subject may be Lord and owner
of a Forest, which though it seems a contradiction, yet both sayings are in
some sort true. For the King may give or alienate a Forest to a Subject, yet
so, as, when it is once in the Subject, it loses the true property of a
Forest; because the Courts called the Justice-seat, Swain-mote, and Attachment,
do forthwith vanish; none being able to make a Lord Chief Justice in Fyr of the
Forest, but the King; as Manwood well observes Par. 2. cap. 3. and 4. Yet it
may be granted in so large a manner, as there may be Attachment, Swain-mote,
and a Court equivalent to a Justice Seat, as appears by him in the same
Chapter, number. 3. So that a Chase differs from a Forest in this, because it may
be in the hands of a Subject, which a Forest, in his proper and true nature,
cannot; and from a Park, in that it is not enclosed, and has not only a
larger compass, and more variety of Game; but of Keepers also, and Officers.
See Forest.

Chattels or Catals (Catallia alias Capitalia) Comprehend all Goods moveable
and immovable, except such as are in nature of Freehold, or parcel of it, as
may be collected out of Stamf. Praerog. cap. 16. and Anno 1 Eliz. cap. 2. Yet
Kitchen, fol. 32. says, That Money is not to be accounted Goods or Chattels,
because it is not of it self valuable; nor Hawks and Hounds, for they are Ferae
naturae. Chattels are either personal or real. Personal, may be so called in
two respects: One, because they belong immediately to the person of a Man, as a
Bow, Horse, etc. The other, for that being any way injuriously withheld from
us, we have no means to recover them, but Personal Actions. Chattels real, are
such as either appertain not immediately to the person, but to some other
thing, by way of dependency, as a Box with Charters of Land, Apples upon a
Tree, or a Tree it self growing on the Ground. Cromp. Just. of Peace, fol. 33.
or else such as are issuing out of some immovable thing to a person, as a
Lease or Rent for term of years. See Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 3 number. 3. and 4.
Chattels are bona quaecunque mobilia and immobilia; proprie tamen ea bonorum
pars, quae in animalibus consistit, a quorum capitibus, res ipsae alias capita
alias capitalia dicta sunt. Spelman.

Chaumpert. -- Et quod tam praedictae xx. virgatae terrae, quam terrae, unde
dicta quaterviginti quarteria srumenti annua proveniunt, de nobis in Capite,
per servitium, vocatum Chaumpert, viz. Undecimae garbae, nobis per manus
tenentium to^rarum earundem, annuatim solvendae, tenentur. Pat. 35 Edw. 3. page
2. m. 18. Hospital. de Bows infra Insulam de Gernesey.

Chaunce-medley. See Chance-medley.

Chaunter (Cantator) A Singer in the Quire. Anno 13 Eliz. cap. 10. At S. David's
in Pembrokeshire, the Chaunter is next to the Bishop, for there is no Dean. Came
Britan.

Chauntry (Cantaria) Aedes sacra; ideo instituta and dotata praediis, ut Missa
ibidem cantaretur pro anima fundatoris and propinquorum ejus. These were
usually little Chapels or particular Altars in some Cathedral or Parochial
Church, and endowed with Lands, or other Revenue, for the maintenance of one or
more Priests, to officiate as abovesaid. Mentioned 37 Hen. 8. cap. 4. -- 1 Edw.
6. c. 14. and 15 Car. 2. cap. 9. Of these Chantries, there were forty seven
belonging to S. Paul's Church in London; for which, see Mr. Dugdales History of
that Church.

Sciant -- quod ego Reginaldus Suard dedi -- Willielmo Crumpe Capellano
Cantariae beatae Mariae de Yarpol unam parcellam pasturae, etc. Dat. apud
Leominstre die Martis prox. post Festum Sancti Hillarii, Anno 7 Hen. 5.

Chawdren of Sea-Coals. Anno 9 Hen. 5. cap. 10. See Chaldron.

Check-Roll, Is a Roll or Book, containing the names of such as are attendants,
and in pay to the King, or other great persons, as their Houshold-servants.
Anno 19 Car. 2. cap. 1. It is otherwise called the Checquer Roll, Anno 24 Hen.
8. cap. 13. Anno 3 Hen. 7. cap. 13. And seems to be a word abstracted, or
derived from the Exchequer, which vide. Clerk of the Check, see in Clerk

Chemin. See Chimin.

Chensers (Anno 27 H. 8. cap. 7.) Quaere If not such as paid tribute or Cense;
Quit-rent, or Chief Rent; For so the Fr. Censier signifies.

Cherset. See Churchesset.

Chevage (Chevagium, from the Fr. chef, i. caput) Signifies a Tribute, or sum
of Money formerly paid by such as held Lands in Villanage or otherwise, to
their Lords in acknowledgment; and was a kind of Head, or Poll-Money. Whereof
Bracton, lib. 1. cap. 10. says thus, Chevagium dicitur recognitio in sig number
subjectionis and Dominii de capite suo. It seems also to be used for a sum of
Money, yearly given to a Man of power, for his Countenance and Protection, as
to their chief Head or Leader. Lambert (lib. 2. cap. 5. Eirenarch.) writes it
Chivage; we now call it Chiefage. Est and apud Wallos Chevagii genus quod Amabr
vocant, Principi Walliae pro maritandis filiabus, olim ab omnibus (ut asserunt)
hodie a quibusdam (etiam liberis) persolutum, says Spelman on the word
Chevagium. See Coke on Littl. fol. 140.

Chevisance (Fr. Chevissance) An Agreement or Composition made; an End or Order
set down between a Creditor and a Debtor; sometimes taken for an indirect gain
or booty. Lo. Verulam in his Hen. 7. But in our Statutes it is most commonly
used for an unlawful Bargain or Contract. As 37 Hen. 8. cap. 9. 13 Eliz: c. 5.
and 8 and 12 Car. 2. cap. 13.

Chevitiae and Chevisc^, Hades at the end of Ploughed Lands. -- Novem acras
terrae cum Cheviscis ad ipsas pertinentibus. Mon. Angl 2 par. fol 116.

Chief. See Capite.

Chiefage. See Chevage.

Chief Pledge (Plegius vel vas capitalis) Anno 20 Hen. 6. cap. 8. See Borowhead.

Childwit (Sax.) Signifies a power to take a Fine of a Bondwoman, unlawfully
begotten with child. Prior habeat Gersumam de Nativa sua impraegnata sine
licentia maritandi. Ex Registro Priorat. de Cokes ord. Every reputed Father of
a base child, gotten within the Manor of Writtel in Com. Essex, pays to the
Lord for a Fine 3 s, 4 d. Where it seems to extend as well to Free as
Bond-women; and the Custom is there also called Childwit.

Chimin (Fr. Chemin, i. aditus, via) Signifies a way; which is of two sorts.
The Kings Highway, and a private way. Kitchen, fol. 35. The Kings Highway
(Chiminus Regius) is that, in which the Kings Subjects, and all others under
His Protection, have free liberty to pass, though the property of the soil,
where the way lies, may perhaps belong to some private man. A Private way is
that, in which one man or more have liberty to pass, either by Prescription or
by Charter, through another man's ground. And this is divided into Chimin in
gross, and Chimin appendant. Kitchen, fol. 117. Chimin in gross, is that way
which a man holds principally and solely in it self; Chimin appendant is that
which a man has as appurtenant to some other thing. As, if he hire a Close of
Pasture, with Covenant for ingress and regress, through some other Ground, in
which, otherwise he might not pass. See Coke on Littl. fol. 56.

Chiminage (Chiminagium) Signifies a Toll for Wayfarage through the Forest.
Cromp. Jurisd. fol 189. Telonium quod in Forestis exigebant Forestarii a
plaustris and equis oneris causa eo venientibus. Charta Forestae, cap. 14.
Nullus Forestarius de caetero, qui non sit Forestarius de feodo, reddens nobis
firmam pro baliva sua, capiat Chiminagium aliquod in Baliva sua, etc. The
Feadists call it Pedagium. This in Poulton, fol. 8. is falsely Printed Chimmage;
and in a Record in the Tower, I find Chimage.

Chimney Money, Otherwise called Hearth-Money. By Statute 14 Car. 2. cap. 12.
Every Fire-Hearth and Stove of every Dwelling, and other House within England
and Wales, (except such as pay not to Church and poor) shall be chargeable with
Two shillings per annum, parable at Michaelmas and Lady Day, to the King, His
Heirs, etc. Which payment is vu^gar^y called Chimney-Money. See Smoak-Silver
and Fuage.

Chirgemot, Circgemot, or Chirch gemot. (Sax) Forum Ecclesiasticum. -- Quosque
Chirgemot Discordantes inveniet, vel amore congreget, vel sequestret judicio.
LL. Hen. 1. cap 8. and 4 Inst. fol. 321.

Chirographer of Fines, (Chirographus Finium and Concordarum, of the Greek
(...), i. A writing of a Man's own hand, whereby he acknowledges a debt to
another) Signifies that Officer in the Common Pleas, who ingrosseth Fines in
that Court acknowledged into a Perpetual Record, (after they are examined, and
fully passed by other Officers) and that writes and delivers the Indentures of
them to the Party. Anno 2 Hen. 3. cap. 8. -- 2 Hen. 4. 8. and Fitz. Not. Br.
fol. 147. A. This Officer makes two Indentures, one for the Buyer, another for
the Seller, and makes one other indented piece, containing also the effect of
the Fine, which he delivers to the Custos Brevium, which is called the Foot of
the Fine. The Chirographer also, or his Deputy, proclaims all the Fines in the
Court every Term, according to the Statute, and endorseth the Proclamations,
upon the backside of the Foot thereof; and always keeps the Writ of Covenant,
and the Note of the Fine. See Tabling of Fines, Anno 23 Eliz. cap. 3. and 2
Part. Inst. fol. 468.

Chivage. See Chevage.

Chivalry (Servitium Militare) Comes from the Fr. Chivalier, i. eques; and
signifies a Tenure of Land by Knights-service, whereby the Tenant was bound to
perform a Service in War unto the King or the Mesn Lord, of whom he held by
that Tenure: The further explication of which Tenure, and the several Branches
of it may be omitted, since by Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. All Tenures by
Knights-service of the King, or of any other person, Knight Service in Capite,
or Soccage in Capite of the King, and the Fruits and consequences thereof,
happened, or which shall or may happen, or arise thereupon, or thereby, are taken
away and discharged: And all Tenures of Houses, Manors, Lands, etc. shall be
construed and adjudged for ever, to be turned into Free and Common Soccage, etc.

Choral (Choralis) may relate to any person, that by virtue of any of the
Orders of the Clergy, was in ancient time admitted to sit and serve God in the
Quire, in Latin (Chorus.) Accordingly Mr. Dugdale (in his History of S. Paul's
Church, page 172.) says, There were anciently Six Vicars Choral belonging to
that Church.

Chose (Fr.) Thing: It is used with diverse Epithetes; as Chose Local, is such a
thing as is annexed to a place: For example, a Mill is Chose Local. Chose
Transitory seems to be that thing, which is moveable, and may be taken away or
carried from place to place. Kitchen, fol. 18: Chose in Actin, is a thing
incorporeal, and only a right, as an Annuity, Obligation for Debt, a Covenant,
Voucher by Warranty, and generally all Causes of Suit, for any Debt or Duty,
Trespass or Wrong, are to be accounted Chooses in Action. And it seems Chose in
Action may be also called Chose in Suspense; because it has no real existence,
or being, nor can properly be said to be in our possession. Broke, tit. Chose
in Action.

Chop-chirch (Ecclesiarum permutatio) Is a word used 9 Hen. 6. 65. a. By the
sense of which Book, it was in those days a kind of Trade; For the Judges say,
It was a lawful Occupation, and a good Addition; yet Brook in his Abridgment
calls it not an Occupation, but a thing permissible by Law. It was (without
doubt) a nickname given to those that used to change Benefices: For to chop
and change, is an usual expression to this day. I have also read
Church-Chopper, for him that used to make such changes. -- Alii vero quorundam
satorum zizaniae, subversorum Justiciae, and inauditae abusionis inventorum, ut
illis verbis utamur Choppe-Churches, communiter appellati, mediatione dolosa
interveniente, execrabili ardore avaritiae, quandoque in subdolis
permutationibus, hos nimia inaequalitate Beneficiorum, ac illos quandoque
optentis beneficiis, fucatis coloribus totaliter destituunt and defraudant; in
tantum quod ex inde de opulentibus effecti miseri, and fodere non valentes,
aliquando inordinata concepta doloris anxietate deperiunt, and saepius in Cleri
and Ecclesiae scandalum nimid egestatis penuria, mendicare miserabiliter
compelluntur. Litera missa omnibus Episcopis suffragancis Domini contra
Choppe-Churches. An. 1391. Spelm. de Conc. vol. 2. fol. 642.

Church-Reve. A Churchwarden. Praepositus Ecclesiae or Gardianus Ecclesiae; of
whom, thus Chaucer, speaking of the Jurisdiction of Archdeacons. Of
Church-Reves, and of Testaments,
Of Contracts, and lack of Sacraments, etc.


Churchwardens (Ecclesiae Gardiani) Are Officers yearly chosen, by consent of
the Minister and Parishioners, according to the custom of every place, to look
to the Church, Churchyard, and such things as belong to both, and to observe
the behavior of their Parishioners, for such faults as appertain to the
Jurisdiction or Censure of the Court-Ecclesiastick. These are a kind of
Corporation, enabled by Law to sue, and be sued for any thing belonging to the
Church, or Poor of their Parish. Anno 12 H. 7. cap. ult. See Lambert in his
duty of Churchwardens.

Churchesset, Ciricsceat, Chirset, or Curcscet (Sax.) Census vel tributum
Ecclesiae Chirchescot. Certam mensuram bladi tritici significat, quam quilibet
olim Sanctae Ecclesiae die Sancti Martini, tempore tam Britonum quam Anglorum
contribuerunt. Plures tamen Magnates, post Romanorum adventum, illam
contributionem secundum veterem legem Moysi nomine primitiarum dabant: Prout in
brevi Regis Knuti, ad summum Pontificem transmisso, continetur, in quo illam
contributionem Churchset appellant, quasi, semen Ecclesiae. See Ciricsceat.
Seldens Hist. of Tithes, page 216. -- Et de essarto and de prato and de Chirset
ejusdem villae, etc. Cart. de Anno 1 Edw. 3. number. 3. And in Pat. 13 Edw. 4.
par. 2. m. 17. it is written Cherchez; but the true Saxon is Cyricsceat.

Cinque Ports (Quinque Portus) Are those special Havens that lie toward
France, and therefore have been thought by our Kings, to be such as ought most
vigilantly to be preserved against Invasion. In which respect, they have an
especial Governor or Keeper, called, by his Office, Lord Warden of the Cinque
Ports, and diverse privileges granted them, as a peculiar Jurisdiction, their
Warden having the authority of an Admiral among them, and sending out Writs in
his own name. Crompton in his Jurisd. fol. 28. names the Cinque Ports, Dover,
Sandwich, Rye, Hastings, Winchelsea, Rumney, Hithe; whereof two must either be
added to the first institution, by some later Grant, or be accounted as
Appendants to some of the rest. See Gardein of the Cinque Ports, and the Stat.
32 Hen. 8. cap. 48. See Quinque Portus. and 4 Inst. fol. 222.

Cippus, A Pair of Stocks to put offenders in. -- Habeant, nec non Cippos and
conclusoria in singulis villis, ad correctionem delinquentium. Mon. Angl. 2
par. fol. 349. a.

Circuit of Action (Circuitus Actionis) Is a longer course of proceeding to
recover the thing sued for, then is needful. As, if a Man Grant a Rentcharge
of x l. out of his Manor of Dale, and after the Grantee Disseiseth the Grantor
of the same Manor, who brings an Assise, and recovers the Land, and xx l.
damages; which being paid, the Grantee brings his Action for x l. of his Rent
due, during the time of the Disseisin, which he must have had, if no Disseisin
had been. This is called Circuit of Action, because; whereas the Grantor was to
receive xx l. damages, and pay x l. rent, he might have received but x l. only
for damages, and the Grantee might have kept the other x l. in his hands, by
way of Deteiner for his Rent, and so have saved his Action. Terms Ley.

Circumspecte Agatis, Is the Title of a Statute made in the Thirteenth of
Edward the First. Anno Domini 1285. prescribing certain Cases to the Judges,
wherein the Kings Prohibition lies not. Coke, lib. 7. fol. 44. Lib. 5. fol. 67.
And 2 Part. Inst. fol. 487.

Circumstantibus (i. Bystanders) Signifies the supply or making up the number
of Jurors (if any impaneld, appear not, or appearing be challenged by either
party) by adding to them so many of those that are present or standing by, as
will serve the turn. 35 H. 8. c. 6. and 5 Eliz. cap. 25.

Ciric seat (Sax. Cyric-sceat, Vectigal Ecclesiasticum, frumenti tributum.)
Church-scot, a certain Tribute or Payment made to the Church, commonly of Corn.
Fleta calls it Circsed, quasi, Semen Ecclesiae debitum. Joh. Southam ad Festum
S. Martini in Yeme debet 1 Gallinam (de redditu) and 5 Gallinas de Chirseat.
Custumar. Monast. de Bello. fol. 87. a. This Tribute was anciently payable at
the Feast of S. Martin, and sometimes at Christmas, as appears by Domesday, and
called by Sir Edw. Coke, Church-seed, on Littl. fol. 88. b. See Churchesset.

City (Civitas) Signifies with us, as it does in other Regions, such a Town
Corporate, as has a Bishop and a Cathedral Church Yet Crompton in his
Jurisdictions, in reckoning our Cities, leaves out Ely, though it have a Bishop
and a Cathedral Church. Anno 35 Eliz. cap. 6. Westminster is called a City, and
it appears by the Statute 35 Hon. 8. cap. 10. that then there was a Bishop of
Westminster: But by Letters Patent dated 21 May, 2 Eliz. (pursuant to an Act of
Parliament of 1 Eliz. not Printed) the Revenues of that late Monastery were
vested in the Dean and Chapter of the Collegiate Church of Westminster, which
has caused Error in the Pleadings of some Cases, by styling it the Cathedral,
for Collegiate, Church of Westminster. Cassanaeus de Consuetud. Burgun. page
15. says, That France has within its Territories 104 Cities, and gives his
reason, Because there are so many Seats of Archbishops and Bishops. Yet Sir
Edward Coke: notes Cambridge to be a City by ancient Record (viz. Mich. 7 Rich.
1. Rot. 1.) Though I find no mention of its ever having been an Episcopal See.
On Littl. fol. 109. b. And in the Stat. 11 Hen. 7. cap. 4. it is called the
Town of Cambridge.

Clack; As to clack, force, and bard alias beard good Wool, Anno 8 Hen. 6.
cap. 22. whereof the first, viz. to clack Wool, is to cut off the Sheeps mark,
which makes it weigh less, and so yield the less custom to the King. To force
Wool is, to clip off the upper and more hairy part of it; to bard or beard it,
is to cut the head and the neck from the rest of the Fleece.

Claim (Clameum) Is a Challenge of Interest in any thing that is in the
possession of another, or, at the least, out of his own; as Claim by Charter,
Claim by Descent, etc. Old Not. Br. fol. 11. Si Dominus infra annum clameum
qualitercunque apposuerit. Bracton, lib. 1. cap. 10. See the definition and
diverse sorts of Claim, in Plowden, Casu Stowel, fol. 359. a.

Clamea Aomittenda in itinere per Atturnatum, Is a Writ whereby the King
commands the Justices in Air, to admit of ones Claim by Attorney, who is
employed in the Kings-service, and cannot come in his own person. Reg. of
Writs, fol. 19. b.

Clap-bord (Anno 35 Eliz. cap. 11.) Is Board cut in order to make Cask or
Vessels.

Clarentius. See Herald.

Claves Insulae, i. The Keys of the Island. In the Isle of Man all ambiguous
and weighty Cases, are referred to Twelve, whom they call Claves Insulae.

Clausum Fregit. Mr. Somner, in his Saxon Dictionary, conceives the original of
those much used words in our Law-Pleadings, might come from the Saxon
Eder-bryce, which signifies Hedge-breaking (the Boughs, which close the top of
the Hedge, being usually called Etherings.)

Clausum Paschae. Stat. of Westminster. 1. Lendemaine de la Cluse de Pasche, that is,
In Crastino clausi Paschae, or, in Crastino Octabis Paschae, which is all one;
viz. The morrow of the Utas of Easter. 2 Part. Inst. fol. 157. -- Ad Curiam cum
visu Franc. Pleg. tent. apud Maurdin die Jovis prox. post Festum Clausi
Paschae, Anno 17 Edw. 4. Testatum fuit quod, etc. Clausum Paschae, i. Dominica
in Albis; sic dictum, quod Pascha Claudat.

Clausura Heye -- Johannes Stanley Ar. clamat quod ipse and haeredes sui sunt
quieti de Clausura Heye de Macclesfield, scil. Clausura unius Rodae terrae
circiter hayam praedict. Rot. Plac. in Itinere apud Cestriam; Anno 14 Hen. 7.

Clergy (Clerus) Is diversely taken, sometime for the whole number of those, who
are De Clero Domini, of our Lords lot or share, as the Tribe of Levi was in
Judaea; sometimes for a Plea to an Indictment, or an Appeal, and is by Stamf.
(Pl. Cor. lib. 2. cap. 41.) thus defined. -- Clergy is an ancient liberty of
the Church, which has been confirmed by diverse Parliaments, and is, When a
Priest, or one in Orders, is arraigned of Felony before a Secular Judge, he may
pray his Clergy, which is as much, as if he prayed to be delivered to his
Ordinary, to purge himself of the offense objected. And this might be done in
case of Murder. Coke, lib. 4. fol. 46. a. This liberty is mentioned in
Articulis Cleri. Anno 9 Edw. 2. c. 26. and what persons might have their
Clergy, and what not, see Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 2. cap. 42, and 43. Yet there
are many Statutes made since he wrote that Book, whereby the benefit of Clergy
is abrigded; As Anno 8 Eliz. cap. 4. -- 14 Ejusdem, cap. 5. -- 18 Ejusdem, cap.
4, 6, 7. -- Anno 23 Ejusdem, cap. 2. -- 29 Ejusdem, cap. 2. 31 Ejusdem, cap 12.
and 39 Ejusdem, cap. 9. and 15. Of this see Cromptons Justice of Peace, fol.
102 -- 105. And Lambert Eiren. lib. 4. cap. 14. And note, that the ancient
course of Law in this point, is much altered; for by the Statute of 18 Eliz:
cap. 7. Clerks are no more delivered to their Ordinaries to be purged, but now
every Man, to whom this benefit is granted, though not in Orders, is put to
read at the Bar, after he is found guilty, and convicted of such Felony; and so
burnt in the hand, and set free for the first time, if the Ordinaries
Commissioner or Deputy standing by do say -- Legit ut Clericus; or otherwise he
suffers death for his transgression. Cowel.

Clerico Admittendo, Is a Writ directed to the Bishop, for the admitting a
Clerk to a Benefice, upon a Ne Admittas tried and found for the party that
procures the Writ. Reg. of Writs, fol. 31.

Clerico capto per Statutum Mercatorum, etc. Is a Writ for the delivery of a
Clerk out of prison, who is imprisoned upon the Breach of a Statute Merchant.
Reg. of Writs, fol. 147.

Clerico convicto commisso Goalae in defectu Ordinarii deliberando, Is a Writ
for the delivery of a Clerk to his Ordinary, that was formerly convict of
Felony, by reason his Ordinary did not challenge him according to the
privileges of Clerks. Reg. of Writs, fol. 69. a.

Clerico infra sacros ordines constituto, non eligendo in Officium, Is a Writ
directed to the Bailiffs, etc. that have thrust a Bailiwick or Beadleship upon
one in holy Orders, charging them to release him. Reg. of Writs, fol. 143. a.

Clerk (Clericus) Has two significations; one, as it is the title of him that
belongs to the holy Ministry of the Church; under which, where the Canon Law
has full power, are, not only comprehended Sacerdotes and Diaconi, but also
Subdiaconi, Cantores, Acolyti, Exorcistae, and Ostiarii. And in this
signification, a Clerk is either Religious (otherwise called Regular) or
Secular. Anno 4 Hen. 4. cap. 12. The other denotes those, who by their function
or course of life, practice their Pen in any Court, or otherwise; as, the Clerk
of the Rolls of Parliament, Clerks of the Chancery, etc. whose peculiar Offices
shall be set down in order.

Clerk of the Ax (Clericus Securis) Is an Officer in the Navy, whose function
is to carry a Silver Ax, wherewith to mark and seize Timber for the Kings use
in His Navy, or otherwise, and mentioned in the Stat. 16 Car. 2. cap. 5. where
it is Printed Clerk of the Acts, I suppose by mistake.

Clerk of the Parliament Rolls (Clericus Rotulorum Parliamenti) Is he that
Records all things done in the High Court of Parliament, and engrosseth them
fairly in Parchment Rolls, for their better preservation to posterity. Of these
there are two, One of the Lords House, another of the House of Commons, Cromp.
Jurisd. fol. 4. and 8. Smith de Repl. Angl. page 38. See also Vowels Book;
touching the Order of the Parliament.

Clerk of the Crown in Chancery (Clericus Coronae in Cancellaria) Is an Officer
there, who, by himself or Deputy, is continually to attend the Lord Chancellor,
or Lord Keeper; writes and prepares, for the Great Seal of England, special
Matters of State by Commission, or the like, either immediately from His
Majesty, or by Order of His Council, as well ordinary as extraordinary, viz.
Commissions of Lieutenancy, of Justices Itinerant, and of Assizes, of Oyer and
Terminer, of Goal Delivery, and of the Peace, with their Writs of Association,
and the like. Also, all General Pardons upon Grants of them, at the Kings
Coronation, or at a Parliament, where he sits in the Lords House in Parliament
time; info whose Office the Writs of Parliament, made by the Clerks of the
Pettibag, with the names of Knights and Burgesses, elected thereupon, are to be
returned and filed. He has also the making of all special Pardons, and Writs
of Execution upon Bonds of Statute Staple forfeited, which was annexed to his
Office in the Reign of Queen Mary, in consideration of his continual and
chargeable attendance: Both these before being common for every Cursitor and
Clerk of the Court of Chancery to make.

Clerk of the Crown (Clericus Coronae) Is a Clerk or Officer in the Kings
Bench, whose function is to frame, read, and record all Indictments against
Traitors, Felons, and other Offenders, there arraigned or indicted upon any
public crime. He is otherwise termed Clerk of the Crown Office. And Anno 2
Hen. 4. cap. 10. he is called Clerk of the Crown of the Kings Bench.

Clerk of Assise (Clericus Assisorum) Is he that writes all things judicially
done by the Justices of Assise in their Circuits. Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 227.

Clerk of the Chest (Anno 16 Car. 2. c. 5.) Keeps an account of the Moneys
collected, and kept in a Chest, for the use of sick and maimed Seamen and
Mariners.

Clerk of the Estreats (Clericus Extractorum) Is a Clerk belonging to the
Exchequer, who Termly receives the Estreats out of the Lord Treasurers
Remembrancers Office, and writes them out to be levied for the King. He also
makes Schedules of such sums estreated, as are to be discharged. See the
Practice of the Exchequer, page 82.

Clerk of the Pell (Clericus Pellis) Is a Clerk belonging to the Exchequer,
whose Office is to enter every Tellers Bill into a Parchment Roll, called
(Pellis. Receptorum,) and also to make another Roll of Payments, which is
called Pellis Exituum, wherein he sets down by what Warrant the Money was paid.
This Officer is called in ancient Records Clericus Domini Thesauri.

Clerk of the Warrants (Clericus Warrantorum) Is an Officer belonging to the
Court of Common Pleas, who enters all Warrants of Attorney for Plaintiff and
Defendant, and inrols all Deeds of Indentures of Bargain and Sale, which are
acknowledged in the Court, or before any Judges out of the Court. And he
Estreats into the Exchequer all Issues, Fines, and Amerciaments, which any way
grow due to the King in that Court, and has a standing Fee of Ten pounds of
the King, for making the same Extreats. See Fitzh. Not. Br. fol. 76.

Clerk of the Pettibag (Clericus Parvae bagae) Is an Officer of the Chancery,
of which sort there are three, and the Master of the Rolls their chief. Their
Office is to record the Return of all Inquisitions out of every Shire; to make
all Patents of Customers, Gangers, Comptrollers, and Aulnegers; all Conge de
Eslires for Bishops; all Liberates upon Extents of Statute Staples; the
recovery of Recognisances forfeited; and all Elegits upon them; the Summons of
the Nobility, Clergy, and Burgesses to the Parliament; Commissions directed to
Knights, and others of every Shire, for Assessing Subsidies; Writs for the
nominations of Collectors for Fifteenths; and all Traverses upon any Office,
Bill, or otherwise; to receive the Fees for Homages due to the Lord Great
Chamberlain; of the Nobility, Bishops, etc. This Officer is mentioned, 33 Hen.
8. cap. 22.

Clerk of the Kings Great Wardrobe (Clericus Magnae Garderobae Regis) Is an
Officer of the Kings House, that keeps an Account or Inventary in Writing, of
all things belonging to the Kings Wardrobe. Mentioned Anno 1 Edw. 4. cap. 1.

Clerk of the Market (Clericus Mercati Hospitii Regis) Is an Officer of the
Kings House (Anno 1 Edw. 4. cap. 1. and Anno 13 Rich. 2. cap. 4.) whose duty is
to take charge of the Kings Measures, and to keep the Standards of them, that
is, The examples of all the Measures that ought to be through the Land: As of
Elns, Yards, Lagens, Quarts, Pottles, Gallons, etc. Of Weights, Bushels, and
such like; and to see that all Measures in every place be answerable to the
said Standard. Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Of which Office, as also
of our diversity of Weights and Measures, you may there find a Treatise worth
the reading. Britton also, in his 30 Chap. says in the Kings Person, to this
effect: We will that none have Measures in the Realm, but we our selves; but
that every Man take his Measures and Weights from our Standards. And so goes on
with a Tractat of this matter, that well shows the ancient Law and Practice in
this point. Touching this Officers duty, you have also good Statutes. Anno 13
Rich. 2. cap. 4. and Anno 17 Car. 1. cap. 19. See 4 Inst. fol. 273.

Clerk of the Kings Silver (Clericus Argenti Regis) Is an Officer belonging to
the Court of Common Pleas, to whom every Fine is brought, after it has been
with the Custos Brevium, and by whom the effect of the Writ of Covenant, is
entered into a Paper-Book; and, according to that Note, all the Fines of that
Term are also recorded in the Rolls of the Court. And his Entry is in this
form: He puts the Shire in the Margin, and then says, A. B. dat Domino Regi
dimidium marcam (or more according to the value) pro licentia concordandi cum
C. D. pro talibus terris, in tali villa, and habet chirographum per pacem
admissum, etc.

Clerk of the Peace (Clericus Pacis) Is an Officer belonging to the Sessions of
the Peace. His duty is, in the Sessions to read the Endictments, to enrol the
Acts, and draw the Process: To record the Proclamations of Rates for Servants
Wages, to enrol the discharge of Apprentices, to keep the Counterpart of the
Indenture of Armor, to keep the Register Book of Licenses, given to Badgers and
Laders of Corn, and of those that are Licensed to shoot in Guns, and to
certify into the Kings Bench Transcripts of Indictments, Outlaries,
Attainders, and Convictions had before the Justices of the Peace, within the
time limited by Statute. Lamberts Eiren. lib. 4. cap. 3. fol. 379.

Clerk of the Signet (Clericus Signeti) Is an Officer attendant continually on
His Majesty's Principal Secretary, who always has the custody of the Privy
Signet, as well for sealing His Majesty's private Letters; as also such Grants
as pass His Majesty's Hand by Bill signed. Of these there are four that attend
in their course, and have their diet at the Secretaries Table. More largely you
may read of their Office in the Statute made Anno 27 H. 8. cap. 11.

Clerk of the Privy Seal (Clericus Privati Sigilli) There are four of these
Officers that attend the Lord Privy Seal, or (if none such) the Principal
Secretary, writing and making out all things that are sent by Warrant from the
Signet to the Privy Seal, and are to be passed to the Great Seal; as also to
make out (as they are termed) Privy Seals upon any special occasion of His
Majesty's affairs; as for Loan of Money, and such like. Of this Officer and his
Function, you may read the Statute 27 H. 8. cap. 11. He that is now called the
Lord Privy Seal, seems in ancient time to have been called Clerk of the Privy
Seal, and to have been reckoned, notwithstanding, in the number of the great
Officers of the Realm. Read the Statute 12 Rich. 2. cap. 11.

Clerk of the Juries or Jurata Writs (Clericus Juratorum) Is an Officer
belonging to the Court of Common Pleas, who makes out the Writs called (Habeas
Corpora) and (Distringas) for appearance of Juries, either in Court, or at the
Assizes, after the Jury or Panel is returned upon the (Venire facias.) He
enters also into the Rolls the Awarding of these Writs, and makes all the
continuance from the going out of the (Habeas Corpora) until the verdict be
given.

Clerk of the Pipe (Clericus Pipae) Is an Officer in the Exchequer, who, having
all Accounts and Debts due to the King, delivered and drawn out of the
Remembrancers Offices, charges them down into the great Roll; who also writes
Summons to the Sheriff, to levy the said Debts upon the Goods and Cattels of
the Debtors; and if they have no Goods, then he draws them down to the Lord
Treasurers Remembrancer, to write Estreats against their Lands. The ancient
Revenue of the Crown remains in charge before him, and he sees the same
answered by the Farmers and Sheriffs. He makes a charge to all Sheriffs of
their Summons of the Pipe and Green Wax, and sees it answered upon their
Accounts. He has the drawing and engrossing all Leases of the Kings Land. In
Henry the Sixths time, he was called Ingrossator Magni Rotuli.

Clerk of the Hamper or Hanaper (Clericus Hanaperii) Is an Officer in Chancery,
(Anno 2 Edw. 4. cap. 1.) otherwise called Warden of the Hamper, in the same
Statute, whose Function is to receive all the Money due to the King for the
Seals of Charters, Patents, Commissions, and Writs; as also Fees due to the
Officers for enrolling and examining the same, with such like. He is tied to
attendance on the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper daily in the Term time, and
at all times of sealing, having with him Leather Bags, wherein are put all
Charters, etc. After they are sealed, those Bags, being sealed up with the Lord
Chancellors Private Seal, are delivered to the Comptroller of the Hamper, who
upon receipt of them, does, as you shall read in his Office. This Hanaper
represents a shadow of that which the Romans termed (Fiscum) which contained
the Emperors treasure.

Clerk of the Pleas (Clericus Placitorum) Is an Officer in the Exchequer, in
whose Office all the Officers of the Court (upon especial Privilege belonging
unto them) ought to sue, or to be sued upon any Action, etc. See the Practice
of the Exchequer, page 86. and 4 Inst. fol. 107.

Clerk of the Treasury (Clericus Thesaurariae) Is an Officer belonging to the
Common Pleas, who has the charge of keeping the Records of the Court, and
makes out all the Records of Nisi Prius, has the Fees due for all searches,
and has the certifying all Records into the Kings Bench, when a Writ of Error
is brought: Also he makes all Exemplications of Records being in the Treasury.
He is taken to be the servant of the Chief Justice, and removeable at his
pleasure, whereas all other Officers are for term of life. There is also a
Secundary, or Under-Clerk of the Treasury for Assistance, who has some
allowances. And likewise an Under-Keeper, who always keeps one Key of the
Treasury door, and the chief Clerk of the Secondary an other; so as the one
cannot come in, without the other.

Clerk of Essoyns (Clericus Essoniorum) Is an Officer belonging to the Court of
Common Pleas, who keeps the Essoyn-Rolls, and has for entering every Essoyn six
pence, and for every Exception to Bar the Essoyn, in case where the party has
omitted his time, six pence. He has also the providing of Parchment, and
cutting it out into Rolls, and marking the numbers upon them, and the delivery
out of all the Rolls to every Officer, and the receiving them again when they
are written, and the binding and making up the whole Bundles of every Term; and
this he does as Servant to the chief Justice. For the chief Justice is at
charge for the Parchment of all the Rolls; for which he is allowed, as the
chief Justice of the Kings Bench, besides the penny for the Seal of every Writ
of Privilege and Utlary, the seventh penny taken for the Seal of every Writ
under the Green Wax, or Petit Seal in the Court of Kings Bench and Common Pleas
respectively, the said Lord Chief Justices having annexed to their several
Offices or places, the custody of the said Seals belonging to each Court.

Clerk of the Outlaries (Clericus Utlagariarum) Is an Officer belonging to the
Court of Common Pleas, being only the Servant or Deputy to the Kings Attorney
General, for making out Writs of (Capias Utlagatum) after Outlary; the Kings
Atturnies name being to every one of those Writs. And whereas seven pence is
paid for the Seal of every other Writ, betwixt party and party, there is but a
penny paid for the Seal of this Writ, because it goes out at the Kings Suit.

Clerk of the Errors (Clericus Errorum) In the Court of Common Pleas does
transcribe and certify into the Kings Bench, the Tenor of the Records of the
Cause or Action; upon which, the Writ of Error (made by the Cursitor) is
brought, there to be adjudged and determined: The Clerk of the Errors in the
Kings Bench, does likewise transcribe and certify the Records of such Causes
in that Court, into the Exchequer, if the Cause or Action were by Bill: If by
Original, the Lord Chief Justice certifies the Record into the House of Peers
in Parliament, by taking the Transcript from the Clerk of the Errors, and
delivering it to the Lord Keeper, there to be determined, according to the
Statutes 27 Eliz. 8. and 31 Eliz. 1. The Clerk of the Errors in the Exchequer
does Transcribe the Records, certified thither out of the Kings Bench, and
prepares them for Judgment in the Court of Exchequer, to be given by the
Justices of the Common Pleas, and Barons there. See 16 Car. 2. cap. 2. and 20
Eiusdem, cap. 4.

Clerk of the Sewers (Clericus Suerarum) Is an Officer appertaining to the
Commissioners of Sewers, writing all things that they do by virtue of their
Commission, for which see Sewers: And see the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 9.

Clerk Comptroller of the Kings House (whereof there are two) Is an Officer in
the Court that has Authority to allow or disallow the charges and demands of
Pursuivants, Messengers of the Green-cloth, or other like. He has also the
oversight and controlling of all Defects and Miscarriages of any the Inferior
Officers, and to sit in the Counting House with the Superior Officers (viz.)
The Lord Steward, Mr. Treasurer, Comptroller, and Cosserer, either for
correcting, or bettering things out of Order. This Officer is mentioned Anno 33
Hen. 8. cap. 12.

Clerk of the Nichils or Nihils (Clericus Nihilorum) Is an Officer in the
Exchequer, who makes a Roll of all such sums, as are nihiled by the Sheriffs
upon their Estreats of Greenwax, and delivers the same into the Lord Treasurers
Remembrancers Office, to have execution done upon it for the King. See the
Stat. 5 Rich. 2. cap. 13. Stat. 1. and Practice of the Exchequer, page 101. See
Nihil.

Clerk of the Check, Is an Officer in the Court, so called because he has the
Check and Controlment of the Yeomen of the Guard, and all other ordinary Yeomen
and Huissiers belonging either to His Majesty, the Queen, or Prince; either
giving leave or allowing their Absences or Defects in attendance, or
diminishing their Wages for the same. He also nigntly by himself, or Deputy,
takes the view of those that are to watch in the Court, and has the setting of
the Watch. This Officer is mentioned Anno 33 Hen. 8. cap. 12. Also there is an
Officer of the same name in the Kings Navy, and mentioned Anno 19 Car. 2. cap.
1.

Clerk Marshal of the Kings House, Seems to be an Officer that attends the
Marshal in His Court, and Records all His proceedings. Anno 33 Hen. 8. cap. 12.

Closh, Was an unlawful Game, forbidden by the Statute of 17 Edw. 4. cap. 3.
and seems to have been the same with our Nine Pins; elsewhere called
Closh-cayls. Anno 33 Hen. 8. cap. 9. Though some think it might be the same
Game, which is still used by idle persons in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and now
called The Wheel of Fortune, wherein they turn about a thing like the Hand of a
Clock, in Fr. Cloche.

Clove, Is the Two and thirtieth part of a Weigh of Cheese, i. Eight pound. An.
9 Hen. 6. cap. 8. See Waga.

Cocherings, An Exaction or Tribute in Ireland. See Bonaght.

Cocket or Coket (Cokettum) Is a Seal belonging to the Kings Custom-house. Reg.
of Writs, fol. 192. a. Also a Scrol of Parchment sealed and delivered by the
Officers of the Custom-house to Merchants, as a Warrant, that their
Merchandises are customed. Anno 11 Hen. 6. cap 16. Which Parchment is otherwise
called Literae de Coketto, or Literae testimoniales de Coketto. Reg. fol. 179.
a. So is the word used, Anno 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 14. And 14 Edw. 3. Stat. 1.
cap. 21. None shall make Wools to be Cocketted, but in the name of him to whom
the Wools be. Anno 13 Rich. 2. cap. 9.

Coket, Is also used for a distinction of Bread in the Statute of Bread and
Ale, made 51 Hen. 3. The words are, When a quarter of Wheat is sold for xii d,
then Wastel-Bread of a Farthing shall weigh vi 1. and xvi s; but Bread-Cocket
of a Farthing, of the same Corn and Bultel, shall weigh more then Wastel by ii
s. And Cocket-Bread made of Corn of lower price, shall weigh more then Wastel
by v s. Bread made into a Simnel, shall weigh ii s. less then Wastel: Bread
made of the whole Wheat, shall weigh a Cocket and a half; so that a Cocket
shall weigh more then a Wastel by v s. Bread of Treet shall weigh two Wastels;
and Bread of Common Wheat shall weigh two great Cockets. When a Quarter of
Wheat is sold for xviii d. then Wastel-Bread of a Farthing, White and
well-baked, shall weigh iv l, x s. when for ii s, iii l. viii s. etc. By which,
we may perceive, that Wastel-Bread was the finest, Cocket-Bread next, then
Bread of Treet, and lastly, Bread of Common Wheat; as we now call the finest
Bread, Wheaten, or French Bread, the second sort White Bread, the third Brown,
or Household Bread, etc.

Codicil (Codicillus) A Schedule or Supplement to a Will, or some other
Writing; some Writers, conferring a Testament, and a Codicil together, call a
Testament a great Will, and a Codicil a little one; and compare a Testament to
a Ship, and the Codicil to the Boat tied to the Ship.

Codicil is used as an addition annexed to a Testament, when any thing is
omitted, which the Testator would add, explain, alter, or retract; and is the
same with a Testament, but that it is without an Executor. Sec Swinb. page 1.
sect. 5. and Touchstone of Wills, page 21, 22.

Coffee (Anno 15 Car. 2 cap. 11) A kind of drink brought hither from the Turks
and Persians, black, thick, and bitter, distrained from Berries of that nature
and name, yet thought to be good and wholesome.

Cofferer of the Kings Household, Is a Principal Officer of the Court, next
under the Comptroller, who in the Counting House, and elsewhere, has a special
charge and oversight of other Officers of the Household, for their good
demeanor and carriage in their Offices, and pays their wages. This Officer is
mentioned. Anno 39 Eliz. cap. 7.

Cogs (Cogones) Seems to be a kind of Vessel or Boat, upon the River of Ouse,
and Water of Humber, mentioned in the Statute of 23 Hen. 8. cap. 18. Also a
kind of Ship; For I find in Matthew. Westminster. Anno Dom. 1066. -- Venit ad hoc in
Angliam (Rex Noricorum) trecentis Coggonibus advectus.

Cognatione. See Cosenage.

Cognisor. See Conisor

Cognitionibus Mittendis, Is a Writ to a Justice, or other that has power to
take a Fine (who having taken it, defers to certify it into the Court of
Common Pleas) commanding him to certify it. Reg. of Writs, fol. 68. b.

Cognizance (Fr. Cognizance, i. cognitio) Is used diversely; sometimes
signifying the Badge of a Waterman, or Serving-Mans Sleeve, which is commonly
the givers Crest, whereby he is discerned to belong to this, or that Noble or
Gentleman: Sometimes an acknowledgment of a Fine, or Confession of a thing
done; as Cognoscens latro. Bract. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 3. 20, 32. And to make
Cognizance of taking a Distress. Sometimes, as an audience or hearing a matter
judicially, as to take Cognizance. Sometimes a Power or Jurisdiction, as
Cognizance of Plea, is an ability to call a Cause or Plea out of another Court,
which no Man can do but the King, except he can show Charters for it. Manw.
par. 1. page 68. For such Cognizance lies not in Prescription.

Cogware, Seems to be a sort of Course Clothes, made in the North of England,
mentioned in the Stat. 13 Rich. 2. cap. 10. Where there is mention also of
Cogmen, that is, Buyyers of, Makers or Dealers in, such Cogware.

Coif (Coifa, Fr. Coiffe) Our Sergeants at Law, are otherwise called Sergeants
of the Coif; from the Lawn Coif they wear on their Heads, under their Cap, when
they are created, and always after. See Sergeant.

Coin (Fr. Coign, i. Angulus, which probably verisies the opinion of such as
hold the ancientest sort of Coin to be cornered, and not round) any sort of
Money coined. Cromp. Just. of P. fol. 220.

Coinage, Besides the general signification, relating to Money: It is (says
Camden) by a Law provided, That all the Tin in Cornwall, after it is cast and
wrought, shall be weighed and signed with a stamp, which is called Coynage.
Britan. fol. 186. and Anno 11 Hen. 7. cap. 4. Some Authors write it Cunage.

Coket. See Cocket.

Coliberts (Colliberti) Sunt tenentes in libero Soccagio. M. S. Or such as of
Villains were made Freemen.

Collateral (Collateralis) Side-wise, or which hangs by the side, or comes in
side-wards, not direct: As Collateral Assurance, is that which is made over and
beside the Deed it self; as, If a Man covenant with another, and enter Bond for
performance of his Covenant, the Bond is termed Collateral Assurance; because
it is external, and without the nature and essence of the Covenant. And
Crompton (Juris. fol. 185.) says, That, to be subject to the feeding of the
Kings Deer, is Collateral to the Soil within the Forest. So we may say, That
Liberties to pitch Booths, or Standings for a Fair in another Man's Ground, is
Collateral to the Ground. The Private Woods of a common person, within a
Forest, may not be cut without the Kings License; for it is a Prerogative
Collateral to the Soil. Manwood, par. 1. page 66.

Collateral Warranty. See Warranty.

Collation of Benefice (Collatio Beneficii) Signifies properly the bestowing a
Benefice by the Bishop, who has it in his own gift or patronage, and differs
from Institution in this, That Institution into a Benefice, is performed by the
Bishop, at the motion or presentation of another, who is Patron of it, or has
the Patrons right for the time. Yet Collation is used for presentation, Anno 25
Edw. 3. Stat. 6.

Collatione facta uni post mortem alterius, etc. Is a Writ directed to the
Justices of the Common Pleas, commanding them to direct their Writ to a Bishop,
for the admitting a Clerk in the place of another presented by the King, who,
during the suit between the King and the Bishops Clerk, is departed this life:
For, Judgment once passed for the Kings Clerk, and he dying before admittance,
the King may bestow his presentation on another. Reg. of Writs, fol. 31. b.

Color (color) Signifies a probable Plea, but in truth, false, and has this
end, to draw the trial of the Cause from the Jury to the Judges. As, in an
Action of Trespass for taking away the Plaintiffs Beasts, the Defendant says,
That before the Plaintiff had any thing in them, he himself was posseised of
them, as of his proper Goods, and delivered them to A. B. to deliver them to
him again, when, etc. And A. B. gave them to the Plaintiff, and the Plaintiff,
supposing the property to be in A. B. at the time of the gift, took them, and
the Defendant took them from the Plaintiff, whereupon the Plaintiff brings his
Action. -- This is a good Color, and a good Plea. See Doctor and Student, lib.
2. cap. 13. And Broke, tit. Color in Assise, Trespass, etc. fol. 104.

Collusion (Collusio) Is a deceitful agreement or compact between two or more,
for the one party to bring an Action against the other to some evil purpose, as
to defraud a third person of his right, etc. See the Statute of Westmin. 2.
cap. 32. and 8 Hen. 6. cap. 26. which gives the Quale ju^ and enquiry in such
Cases. See Broke, tit. Collusion, and Reg. of Writs, fol. 179. a. Gifts made by
Collusion, see in 50 Edw. 3. cap. 6.

Combat (Fr.) Signifies as much as Certamen, pugna; But with us it is taken for
a formal trial between two Champions, of a doubtful cause or quarrel, by the
Sword or Bastons; of which you may read at large in Glanvile, lib. 14. cap. 1.
Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 21. Britton, cap. 22. Horns Mirror of Justices,
lib. 3. cap. Des Exceptions in fine proxime and cap. Juramentum Duelli. Dyer,
fol. 301. number. 41, 42: When Alan de la Zouch had judicially sued John Earl of
Warren, who chose rather to try the title by the Sword Point, than by Point of
Law, he was wounded by him even in Westminster Hall, in the year 1269. says
Camden in his Britan. fol. 519. The last Trial by combat was admitted 6 Car. 1.
between Donnold Lord Roy, Appellant, and David Ramsey, Esquire, Defendant,
Scotchmen, in the Painted Chamber at Westminster, before Robert Earl of
Lindsey, Lord High Constable, Thomas Earl of Arundel, Earl Marshal, with other
Lords; where, after the Court had met several times, and Bill, Answer, and
Replication put in by the Parties, and Council heard with other Formalities, it
was at last determined, that the matter should be referred to the Kings will
and pleasure, whose favor inclined to Ramsey. Bakers Chron. fol. 500. See Coke
on Littl. fol. 294. b. Origines Juridiciales, fol. 65. And Spelmans Gloss. at
large, verbo, Campus.

Comitatu Commisso, Is a Writ or Commission, whereby the Sheriff is authorized
to take upon him the charge of the County. Reg. of Writs, fol. 295. Cokes Rep.
lib. 3. fol. 72. a.

Comitatu and Castro Commisso, Is a Writ whereby the charge of a County, with
the keeping of a Castle is committed to the Sheriff. Reg. of Writs, fol. 295.

Comitatus. -- Of dead Ferms and Debts desperate, whereof there is no hope, one
Roll shall be made, and shall be entitled, Comitatus, and read every year upon
the account of Sheriffs. 10 Edw. 1. cap. unico.

Commandry (Praeceptoria) Was a Manor or chief Message, with Lands and
Tenements appertaining thereto, belonging to the Priory of St. John's of
Jerusalem in England; and he, who had the Government of any such Manor or
House, was called the Commander; who could not dispose of it, but to the use of
the Priory, only taking thence his own sustenance, according to his degree,
who was usually a Brother of the same Priory. New Eagle in the County of
Lincoln, was, and still is called the Commandry of Eagle, and did anciently
belong to the said Priory; so were Slebach in Pembrokeshire, and Shengay in
Cambridgeshire Commandries, in time of the Knights-Templers, says Camd. --
These, in many places of England, are termed Temples, as Temple Bruere in
Lincolnshire, Temple Newsum in Yorkshire, etc. because they formerly belonged
to the said Templers. Of these read Anno 26 Hen. 8. cap. 2. and 32 Ejusdem,
cap. 24. See Preceptories.

Commandment (Praeceptum) Has a diverse use; as the Commandment of the King,
when, upon his mere motion and from his own mouth, he casts any Man into
Prison. Stamf. Pl. Cor. fol. 72. Commandment of the Justices is either absolute
or ordinary. Absolute, as when, upon their own Authority in their Wisdom and
Discretion, they commit a Man to prison for a punishment. Ordinary is, when
they commit one rather for safe-custody, then punishment. A Man committed upon
an Ordinary Commandment is replevisable. Pl. Cor. fol. 73. Commandment is again
used for the offense of him, that wills another Man to transgress the Law, or
to do any thing contrary to the Law; as Murder, Theft, or such like. Bracton,
lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 19. which the Civilians call Mandatum.

Commendam (Ecclesia Commendata) Is a Benefice or Church-Living, which being
void, is commended to the charge and care of some sufficient Clerk, to be
supplied, until it may be conveniently provided of a Pastor. And, that this was
the true original of this practice, you may read at large in Durandus, De
sacris Ecclesiae Ministeriis and Beneficiis, lib. 5. cap. 7. He to whom the
Church is commended, has the Fruits and Profits thereof, only for a certain
time; and the Nature of the Church is not changed thereby, but is as a thing
deposited in his hands in trust, who has nothing but the custody of it, which
may be revoked. When a Parson is made Bishop, there is a Cession of his
Benefice by the Promotion; but if the King gives him power to retain his
Benefice, he shall continue Parson, and is said to hold it in Commendam. Hob.
Rep. fol. 144. Latches Rep. fol. 236, 237. See Ecclesia commendata, in Gloss.
x. Scriptor.

Comminalty (Fr. Communaute) Includes all the Kings Subjects. So in Art. super
Chartas 28 Edw. 1. cap. 1. Tout le Commune d'Engleterre, signifies all the
People of England. 2 Inst. fol 539.

Commissary (Commissarius) Is a Title of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
appertaining to such a one, as exercises Spiritual Jurisdiction in places of
the Diocese so far distant from the chief City, as the Chancellor cannot call
the Subjects to the Bishops Principal Consistory, without their too great
molestation. This Commissary is by the Canonists called Commissarius or
Officialis foraneus. Lyndwoods Provin. cap. 1. And is ordained to this special
end, that he supply the Bishops Jurisdiction and Office in the out places of
the Diocese, or else in such Parishes as are peculiar to the Bishop, and
exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Archdeacon. For where either by
Prescription or Composition, Archdeacons have Jurisdiction within their
Arch-deaconries, as in most places they have, this Commissary is but
superfluous, and oft-times vexations to the people. Therefore the Bishop,
taking Prestation Money of his Archdeacons yearly, Pro exteriori
Jurisdictione, as it is ordinarily called, does by super-onerating their
circuit with a Commissary, not only wrong Archdeacons, but the poorer sort of
Subjects much more. Cowel. and see 4 Inst. fol. 338.

Commission (Commissio) Is with us, as much as delegatio with the Civilians,
and is taken for the Warrant or Letters Patent, which all Men (exercising
Jurisdiction, either ordinary or extraordinary) have to authorize them to hear
or determine any cause or action. Of these see diverse in the Table of the Reg.
of Writs, and see Broke, tit. Commission; yet this word is sometimes extended
farther then to Matters of Judgment, as the Commission of Purveyors or Takers,
Anno 11 Hen. 4. cap. 28. which seems to be null by the Statute, for taking away
Purveyance. Anno 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. The High Commission Court which was
founded upon the Statute 1 Eliz. cap. 1. is also abolished by Act of
Parliament, 17 Car. 1. cap. 11. and that again explained by another Act, 13
Car. 2. cap. 12.

Commission of Association (mentioned 18 Eliz. cap. 9.) Is a Commission under
the Great Seal, to associate two or more learned persons, with the several
Justices in the several Circuits and Counties in Wales.

Commission of Anticipation, Was a Commission under the Great Seal, to collect
a Subsidy before the day. Anno 15 Hen 8. Cokes 12 Rep. fol. 120.

Commission of Rebellion (Commissio Rebellionis) Is otherwise called a Writ of
Rebellion, and Issues, when a Man (after Proclamation issued out of the
Chancery, and made by the Sheriff, to present himself, under pain of his
allegiance to the Court, by a certain day) appears not. And this Commission is
directed by way of command to certain persons, three, two or one of them, to
apprehend or cause to be apprehended, the party, as a Rebel, or contemner of
the Kings Laws; wheresoever they find him within the Kingdom, and bring or
cause him to be brought to the Court upon a day therein assigned: The Form of
it you have in West, Tract. Touching proceedings in Chancery, Sect. 24.

Commissioner (Commissionarius) Is he that has Commission, as Letters Patent,
or other lawful Warrant, to execute any Public Office; as Commissioners of the
Office of Licenses of Alienation. West. Part. 2. Symb. Tit. Fines, Sect. 106.
Commissioners in Eyr. Anno 3 Edw. 7. cap 26. With many such like.

Committee. Is he, or they to whom the consideration or ordering of any matter
is referred, either by some Court or Consent of Parties to whom it belongs. As
in Parliament, a Bill being read, is either consented to and passed, or denied,
or neither, but referred to the consideration of some certain persons,
appointed by the House farther to examine it, who thereupon are called a
Committee. Committee of the King. West. pa. 2. Symb. tit. Chancery, Sect. 144.
This word seems to be strangely used in Kitchen, fol. 160. where the Widow of
the Kings Tenant being dead, is called the Committee of the King, that is, one
committed by the ancient Law of the Land, to the Kings care and protection.

Commoigne (Fr.) A Fellow-Monk, that lives in the same Convent. 3 Part. Instit.
fol. 15.

Common (Commune, i. quod ad omnes pertinet) Signifies that Soil or Water,
whereof the use is common to this or that Town or Lordship; as Common of
Pasture, (Commune Pasturae.) Bracton, lib. 4. cap. 19. and 40. Commun of
Fishing, (Commune Piscariae.) Idem, lib. 2. cap. 34. Common of Turbary,
(Commune Turbariae, i. Of digging Turves.) Idem, lib. 4. cap. 41. Common of
Estovers, (Commune Estoveriorum,) Kitchen, fol. 94, etc. Common is divided into
Common in Gross, Common Appendant, Common Apportenant, and Common per cause de
Vicinage, i. By reason of Neighborhood.

Common in Gross, Is a liberty to have Common alone (that is) without any Land
or Tement, in another Man's Land, to himself for life, or to him, and his heirs;
and it is commonly passed by Deed of Grant or Specialty. Old Not. Br. fol. 31.
and 37.

Common Appendant, and Common Appurtenant, are in a manner confounded, as
appears by Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 180. And are defined to be a Liberty of Common
Appurtaining to, or Depending on such, or such a Freehold; which Common must be
taken with Beasts Commonable; as Horses, Oxen, Kine, and Sheep, being accounted
fittest for the Ploughman; and not of Goats, Geese, and Hogs: But some make
this difference, That Common Appurtenant may be severed from the Land whereto
it pertains, but not Common Appendant; which (according to Sir Edw. Coke, lib.
4. fol. 37.) had this beginning -- When a Lord enfeoffed another in Arabic
Lands, to hold of him in Soccage; the Feoffce, to maintain the service of his
Plough, had at first, by the Courtesy or Permission of the Lord, Common in the
Wastes of his Lord, for his necessary Beasts, to ear and compost his Land, and
that for two Causes; one, for that, as then it was taken, it was tacitly
implied in the Feoffment, by reason the Feoffee could not Till, nor Compost his
Land without Cattle, and Cattle could not be sustained without Pasture, and so
by consequence the Feoffee had, as a thing necessary and incident, Common in
the Wastes and Land of the Lord. And this appears by the ancient Books, Temp.
Ed. 1. tit. Common 24. and 17 Edw. 2. tit. Common 23. and 20 Edw. 3. tit.
Admeasurement 8. and by the rehearsal of the Statute of Merton, cap. 4. The
second reason was, for maintenance and advancement of Tillage, which is much
regarded and favored by the Law.

Common per cause de Vicinage (i. Common by reason of Neighborhood) Is a
Liberty that the Tenants of one Lord in one Town, have to Common with the
Tenants of another Lord in another Town: Those that challenge this kind of
Common (which is usually called Intercommoning) may not put their Cattle into
the Common of the other Town; for then they are distrainable, but, turning them
into their own Field, if they stray into the Neighbor- Common, they must be
suffered; provided they do not surcharge either Common. Common of Pasture, the
Civilians call Jus compascendi.

Common Bench (Bancus Communis, from the Sax. banc, i. A Bank, or Hillock, and
metaphorically a Bench, High Seat or Tribunal.) The Court of Common Pleas was
anciently so called. Anno 2 Edw. 3. cap. 11. because (says Camden in his
Britan, page 113.) Communia Placita inter subditos ex jure nostro, quod Commune
vocant, in hoc disceptantur, that is, the Pleas or Controversies between common
persons are there tried. And the Justices of that Court in Legal Records, are
termed Justiciarii de Banco. Coke on Littl. fol. 71. b. See Common Pleas.

Common Fine (Finis Communis) Is a certain sum of Money, which the Resiants
within the view of some Leets, pay to the Lord thereof, called in diverse places
Head-silver, in others Cert-money, or Certum Leta, and Head-pence; and was
first granted to the Lord toward the charge of his purchase of the Court Leet,
whereby the Resiants had now the ease, to do their Suit-Royal nearer home, and
not be compelled to go to the Sheriffs Turn. As in the Manor of Sheapshead in
Com. Leic. every Resiant pays 1 d per Poll to the Lord, at the Court held after
Michaelmas, which is there called Common Fine. There is also Common Fine of the
County, for which see Fleta, lib. 7. cap. 48. and the Statute of 3 Edw. 1. cap.
18. But the Clerk of the Market shall take no Common Fine, Anno 13 Rich. 2.
cap. 4. For Common Fine, the Lord cannot distrain without a prescription.
Godfreys Case, in Sir Edw. Cokes 11 Report.

Common Pleas (Communia Placita) Is the Kings Court, now constantly held in
Westminster Hall, but in ancient time moveable, as appears by Magna Charta,
cap. 11. 2 Edw. 3. cap. 11. and Pupilla oculi, Part 5. cap. 22. But Gwin, in
the Preface to his Readings, says, That until Henry the Third granted the
Great Charter, there were but two Courts in all, called the Kings Courts, viz.
The Exchequer and the Kings Bench, which was then called Curia Domini Regis,
and Aula Regis; because it followed the Court or King, and that upon the Grant
of that Charter, the Court of Common Pleas was erected and settled in one place
certain, viz. Westminster Hall; amd therefore after that, all the Writs ran,
Quod sit coram Justiciariis meis apud Westminster. whereas before the party was
commanded by them to appear, Coram me vel Justiciariis meis, simply without
addition of place, as he well observes out of Glanvile and Bracton, the one
writing in Henry the Second's time, before this Court was erected; the other in
the later end of Henry the Third's time, who erected this Court. All Civil
Causes, both Real and Personal, are or were in former times tried in this
Court, according to the strict Law of the Realm; and by Fortescu, cap. 50. it
seems to have been the only Court for Real Causes. The Chief Justice thereof,
is called the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, accompanied with three or
four Judges, Assistants, or Associats, who are created by Letters Patent, and,
as it were, enstalled or placed on the Common Bench, by the Lord Chancellor,
and Lord Chief Justice of the Court, as appears by Fortescu, cap. 51. who
expresses all the circumstances thereof. The rest of the Officers belonging to
this Court, are, The Custos Brevium, three Prothonotaries, otherwise called
Prenotaries, Chirographer, 14 Filazers. 4 Exigenters, Clerk of the Warrants,
Clerk of the Juries, or Jurata Writs, Clerk of the Treasury, Clerk of the Kings
Silver, Clerk of the Essoyns, Clerk of the Outlaries, Clerk of the Errors.
Whose distinct Functions read in their places. See Common Bench, and 4 Inst.
fol. 99.

Common Day in Plea of Land (Anno 13 Rich. 2. Stat. 1. cap. 17.) Signifies an
Ordinary day in Court, as Octabis Hillarii, Quindena Pasche, etc. Which you may
see in the Statute of 51 Hen. 3. concerning general days in the Bench.

Common Intendment, Is Common Understanding or Meaning, according to the
Subject Matter, not strained to an exotic sense. Bar to Common Intendment, is
an Ordinary or General Bar, which commonly disables the Declaration of the
Plaintiff. Of Common Intendment, a Will shall not be supposed to be made by
Collusion. Coke on Littl. fol. 78. b. See Intendment.

Commons House of Parliament, Is so called, because the Commons of the Realm,
that is, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses representing them, do sit there.
Crompt. Jurisd. 9.

Common Law (Communis Lex) Has three significations: First, It is taken for
the Laws of this Realm simply, without any other Law joined to it; As, when it
is disputed, what ought of right to be determined by the Common Law, and what
by the Spiritual Law, or Admirals Court, or the like. Secondly, For the Kings
Court, as the Kings Bench or Common Pleas, only to show a difference between
them and the Base Courts, as Customary Courts, Court Barons, County Courts,
Pipowders, and such like: As when a Plea of Land is removed out of Ancient
Demesne, because the Land is Frank-fee, and pleadable at the Common Law, that
is, in the Kings Court, and not in Ancient Demesne, or any other Base Court.
Thirdly, and most usually, by the Common Law, is understood such Laws as were
generally taken and holden for Law, before any Statute was made to alter the
same. As, neither Tenant for Life, nor for Years, were punishable by the Common
Law for doing Waste, till the Statute of Glouc. cap. 5. was made, which gives
an Action of Waste against them. But Tenant by the Courtesy, and Tenant in
Dower, were punishable for it before the said Statute. See Law.

Commorth. See Comorth.

Commore (Br. Cwmmwd, i. Provincia) In Wales is half a Cantred or Hundred,
containing Fifty Villages. Stat. Walliae, 12 Edw. 1. and 21 Hen. 8. cap. 26. It
signifies also a great Seignory, and may include one or diverse Manors. Coke on
Littl. fol. 5.

Commune. See Comminalty.

Communi Custodia, Is a Writ that did lie for that Lord, whose Tenant, holding
by Knights-service, died and left his eldest Son under age, against a Stranger
that entered the Land, and obtained the Ward of the Body. Old Not. Br. fol. 89.
But this Writ is become obsolete since Wardships were taken away by the Stat.
12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

Communication (Communicatio) A talking, consultation, or conferring with.
Where there is only a Parley betwixt two, and no perfect Agreement, that is,
no such Contract between them, as on which to ground an Action, it is called a
Communication.

Communia placita non tenenda in Scarcario, Is a Writ directed to the Treasurer
and Barons of the Exchequer, forbidding them to hold Plea, between common
persons in that Court, where neither of them belong thereto. Reg. of Writs,
fol. 187. b.

Comorth (Comortha) From the British Cymmorth, Subsidium) A Contribution:
Subsidium a pluribus collatum. Anno 4 Hen. 4. cap. 27. And 26 Hen. 8. cap. 6.
Prohibits the Levying any such in Wales, or the Marches, etc. It seems this
Commorth was gathered at Marriages, and when young Priests said or sung their
first Masses, and sometimes for redemption of Murders or Felonies.

Companion of the Garter, Is one of the Knights of that most Noble Order. Anno
24. Hen. 8. cap. 13. See Garter.

Compositio Mensurarum, Is the Title of an ancient Ordinance for Measures, not
Printed, and is mentioned in the Statute of 23 Hen. 8. cap 4.

Compromise (Compromissum) Is a mutual promise of two or more parties at
difference, to refer the ending of their Controversies to the Arbitrament, and
Equity of one or more Arbitrators. West defines a Compromise or Submission to
be the faculty or power of pronouncing Sentence between Persons at
Controversy, given to Arbitrators by the Parties mutual private consent,
without public Authority. Par. 2. Symbol. Tit. Compromise. Sect. 1.

Computation (Computatio) Is the true account and construction of time; to the
end, that neither party do wrong to the other, nor that the determination of
time be so left at large, as to be taken otherways then according to the just
Judgment of the Law. As, if Indentures of Demise are engrossed, bearing date 11
May, 1669. To have and to hold the Land in S. for three years from henceforth,
and the Indentures are delivered the Fourth day of June following: In this
Case, from henceforth shall be accounted from the day of the Delivery, and not
from the date; and if the Indenture be delivered at four of the Clock in the
Afternoon of the said Fourth day of June, the Lease shall end the Third day of
June, in the Third year. For the Law, in this Computation, rejects all
fractions or divisions of the day, for the incertainty, which always is the
Mother of Contention. So where the Statute of Enrolments, made 27 Hen. 8. cap.
16. is, That Writings shall be enrolled within six Months after the date
thereof, if such Writings have date, the Six Months shall be accounted from
the date, and not from the Delivery; but if they want date, then it shall be
accounted from the Delivery. Coke, lib. 5. fol. 1.

If any Deed be showed to a Court at Westminster, it shall remain in Court (by
Judgment of the Law,) all the Term, in which it is showed, for all the Term in
Law, is but as one day. Coke, lib. 5. fol. 74. If a Church be void, and the
Patron does not present within Six Months, then the Bishop of the Diocese may
collate his Chaplain, but these Six Months shall not be Computed according to
Twenty eight days in the Month, but according to the Calendar. See
Kalendar-moneth.

Computo (Lat.) Is a Writ so called of the Effect, which compels a Bailiff,
Chamberlain, or Receiver, to yield his account. Old Not. Br. fol. 58. It is
founded on the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 2. And it lies also for Executors of
Executors. 15 Edw. 3. Stat. de provis. victual. cap. 5. Thirdly, Against the
Guardian in Soccage for Waste made in the Minority of the Heir. Marlbr. cap.
17. And see further in what other Cases it lies, Reg. of Writs, fol. 135. Fitz.
Not. Br. fol. 116.

Conabel (Fr. Convenable, i. Convenient or fitting) -- We ordain, that there be
made a Hache of Conabyl heythe, crestyd with Pikes of Herne, to sore the entry
of your Kechyne, that no strange peopille may enter with certain Clekets,
advised be you, and be your Steward to such persons, as you and them think
honest and Conable. Artic. Decani and Capit. S. Pauli Priorat. S. Helenae. Dat.
21 Junii, 1439.

Concealers (Concelatores) Are such as find out concealed Lands, that is, such
Lands as are privily kept from the King by common persons, having nothing to
show for their Title or Estate therein. Anno 39 Eliz. cap. 22. and 21 Jac. cap.
2. They are so called a Concelando, as Mons a Movendo, per Antiphrasin. See 3
Part. Inst. fol. 188. Where the Author calls them Turbidum hominum genus.

Concessi (a word much used in Conveyances) In Law it creates a Covenant, as
Dedi does a Warranty. Coke on Littl. fol. 384.

Concord (Concordia, Agreement) Is, by a peculiar signification, defined to be
the very Agreement between Parties, who intend the levying a Fine of Lands one
to the other, how, and in what manner the Land shall pass. But in the form of
it, many things are to be considered. West, pa. 2. Symb. tit. Fines and
Concords, Sect. 30. whom read at large.

Concord is also an Agreement made (upon any Trespass committed) betwixt two or
more; and is divided into a Concord Executory, and a Concord Executed. See
Plowden, in Reniger and Fogassa's Case, fol. 5, 6, and 8. where it appears by
some opinion, That the one binds not, as being imperfect; the other absolute,
and ties the party: Yet by some other opinion in the same Case, it is affirmed,
That Agreements Executory, are perfect, and bind no less then Agreements
executed.

Concubinage (Fr.) Signifies properly the keeping a Whore for ones own filthy
use; but it is used as an exception against her, who sues for Dower, alleging
thereby that she was not Wife lawfully married to the party, in whose Lands she
seeks to be endowed, but his Concubine. Britton, cap. 107. Bracton, lib. 4.
tract. 6. cap. 8.

Conders (from the Fr. Conduire, i. to conduct) Are such as stand upon high
places, near the Seacoast, at the time of Herring-Fishing, to make signs with
Boughs, etc. to the Fishers, which way the shole of Herrings passes, which may
better appear to such as stand upon some high Cliff on the shore, by a kind of
blew color they cause in the Water, then to those that are in the Ships. These
are otherwise called Huers, (of the Fr. Huyer, i. Exclamare) and Balkers,
Directors, and Guiders, as appears by the Statute 1 Jac. cap. 23.

Condition (Conditio) Is a Manner, Law, Quality, or Restriction annexed to Men's
Acts, qualifying or suspending the same, and making them uncertain, whether
they shall take effect, or no. West, pa. 1. Symb. lib. 2. sect. 156. In a Lease
there may be two sorts of Conditions; Condition collateral, or Condition
annexed to the Rent. Coke, lib. 3. Penants Case, fol. 64. Collateral Condition,
is that which is annexed to any Collateral Act, as, that the Lessee shall not
go to Paris. Ibidem, fol. 65. Condition is also divided into Condition in Deed
or Fact, and Condition in Law; which otherwise may be termed Condition
expressed, and Condition implied. Perkins, tit. Conditions.

Condition in Deed, Is that which is knit and annexed by express words to the
Feoffment, Lease, or Grant, either in writing, or without writing: As if I
enfeoff a Man in Lands, reserving a Rent to be paid at such a Feast, upon
Condition, if the Feoffee fail of payment at the day, then it shall be lawful
for me to reenter.

Condition Implied, which is called a Condition in Law, Is when a Man Grants to
another the Office of Keeper of a Park, Steward, Bailiff, or the like for Life,
though there be no Condition at all expressed in the Grant; yet the Law makes
one covertly, which is, if the Grantee does not justly execute all things
pertaining to his Office by himself, or his sufficient Deputy, it shall be
lawful for the Grantor, to enter and discharge him of his Office. See
Littleton, lib. 3. cap. 5.

Cone and Key. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 37. number. 3. Foemina in tali atate (i. 14
and 15 Annorum) potest disponere Domui suae and habere Cone and Key. Colne in
the Saxon, signifies Calculus, computus; and Key, clavis. So that a Woman was
then held to be of competent years, when she was able to keep the Accounts and
Keys of the House; and Glanv. lib. 7. cap. 9. has somewhat to the same purpose.

Confederacy (Confederatio) Is when two or more confederate or combine
themselves to do any damage to another, or to commit any unlawful act. And
though a Writ of Conspiracy does not lie, if the party be not indicted, and in
lawful manner acquitted, for so are the words of the Writ; yet false
confederacy between diverse persons shall be punished, though nothing be put in
execution, which appears by the Book of 27 Assis. Placit. 44. where two w^^e
indicted of Confederacy, each to maintain other, whether their matter were true
or false, and though nothing were supposed to be put in practice, the Parties
were enjoined to answer, since the thing is forbidden by Law. So in the next
Article, in the same Book, enquiry shall be made of Conspirators and
Confederators, which bind themselves together, etc. This Confederacy,
punishable by Law before it be executed, ought to have four incidents. First,
It must be declared by some matter of prosecution, as by making of Bonds or
Promises the one to the other: 2. Malicious, as for unjust revenge. 3. It ought
to be false, against an innocent. Lastly, to be out of Court, voluntary. Terms
de la Ley.

Confirmation (Confirmatio) Is a strengthening or confirming an estate to one,
who has the possession, by a voidable Title, though not at present void. As, a
Bishop grants his Chancellorship by Patent for term of the Patentees life: This
is no void grant, but voidable by the Bishops death, except it be strengthened
by the Dean and Chapters Confirmation. See more of this in West, pa. 1. Symb.
lib. 2. sect. 500. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 169. b. and Littleton, lib. 3. cap. 9.

Confiscate, From the Lat. Confiscare, and that from Fiscus, which originally
signifies a Hamper, Pannier or Basket; but Metonymically the Emperors Treasure,
which was anciently kept in such Hampers; and though our King keeps not His
Treasure in such things, yet (as the Romans said) such Goods as were forfeited
to the Emperors Treasury for any offense, were Bona confiscata, so say we of
those that are forfeited to our Kings Exchequer. And the title to have these
Goods, is given the King by the Law, when they are not claimed by some other.
As, if a Man be indicted for feloniously stealing the Goods of another, where in
truth they are the proper Goods of him indicted, and they are brought in Court
against him; who, being asked what he says to the said Goods, disclaims them.
By this Disclaimer he shall lose the Goods, though he be afterward acquitted
of the Felony, and the King shall have them as Confiscate; but otherwise, if he
had not disclaimed them. So where Goods are found in the Felons possession,
which he disavows, and afterward is attainted of other Goods, and not of them,
there the Goods which he disavows, are Confiscate to the King; but had he been
attainted of the same Goods, they should have been said forfeited, not
Confiscate, notwithstanding his disavowment. See more in Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib.
3. cap. 24. Note, Confiscare and Forisfacere, are Synonyma; and Bona
confiscata, are Bona forisfacta. 3 Inst. fol. 227.

Confrairie (Fr.) A Fraternity, Fellowship, or Society; as the Confrairie de
Seint George, or de les Chivaliors de la bleu Jartier. Seldom.

Confreeres (Fr. Confreres) Brethren in a Religious House; Fellows of one and
the same House or Society. Anno 32 Hen. 8. cap. 24.

Congeable (from the Fr. Conge, i. Leave, License, or Permission) Signifies as
much as lawful or lawfully done, or done with leave of permission, as, The
entry of the Disseisee is congeable: Littleton, sect. 410. and 2 par. Croke,
fol. 31.

Conge d'^^ccorder. (Fr. i. Leave to accord or agree) I find it in the Statute
of Fines, An. 18 Edw. 1. in these words -- When the Writ original is delivered
in presence of the Parties before Justices, a Pleader shall say this, Sir
Justice Conge d'Accorder, and the Justice shall say to him, What says Sir R.
and shall name one of the Parties, etc.

Conge d'Eslire (Fr. i. Leave to choose) Signifies the Kings Permission Royal to
a Dean and Chapter, in time of Vacation, to choose a Bishop, or to an Abbey or
Priory of his own Foundation, to choose their Abbot or Prior. Fitz. Not. Br.
fol. 169, 170. -- Gwin, in the Preface to his Readings, says, The King of
England, as Sovereign Patron of all Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics, and other
Eccsesiastical Benefices, had of ancient time free appointment of all
Ecclesiastical Dignities, whenever they chanced to be void, investing them
first per baculum and annulum; and afterward by His Letters Patent, and that
in process of time he made the Election over to others, under certain Forms and
Conditions; as namely, that they should, at every vacation, before they choose,
demand of the King Conge d'Eslire, that is, Leave to proceed to Election, and
then after the Election, to crave His Royal assent, etc. And he affirms, that
King John was the first that granted this, which was afterward confirmed by
Westminster. 1. cap. 1. and again, by Articuli Cleri, cap. 2.

Congius, An ancient Measure of Six Sextaries; which is about a Gallon, and a
Pint. -- Et reddat quinque Congios celia and unum Ydromelli, and triginta panes
cum pertinentibus pulmentariis. Carta Edmundi Regis de Anno 946.

Conisance. See Cognizance.

Conisor alias Cognizor (Recognit^r.) Is used in the passing of Fines for him
that acknowledges the Fine, and the Conizee is he to whom the Fine is
acknowledged. Anno 32 Hen. 8. cap. 5. West. pa. 1. Symb. lib. 2. sect. 49. and
Part 2. tit. Fines, sect. 114.

Conjuration (Conjuratio) Signifies a Plot or Confederacy, made by some persons
combining themselves together, by oath or promise, to do some public harm. But
it is more especially used for the having personal conference with the devil,
or some evil spirit, to know any secret, or to effect any purpose. Anno 5 Eliz.
cap. 16. The difference between Conjuration and Witchcraft seems to be, because
the one endeavors by Prayers and Invocation of Gods powerful names, to compel
the divol to say or do what he commands him; the other deals rather by friendly
and voluntary conference or agreement with the devil or familiar, to have her,
or his desires served, in lieu of blood, or other gift offered him, ospecially
of his or her Soul. And both these differ from Enchantments or Sorc^ries;
because those are personal conferences with the Devil, as is said; and these
are but Medicines and Ceremonial Forms of words (called commonly Charms)
without Apparition. Cowel.

Consanguineo, Is a Writ, which see in the Reg. of Writs; de Avo. Pro avo, and
Consanguineo, fol. 226.

Conservator of the Truce, and safe Conducts (Conservator induciarum and
salvorum Regis Conductuum) Was an Officer appointed in every Seaport, under
the Kings Letters Patent, and had forty pound for his yearly stipend at the
least. His charge was to enquire of all offenses done against the Kings truce
and safe Conducts upon the main Sea, out of the Franchises of the Cinque Ports,
as the Admirals of Custom were wont, and such other things as are declared Anno
2 Hen. 5. cap. 6. Touching this matter also, see the Statute of 4 Hen. 5. cap.
7.

Conservator of the Peace (Conservator vel custos Pacis) Is he that has an
especial charge, by virtue of his Office, to see the Kings Peace kept: Which
Peace, Lambert defines to be, a withholding or abstinence from that injurious
force and violence, which boisterous and unruly persons are, in their nature,
prone to use toward others, were they not restrained by Laws, and fear of
punishment: He farther adds, that before the time of King Edward the Third, who
first erected Justices of Peace, there were sundry persons, who by the Commmon
Law, had interest in keeping the Peace. Of those, some had that charge, as
incident to the Offices they bore, and so included in the same, that they were
called by the name of their Office only; others had it simply as of it self,
and were thereof named Custodes Pacis, Wardens, or Conservators of the Peace.
The former and later sort he again subdivides in his Eyren, lib. 1. cap. 3. The
Corporation of the great Level of the Fens, does consist of one Governor, Six
Bailiffs, Twenty Conservators and Commonalty; as by the Act of Parliament, 15
Car. 2. cap. 17. appears. The Chamberlain of Chester, is a Conservator of the
Peace in that County, by virtue of his Office. 4 Inst. fol. 212. And Petty
Constables are by the Common Law, Conservators of the Peace, etc. Conservators
of the Privileges of the Hospitalers, and Templers, etc. Westminster. 2. cap. 43.
See 4 Inst. fol. 341.

Consideration (Consideratio) Is the material cause, the Quid pro quo of any
Contract, without which no Contract binds. This Consideration is either
expressed, as if a Man bargain to give Five pounds for a Horse; or implied, as
when the Law it self inforces a Consideration; as if a Man come into a Common
Inn, and there stay some time, taking Meat and Lodging, or either for himself
and his Horse, the Law presumes he intends to pay for both, though there be no
express Contract betwixt him and his Host; and therefore, if he discharge not
the House, the Host may stay his Horse. Fulb. Paral. tract. Contracts, fol. 6.

Consistory (Consistorium) Signifies as much as Praetorium or Tribunal. It is
commonly used for a Council-House of Ecclesiastical Persons, or the place of
Justice in the Court Christian; a Session or Assembly of Prelates. Every
Archbishop and Bishop of every Diocese, has a Consistory Court held before his
Chancellor or Commissary in his Cathedral Church, or other convenient place of
his Diocese, for Ecclesiastical Causes. See 4 Inst. fol. 338. -- Sciatis vos
omnes and caeteri mei fideles, qui in Anglia manent, quod Espicopales Leges,
quae non been secundum Sanctorum Canonum praecepta, usque ad mea tempora, in
Regno Anglorum fuerunt, communi Concilio Archiepiscoporum meorum and caeterorum
Episcoporum and Abbatum and omnium Principum Regni mei, emendendas judicavi.
Propterea mando and Regia Authoritate praecipuo, ut nullus Episcopus vel
Archi-Deaconus de Legibus Episcopalibus amplius in Hundret placita teneant, nec
causam, quae ad regimen animarum pertinet, ad judicium secularium hominum
adducant, etc. This Law, made by the Conqueror, seems to give the original of
the Bishops Consistory, as it sits with us divided from the Hundred or
County Court, wherewith in the Saxon time it was joined. And, in the same Law
of his, is further added, Hoc etiam defendo, ut nullus laicus homo de Legibus
quae ad Episcopum pertinent, se intromittat, etc. Seldens Hist. of Tithes, page
413, 414.

Consolidation (Consolidatio) Is used for the combining and uniting two
Benefices in one. Broke, tit. Union, and Anno 37 Hen. 8. cap. 21. This word is
taken from the Civil Law, where it signifies properly an uniting of the
possession, occupation, or profit, with the property. As, if a Man have by
Legacy Usum-fructam fundi, and afterward buy the Property or Fee-simple (as we
call it) of the Heir; this is called a Consolidation. See Union, and Unity of
Possession.

Conspirators, Are (according to the Statute) those that do confeder, or ^ind
themselves by Oath, Covenant, or other Aliance, that every of them shall aid,
and hear the other, falsely and maliciously to indite, or cause to indite, or
falsely to move or maintain Pleas: And also such as cause Children within age,
to Appeal Men of ^elony, whereby they are imprisoned and sore grieved; and such
as retain Men in the Country, with Liveries or Fees to maintain their
malicious enterprises: And this extends as well to the takers, as to the
givers. And Stewards and Bailiffs of great Lords, which by their Seigniory,
Office, or Power, undertake to hear or maintain Quarrels, Pleas, or Debates
that concern other Parties, then such as touch the estate of their Lords, or
themselves. Anno 33 Edw. 1. Stat. 2. -- 2 Part. Inst. ^ol. 384. and 562.

Conspiracy (Conspiratio) Though both in Latin and French, it be used for an
Agreement of Men to do any thing, either good or bad; yet in our Law Books, it
is always taken in the evil part. Anno 4. Edw. 3. cap. 11. -- 3 Hen. 7. cap.
13. -- 1 Hen. 5. cap. 3. and 18 Hen. 6. cap. 12. As also New Book of Entries,
verbo Conspiracy. In which places, Conspiracy is taken more generally, and
confounded with Maintenance and Champerty; but, in a more special
signification, it is used for a Confederacy of two, at the least, falsely to
endite one, or to procure one to be endited of Felony. And the punishment of
it, upon an Indictment of Felony, at the Kings suit, anciently was, That the
party attainted, lose his Frank-Law, to the end, he be not empannel'd upon
Juries or Assizes, or such like employments, for testifying the truth; and if
he have to do in the Kings Court, that he make his Attorney; and that his
Lands, Goods, and Chattels be seized into the Kings hands, his Lands estreaped
(if he find no better favor) his Trees raced, and his Body committed to
prison. 27 Lib. Assis. 59. Cromptons Just. of Peace, fol. 156. b. This is
called Villainous Judgment or Punishment. See Villainous Judgment. But if the
party grieved, sue upon the Writ of Conspiracy, then see Fitz. Not. Br. fol.
114. D. 115. I. Conspiracy may be also in Cases of less weight; As Conspiracies
made by Victualers, touching selling of Victuals, shall be grievously punished.
See 37 Hen. 8. 23. and 3 Part. Inst. fol. 143.

Conspiratione, Is a Writ that lies against Conspirators. Fitz. Not. Br. fol.
114. d. Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 209. See also the Register, fol. 134.

Constable (Constabularius) Is a Saxon word compounded of Cuning or Cyng, and
Staple, which signisie the stay and hold of the King. Lamb. Duty of Constables,
number. 4. But I have seen it derived from Comes Stabuli, which seems more
probable; because we had this Officer, and many others from the Caesarean Laws,
and Customs of the Empire, as well as from the Saxons.

This word is diversely used, First for the Constable of England, of whose great
Dignity and Authority, we may find many proofs in the Statutes and Chronicles
of this Realm. His Function consists in the care of the common Peace of the
Land, in Deeds of Arms, and Matters of War. Lamb. ubisupra. With whom agrees
the Statute of 13 Rich. 2. cap. 2. Stat. 1. which says, To the Court of the
Constable. and Marshal, it appertains to have Conusance of Contracts and Deeds
of Arms and of War, out of the Realm, and also of things that touch War within;
as Combats, Blasonry of Arms, etc. But it may not meddle with Battle in
Appeals, nor generally with any other thing that may be tried by the Law of the
Land. See Fortescu, cap. 32. and 4 Inst. fol. 123.

Out of this High Magistracy of Constable of England (says Lambert) were drawn
those Inferior Constables, which we call Constables of Hundreds and Franchises;
and first ordained by the Statute of Winchester, Anno 13 Edw. 1. which appoints
for conservation of the Peace, and view of Armor, two Constables in every
Hundred and Franchise, which in Latin are called Constabularii Capitales, High
Constables; because continuance of time and increase, both of People and
Offenses, has, under these, made others in every Town called Petit-Constables,
in Latin Sub-Constabularios, which are of like nature, but of Inferior
Authority to the other. The making of a Petty Constable belongs to the Lords of
diverse Manors, Jure Feudi. Of these, read Smith de Rep. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 22.
Besides these there are Officers of particular places, called by this name, as
Constable of the Tower. Stamf. Pl. Cor. fol. 152. Anno 1 Hen. 4. cap. 13.
Constable of the Exchequer, Anno 51 Hen. 3. Stat. 5. Constable of Dover Castle,
Came. Britan. page 239. Fitz Not. Br. fol. 240. But these are Castellani
properly, as Lambert Notes, though confounded in name with the other. See the
Statute Anno 32 Hen. 8. cap. 38. -- Manwood, par. 1. cap. 13. mentions a
Constable of the Forest.

Constat (Lat.) Is the name of a kind of Certificate, which the Clerk of the
Pipe, and Auditors of the Exchequer make, at the request of any person, who
intends to plead or move in that Court, for discharge of any thing. Anno 3 and
4 Edw. 6. cap. 4. and 13 Eliz cap. 6. The effect of a Constat is the certifying
what does constare upon Record, touching the matter in question, and the
Auditors Fee for it, is 13 s. 4 d.

A Constat is held to be Superior to a Certificat, because this may err or
fail in its Contents, that cannot; as certifying nothing, but what is evident
upon Record. Also, the Exemplification under the Great Seal of the Inrolment of
any Letters Patent is called a Constat. Coke on Littl. fol. 225. b. The
difference between a Constat, Inspeximus and Vidimus, you may read at large in
Pages Case. Cokes fifth Report.

Consuetudinibus and Servitiis, Is a Writ of Right Close, which lies against
the Tenant that deforceth his Lord of the Rent or Service due to him. Of this
see more in Old Not. Br. fol. 77. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 151. and Reg of Writs,
fol. 159.

Consultation (Consultatio) Is a Writ whereby a Cause, being formerly removed
by Prohibition from the Ecclesiastical Court or Court Christian, to the Kings
Court is returned thither again. For, if the Judges of the Kings Court, upon
comparing the Libel with the suggestion of the party, find the suggestion
false, or not proved; and therefore, the Cause to be wrongfully called from the
Court Christian, then upon this Consultation or Deliberation, they Decree it to
be returned again; whereupon the Writ in this Case obtained, is called a
Consultation. Of this you may read Reg. of Writs, fol. 44, 45. -- Usque 58. Old
Not. Br. fol. 32. Fiiz. Not. Br. fol. 50. The Statute of the Writ of
Consultation, Anno 24 Edw. 1. and 2 Part. Inst. fol. 105.

Contenement (Contenementum, As -- Salvo contenemento suo, Mag. Cha. cap. 14.)
Signifies his Countenance, Credit, or Reputation, which he has, together with,
and by reason of his Freehold; and in this sense does the Statute of 1 Edw. 3.
and Old Not. Br. use it, where Countenance is used for Contenement: The Armor
of a Soldier is his Countenance; the Books of a Scholar, his Countenance, and
the like. Coke, 2 Part. Inst. fol. 28. Bracton, lib. 3. Tract. 2. cap. 1. number.
3. And Sir Henry Spelman says, Contenementum est ^stimatio and conditionis
forma, qua quis in Repub. subsistit.

Contingent Use, Is a Use limited in a Conveyance of Land, which may, or may
not happen to Vest; according to the contingency expressed in the Limitation of
such Use. See Chudleighs Case, in Cokes 1 Rep.

Continuance, Is as Prorogatio in the Civil Law. For example, Continuance until
the next Assise. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 154. F. and 244. D. in both which places
it is said, if a Record in the Treasury be alleged by the one party, and
denied by the other, a Certiorari shall be sued to the Treasurer, and the
Chamberlain of the Exchequer, who, if they certify not in the Chancery, That
such a Record is there, or that it is likely to be in the Tower, the King shall
send to the Justices, repeating the Certificate, and will them to continue the
Assise. In this signification, it is likewise used by Kitchen, fol. 202. and
199. And Anno 11 Hen. 6. cap. 4. And Continuance of a Writ or Action, is from
one Term to another, in case where the Sheriff has not returned or executed a
former Writ, issued out in the said Action.

Continual Claim, Is a Claim made from time to time, within every year and day,
to Land, or other thing, which in some respect, we cannot attain without
danger. As, if I be disseised of Land, into which, though I have a right, I
dare not enter for fear of beating, it behooves me to hold on my right of Entry
at my best opportunity, by approaching as near it as I can, once every year, as
long as I live, and so I save the right of Entry to my Heir. See more in
Littleton, verbo, Continual Claim, and the New Book of Entries, ibidem. And
Fleta, lib. 6. cap. 53.

Continuando, Is a word used in a special Declaration of Trespass, when the
Plaintiff would recover damages for several Trespasses in the same Action: For,
to avoid multiplicity of Suits, a Man may in one Action of Trespass, recover
damages for forty or more Trespasses, laying the first to be done with a
Continuance to the whole time, in which the rest of the Trespasses were done;
and is in this Form, Continuando transgressionem praedictam, etc. (...)
praedict^ die, etc. Usque such another day, including the last Trespass.

Contours. See Countors.

Contrabanded Goods (from contra, and the Ital. Bando, an Edict or
Proclamation) Are those which are prohibited by Act of Parliament, or
Proclamation, to be imported into, are exported out of this, or other Nations.

Contract (Contractus) Is a Covenant or Agreement between two, with a lawful
Consideration or Cause. West, pa. 1. Symb. lib. 1. sect. 10. As if I sell my
Horse for Money, or Covenant, in consideration of 20 l. to make you a Lease of
a Farm; these are good Contracts, because there is Quid pro quo.

Usurious Contract, Is a Contract to pay more interest for any Money, then the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm allow. It is a Devastavit in an Executor, to
pay a Debt upon an Usurious Contract. Noys Reports, fol. 129.

Contrafaction (Contrafactio) A Counterfeiting. As Contrafactio sigilli Regis.

Contra formam Collationi^, Was a Writ that ^ay against an Abbot, or his
Successor, for him or his heir, who had given Land to an Abbey for certain good
uses, and found a Feofment made thereof by the Abbot, with assent of the
Tenants, to the Dis^^herison of the House and Church. This was founded on the
Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 41. See Reg. of Writs, fol. 238. and Fitz. Not. Br.
fol. 210.

Contra formam Feoffamenti, Is a Writ that lies for the Heir of a Tenant
enseoffed of certain Lands or Tenements, by Charter of Feoffinent of a Lord, to
make certain Services and Suits to his Court, and is afterward distrained for
more, then is contained in the said Charter. Reg. of Writs, fol. 176. Old Not.
Br. fol. 162.

Contributione facienda, Is a Writ, that lies, where more are bound to one
thing, and one is put to the whole burden. Fitzh. (Not. Br. fol. 162.) brings
these examples, If Tenants in Common or Joint, hold a Mill Pro indiviso, and
equally take the profits thereof, the Mill falling to decay, and one or more of
them refusing to contribute toward its reparation, the rest shall have this
Writ to compel them. And if there be three Coparceners of Land, that ow suit to
the Lords Court, and the eldest performs the whole, then may she have this Writ
to compel the refuser to a Contribution. Old Not. Br. (fol. 103.) frames this
Writ to a Case, where one only suit is required for Land, and that Land being
sold to diverse, suit is required of them all, or some of them by Distress, as
entirely, as if all were still in one. See Reg. of Writs, fol. 176.

Controller (Fr. Contrerolleur) We have diverse Officers of this name; as
Controller of the Kings House, Anno 6 Hen. 4. cap. 3. Controller of the Navy,
35 Eliz. cap. 4. Controller of the Custom, Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 105. Controller
of Calis, 21 Rich. 2. cap. 18. Controller of the Mint, 2 Hen. 6. cap. 12.

Controller of the Ha^per, Is an Officer in the Chancery attending the Lord
Chancellor daily in the Term time, and upon Seal days. Hia Office is to take
all things sealed from the Clerk of the Hanaper, enclosed in Bag^ of Leather,
and to note the just number and effect of all things so received, and enter the
same in a Book, with all the duties, appertaining to His Majesty, and other
Officers for the same, and so charges the Clerk of the Hanaper with it.

Controller of the Pipe, Is an Officer of the Exchequer, who writes out Summons
twice every year to the Sheriffs to levy the Farms, and Debts of the Pipe, and
keeps a Controlment of the Pipe, and was anciently called Duplex Ingrossator.

Controller of the Pell, Is also an Officer of the Exchequer, of which sort
there are two, viz. The two Chamberlains Clerks, that do or should keep a
Controlment of the Pell, of receipts and goings out: This Officer was
originally one, who took notes of any other Officers accounts or receipts, to
the intent to discover him, if he dealt amiss, and was ordained for the Princes
better security; for proof whereof, read Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 18. And the Stat.
12 Edw. 3. cap. 3.

Controvor (Fr. Controuveur) He that of his own head, devises or invents false
bruits, or feigned news. 2 Inst. fol. 227.

Convenable (Fr.) Agreeable, suitable, convenient or fitting. Anno 27 Edw. 3.
Stat. 2. cap. 21. and 2 Hen. 6. cap. 2. See Covenable.

Conventicle (Conventiculum) A little private Assembly or Meeting, for exercise
of Religion; first, attributed in disgrace to the Schools of Wickcliff in this
Nation, above 200 years since, and now applied to the Illegal Meetings of the
Non-conformists, and is mentioned in the Stat. 1 Hen. 6. cap. 3. and 16 Car. 2.
cap. 4.

Conventio, Is a word much used both in Ancient and Modern Law-pleadings, for
an Agreement or Covenant: For example, take this pleasant Record.

Ex libro Rotulorum Curiae Manerii de Hatfield (juxta Insulam de Axholme) in
Com. Ebor.

Curia tenta apud Hatfield die Mercurii Proxo post Festum -- Anno xio. Edw.
3tii.
RObertus de Roderham qui optulit se versus Johannem de Ithen de eo quod non
teneat Conventionem inter eos factam, and unde queritur, quod certo dio and
anno apud Thorn conveni^ inter praedictum Robertum and Johannem, quod
praedictus Johannes vendidit praedict^ Roberto Diabolum ligatum in quodam
ligamine pro iiid. ob. and super praedictus Robertus tradidit praedicto Johanni
quoddam obolum-earles (i. earnest-money) per quod proprietas dicti Diaboli
commoratur in persona dicti Roberti ad habendam deliberationem dicti Diaboli,
infra quartam diem prox' sequent. Ad quam diem idem Robertus venit ad praefatum
Johannem, and petit deliberationem dicti Diaboli, s^^undum Conventionem inter
eos factam; idem Johannes praedictum Diabolum deliberare noluit, nec adhuc
vult, etc. ad grave dampnum ipsius Roberti lxfol. Et inde producit sectam, etc.
and praedictus Johannes venit, etc. Et non dedicit Conventionem praedictam. Et
quia videtur Curiae quod tale placitum non jacet inter Christianos, Ideo parts
praedicti adjournantur usque in infernum, ad audiendum judicium suum, and
utraque pa^s in misericordia, etc.

Conventione, Is a Writ that lies for the breach of any Covenant in writing.
Reg. of Writs, fol. 185. Old Not. Br. fol. 101. Fitz. (Not. Br. fol. 145.)
calls it a Writ of Covenant, who divides Covenants into personal and real,
making a discourse of both, as also how this Writ lies for both.

Conventuals, Are those Religious Men, who are united together in a Convent or
Religious House. See Friar Observant.

Conventual Church. See Parish.

Convict (Convictus) Is he that is found guilty of an O^fence by Verdict of a
Jury. Stamf. Pl. Cor. fol. 186. yet Crompton, out of Judge Dyers Commentaries,
275, says, That Conviction is, either when a Man is outlawed, or appears, and
confesses, or else is found guilty by the Inquest. Cromp. Jus^. of Peace, fol.
9. Conviction and Attainder are often confounded. See Attaint and Attainted.

A Convict Recusant, Is one that has been legally presented, indicted and
convic^ for refusing to come to Church to hear the Common Prayer, according to
the Statutes. 1 Eliz. 2. -- 23 Eliz. 1 and 3 Jac. 4. And these are commonly
understood to be Popish Recusants; though any others, that refuse to come to
Church for the purpose aforesaid, may as properly be called Recusants. See Ju^y.

Convocation (Convocatio) Is the Assembly of all the Clergy to consult of
Ecclesiastical Matters in time of Parliament: And as there are Two Houses of
Parliament; so are there Two Houses of Convocation; the one called the Higher
Convocation House, where the Archbishops and Bishops sit severally by
themselves, the other the Lower Convocation House, where all the rest of the
Clergy sit. Anno. 25 Hen. 8. cap. 19. See Prolo^utor.

Conusance. See Cognizance.

Conusant (Fr. Cognoissant) Knowing, understanding, apprehending. -- If the son
be Conusant, and agrees to the Fe(...)meant, etc. Coke on Littl. fol. 159. b.

Conusor. See Cognizor.

Coopertura, A Thicket or Covert of Wood. Carta de Foresta, cap. 12.

Ca^^^ceners (Farticip^s) Otherwise called Parceners, are such as have equal
portion in the inheritance of their Ancestor. Littleton (lib. 3.) says,
Paroenors are either by Law, or by Custom; Parcenors by Law, are the issue
Female, which (in default of Heir-male)* come in equality to the Lands of their
A(...). Bracto^, lib. 2. cap. 30. Parce^^rs by Cust^^ are those, who by custom
of the Country, challenge equal part in such Lands, as in Kent, by ^^volkind.
Of these you may read more at large in Littl. lib. 3. cap. 1. and 2. and
Brittan, cap. 27. The Crown of England is not subject to Coparcinery. Anno 25
Hen. 8. cap. 22.

Cope, Is a Custom or Tribute due to the King, or Lord of the Soil, out of the
Lead-Mines in the Wapentake of Wirksworth in Com. Derby; of which, thus Mr.
Manlove in his Treatise of those Liberties and Customs, Printed 1653.

-- Egress and Regress to the Kings Highway,
The Miners have; and Lot and Cope they pay.
The Thirteenth Dish of Oar within their Mine,
To the Lord for Lot, they pay at Measuring time.
Six pence a Load for Cope the Lord demands,
And that is paid to the Berghmasters hands, etc.
Copia libelli deliberanda, Is a Writ that lies in Case, where a Man cannot get
the Copy of a Libel at the hands of the Judge Ecclefiastical. Reg. of Writs.
fol. 51.

Copihold (Tenura per Copiam Rotuli Curiae) Is a Tenure for which the Tenant
has nothing to show, but the Copy of the Rolls made by the Steward of his
Lords Court. For, as the Steward enrols and makes Remembrances of all other
things done in the Lords Court; so he does also of such Tenants as are admitted
in the Court, to any parcel of Land or Tenement belonging to the Manor, and
the Transcript of this, is called the Court-Roll, the Copy whereof the Tenant
keeps, as his only evidence. Coke, lib. 4. fol. 25. b. This is called a Base
Tenure, because it holds at the Will of the Lord. Kitchen, fol. 80. cap.
Copiholds. Fitzh. (Not. Br. fol. 12.) says, It was wont to be called Tenure in
Villenage, and that Copihold is but a new name; and yet it is not simply at the
Will of the Lord, but according to the Custom of the Manor. So that if a
Copiholder break not the Custom of the Manor, and thereby forfeit his Tenure,
he seems not so much to stand at the Lords courtesy for his right, that he may
be displaced at his pleasure. These Customs are infinite, varying in one point,
or other, almost in every several Manor.

Copiholders do upon their Admittances, pay a Fine to the Lord of the Manor,
of whom the Lands are holden, which Fines are in some Manors certain, in
others uncertain: Those which are uncertain, the Lord rates at what Fine he
pleases; but if it exceeds two years value, the Courts of Chancery, Kings
Bench, Common Pleas, or Exchequer, have in their several Jurisdictions, power
to reduce the Fine unto two years value.

Copiholds, are a kind of Inheritance, and called in many places Customary;
because the Tenant dying, and the hold being void, the next of the Blood,
paying the Customary Fine, as Two shillings for an Acre, or such like, may not
be denied his admission. Secondly, some Copiholders have by Custom, the Wood
growing upon their own Land, which by Law they could not have. Thirdly, Others
hold? by the Verge in ancient Demesns, and though they hold by Copy, yet are
they in account a kind of Freeholder; for if such a one commit Felony, the
King has Annum, diem and vastum, as in case of Freehold; some others hold by
Common Tenure, called Mere Copihold, whose Land, upon Felony committed,
Escheats to the Lord of the Manor. Kitchen, fol. 81. Cha. Tenants per Verge in
ancient Demesne. This is the Land, which (in the Saxons time) was called
Folkland. West, (Par. 1. Symbol. lib. 2. sect. 646.) says, A Copiholder is he
who is admitted Tenant of any Lands, or Tenements within a Manor, which, time
out of mind, by the use and custom thereof, have been Demisable to such as
will take the same, by Copy of Court-Roll, according to the custom of the said
Manor, etc. Where you may read more on this subject, see Freebench.

Coram non judice, -- In a Cause whereof they (the Judges) have not any
Jurisdiction, and then it is Coram non judice. 2 Part. Croke, fol. 351. Powels
Case.

Coraage (Coraagium) Is a kind of Imposition extraordinary, growing upon some
unusual occasion, and it seems to be of certain Measures of Corn. For Corus
tritici, is a Measure of Corn. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 116. number. 6. Who in the
same Chapter, number. 8. has these words. -- Sunt etiam quaedam communes
praestationes, quae servitia non dicuntur, nec de consuetudine veniunt, nisi
cum necessitas intervenerit, vel cum Rex venerit; sicut sunt Hidag^a, Coraagia,
and Carvagia, and alia plura de necessitate and ex consensu communi totius
Regni introducta, etc.

Cord of Wood, Ought to be eight foot long, four foot broad, and four foot
high, by Statute.

Cordage (Fr.) Is a general application for Stuff to make Ropes, and for all
kind of Ropes belonging to the Rigging of a Ship. Mentioned 15 Car. 2. cap.
13. Seamans Dictionary.

Cordiner (vulgarly Cordwaner) From the Fr. Codovannier, a Shoo-maker, and is
so used in diverse Statutes, as 3 Hen. 8. cap. 10. -- 5 Ejusdem, cap. 7. and
others.

Cornage (Cornagium from Cornu, a Horn) Was a kind of Grand Serjeanty; the
service of which Tenure, was to blow a Horn when any Invasion of the Scots was
perceived. And by this many Men held their Land Northward, about the
Picts-wall. Camd. Britan. page 609. and Littleton, fol. 35. But by Stat. 12
Car. 2. cap. 24. All Tenures are turned into free and common Soccage.

Sir Edward Coke (on Littl. fol. 107.) says, Cornage is also called in old
Books Horngeld, but quaere, for they seem to differ much. See Horngeld, and 2
Inst. fol. 9.

Corner-Tile. See Gutter-Tile.

Corody or Corrody (Corrodium, from Corrodo) Signifies a sum of Money or
allowance of Meat, Drink, and Clothing, due to the King from an Abbey, or
other House of Religion, whereof he is Founder, toward the reasonable
sustenance of such a one of his servants, or vadelets, as he thinks good to
bestow it on: The difference between a Corody and a Pension, seems to be, That
a Corody is allowed toward the maintenance of any of the Kings servants in an
Abbey; a Pension is given to one of the Kings Chaplains for his better
maintenance, till he may be provided of a Benefice. Of both these, read Fitzh.
Not. Br. fol. 250. who sets down all the Corodies and Pensions certain, that
any Abbey, when they stood, was bound to perform to the King.

Corody seems to be ancient in our Law; for in Westminster. 2. cap. 25. it is
ordained, that an Assisc shall lie for a Corody. It is also apparent by the
Stat. 34 and 35 Hen. 8. cap. 26. That Corodies belonged sometimes to Bishops
and Noblemen from Monasteries. Tenure in Frankalmoin was a discharge of all
Corodies in it self. Stat. 1 Edw. 3. cap. 10. See 2 Part. Inst. fol. 630.

SCiant -- quod nos Radulphus Abbas Monasterii S. Johannis de Haghmon and
ejusdem loci Conventus, ad instanciam and speciale rogatum excellentissimi and
reverendissimi Domini nostri Thomae Comitis Arundeliae and Surreiae, Dedimus --
Roberto Lee unum Corrodium pro termino vitae suae, essendo cum Abbate
Monasterii praedicti Armigerum, cum uno Garcione and duobus equis; capiendo
ibidem esculenta and poculenta sufficientia pro scipso, sicut Armigeri Abbatis,
qui pro tempore fuerint, capiunt and percipiunt; and pro Garcione suo, sicut
Garciones Abbatis and Armigerorum suorum capiunt and percipiunt; capiendo etiam
pro equis suis foenum and praebendam -- Et quod idem Robertus habeat vesturam
Armigerorum, etc. Dat. 3 Hen. 5. Mon. Angl. 2 par. fol. 933. a.

Corodio Habendo, Is a Writ, whereby to exact a Corody of an Abbey, or
Religious. House. See Reg. of Writs, fol. 264.

Coronatore Eligendo, Is a Writ, which, after the death or discharge of any
Coroner, is directed to the Sheriff out of the Chancery, to call together the
Freeholders of the County, for the choice of a new Coroner, to certify into
Chancery, both the election, and the name of the party elected, and to give him
his Oath. See Westminster. 1. cap. 10. Fitzh. Not. Br. fol. 163. and Reg. of Writs,
fol. 177.

Coroner (Coronator a Corona) Is an ancient Officer of this Land (for mention
is made of his Office in King Athelstans Charter to Beverley, Anno 925.) and is
so called, because he deals wholly for the King and Crown. There are four of
them commonly in every County, in some fewer, and in some Counties but one;
they are chosen by the Freeholders of the same by the Kings Writ, and not made
by Letters Patent. Crompt. Jurisd. fol. 126. This Officer, by the Statute of
Westminster. 1. cap. 10. ought to be a sufficient person, that is, the most wise and
discreet Knight, that best would, and might attend upon such an Office, yea,
there is a Writ in the Register, Nisi sit Miles, fol. 177. b. whereby it
appears. it was sufficient cause to remove a Coroner chosen, if he were not a
Knight, and had not a hundred shillings Rent of Freehold. The Lord Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench is the Sovereign Coroner of the whole Realm in
person, i. wheresoever he abodes, Lib. Assisarum, fol. 49. Coke, lib. 4. Case
of Wardens, etc. of the Sadlers, fol. 57. b. His Office especially concerns the
Pleas of the Crown: But what anciently belonged to him, read at large in
Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 5, 6, 7 and 8. Britton. cap. 1. Fleta, lib. 1.
cap. 18. and Horns Mirror, lib. 1. cap. del Office del Coroners. But more aptly
for the present times. Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 1. cap. 51.

There are also certain special Coroners within diverse Liberties, as well as
these ordinary Officers in every County; as the Coroner of the Verge, which is
a certain compass about the Kings Court, whom Cromp. in his Jurisd. fol. 102.
calls the Coroner of the Kings House; of whose Authority, see Cokes Rep. lib.
4. fol. 46. By certain Charters belonging to some Colleges and Corporations,
they are licensed to appoint their Coroner within their own Precincts. Of this
Office, see also 4 Inst fol. 271. Smith de Rep. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 21. And
Lamb. Eiren. lib. 4. cap. 3. page 380. And of the Coroners Office in Scotland,
read Skene, verbo, Iter.

Corporal Oath. See Oath.

Corporation (Corporatio) A Body Politic, or a Body Incorporate; so called,
because the persons are made into a Body, and of capacity to take, and grant,
etc. And this Body Politic or Incorporate, may commence, and be established
three manner of ways, viz. By Prescription, by Letters Patent, or by Act of
Parliament. Every Body Politic or Corporate, is either Ecclesiastical, or Lay:
Ecclesiastical, either Regular, as Abbots, Priors, etc. or Secular, as Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars, etc. Lay, as Major, Commonalty, Bailiffs,
and Burgesses, etc. Also every Body Politic or Corporate, is either Elective,
Presentative, Collative, or Donative. And again, it is either sole or aggregate
of many, which last is by the Civilians called Collegium or Universitas. Coke
on Littl. fol. 250. and 3 Inst. fol. 202.

Corpus Christi day, (being always on the next Thursday after Trinity Sunday)
Is a Feast instituted by the Church, in honor of the Blessed Sacrament: To
which also, a College in Oxford is dedicated. It is mentioned in 32 Hen. 8.
cap. 21. By which Statute, Trinity Term is appointed for ever to begin the
Friday next after this Feast.

Corpus cum Causa, Is a Writ, issuing out of the Chancery, to remove both the
Body and Record, touching the Cause of any Man lying in Execution, upon a
Judgment for Debt, into the Kings Bench, etc. There to lie till he have
satisfied the Judgment. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 251. E.

Corrector of the Staple, Is an Officer or Clerk belonging to the Staple, who
Writes and Records the Bargains of Merchants there made. Anno 27 Edw. 3. Stat.
2. cap. 22. and 23. The Romans called them Mersarios.

Corrody. See Corody.

Corruption of Blood (Corruption Sanguinis) Is an Infection growing to the State
of a Man (attainted of Felony or Treason) and to his Issue: For, as he loses
all to the Prince, or other Lord of the Fee, as his case is; so his issue
cannot be heirs to him, or to any other Ancestor by him. And, if he were Noble,
or a Gentleman before, he and his children are thereby ignobled and ungentiled.
But, if the King pardon the offender, it will cleanse the corruption of Blood
in those Children, which are born after the Pardon, and they may inherit the
Land of their Ancestor, purchased at the time of the pardon, or afterward; but
so cannot they, who were born before the pardon. Yet note, there are diverse
offenses made Treason by Act of Parliament, whereof, though a Man be Attaint,
yet his Blood, by Provisoes therein, is not corrupt, nor shall he forfeit any
thing, but what he has for his own life; for which, see the several Statutes
of 5 Eliz. cap. 1, 11 and 14. -- 18 Eliz. cap. 1. -- 31 Eliz. cap. 4. and 1
Jac. cap. 12.

Corselet (Fr.) Signifies a little Body, in Latin Corpusculum. It is used with
us for an Armor to cover the whole Body, or Trunck of a Man (Anno 4 and 5 Phil.
and Ma. cap. 2.) wherewith the Pikemen, commonly placed in the Front and Flanks
of the Battle, are armed, for better resistance of the enemies assaults, and
surer guard of the Gunners, placed behind, or within them. See Barrets
Discourse of War. Lib. 3. Dial. 2.

Cosenage (Fr. Cousinage, i. Kindred, Cosinship) Is a Writ that lies, where the
Tresail (that is, Tritavus, the Father of the Besail, or Great Grandfather)
being seized in Fee, at his death of certain Lands or Tenements, and dies; a
stranger enters and abates, then shall his heir have this Writ of Cosenage. The
form whereof, see in Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 231. Of this also read Britton at
large, cap. 89.

Cosening, Is an offense, whereby any thing is done deceitfully in or out of
Contracts, which cannot be fitly termed by any especial name. West, pa. 2.
Symb. lit. Indictments, Sect. 68. It is called Stellionatus in the Civil Law.

Corsepresent (from the Fr. Corpse present, i. the Body presented) Signifies a
Mortuary, Anno 21 Hen. 8. cap. 6. And the reason why it was thus termed, seems
to be, That where a Mortuary, after any Man's Death, became due, the Body of the
best or second Beast, was, according to the Custom, offered or presented to the
Priest, and carried along with the Corpse.

In nomine Patris and Filii and Spiritus sancti. Ego Brianus de Brompton Sen.
Anno Domini MCCLXII. in vigilia Apostorum Simonis and Judae condo Testamentum
meum. Volo corpus meum sepeliri in Prioratu Majoris Malverniae inter
Praedecessores meos, and cum corpore meo Palefridum meum, cum hernesio and
Equum summarium, cum lecto meo, etc. In codice M. S. penes Gul. Dugdale, Arm.

Cot, Is a kind of Refuse Wool; so clung or clotted together, that it cannot
be pulled a sunder. Anno 13 Rich. 2. Stat. 1. cap. 9. where it is provided,
That neither Denizen, nor Foreiner, make any other refuse of Wools, but Cot,
Gare, and Villein. Cot or Cote, signifies also as much as Cotage in many
places, and was so used by the Saxons, according to Verstegan.

Cotland alias Cotsetbland. Lib. Rames. Sect. 265. -- Dedit praedictus Abbas
praedicto Hugoni pro tota terra quae tunc temporis a S. Benedicto idem Hugo
tenebat, unam Cothsethlandam cum libero servitio in villa quae dicitur Sleep
and unum Maignagium in foro ejusdem villa -- Cothsethlandam hic intelligo Cotae
sedem and praedii quidpiam ad eandem pertinens. Spelman. -- De una Cothlanda
terrae in Wathford. Pat. 9 Edw: 2. par. 2. m. 2.

Cotage (Cotagium and Chota, from the Sax. Cote) Is a House without Land
belonging to it. Anno 4 Edw. 1. Stat. 1. And the Inhabitants of such Cotages,
are called Cotagers. But by a later Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 7. No Man may
build a House, but he must lay four Acres of Land to it; so that a Cotage is
properly any little House newly built, that has not four Acres of Land
belonging to it. -- Dedit Chotam, and quendam campum junctum huic Chotae. Mon.
Angl. 1 par. fol. 201. b.

Cottarius, A Cotager.

Coucher, Signifies a Factor, that continues in some place or Country for
Traffic; as formerly in Gascoign, for buying Wines. Anno 37 Edw. 3. cap. 16.
It is also used for the General Book, in which, any Religious House or
Corporation Register their particular Acts. Anno 3 and 4 Edw. 6. cap. 10.

Covenable (Fr. Convenable) Fit, convenient, or suitable. -- That every of the
same three sorts of Fish, be good and covenable, as in old time has been used.
31 Edw. 3. Stat. 3. cap. 2. Plowden, fol. 472. a.

Covenant (Conventio) Is the Consent or Agreement of two or more in one thing,
to do or perform somewhat. West, par. 2. Symb. lib. 1. Sect. 4. It seems to be
as much as Pactum or Conventum, with the Civilians. Covenant is either in Law,
or in Fact. Coke, lib. 4. Nokes Case, fol. 80. Or Covenant Express, and
Covenant in Law. Idem, lib. 6. fol. 17. Covenant in Law, is that which the Law
intends to be made, though it be not expressed in words: As if the Lessor
demise and grant B. Acre to the Lessee for a certain term, the Law intends a
Covenant on the Lessors part, that the Lessee shall, during the term, quietly
enjoy his Lease against all lawful encumbrance. Covenant in Fact, is that which
is expressly agreed between the parties. There is also a Covenant merely
personal, and a Covenant real. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 145. who seems to say, a
Covenant real is that, whereby a Man ties himself to pass a thing real, as Land
or Tenements; or to levy a Fine of Land, etc. Covenant merely personal is,
where a Man Covenants with another by Deed, to build him a House, or any other
thing, or to serve him, etc. See Conventio.

Covenant is also the name of a Writ, for which see Conventione, and New Book
of Entries, verbo Covenant.

NOverint omnes praesentes scriptum Cyrographatum visur. vel auditur. quod
xviii die April. Temporis gratiae MCCLX, ita convenit inter nos Hugonem de
Okelesthorp and Adam silium Ade de Thowes, generum ejusdem Hugonis, sc. quod
ego Adam non dabo, impignorabo, vendam, nec alienabo aliquam partem tenementi
mei de quo fui vestitus and saisitus praedicto die, nec tenementi mihi
contingentis nomine baereditatis, sine voluntate and assensu praedicti Hugonis
vel haeredum suorum, Et quod amabiliter tractabo uxorem meam, filiam praedicti
Hugonis; Et nisi fecero, ibo per septem dies sabati nudus per medium forum de
Harewode quando before fucrit, secundum or dinationem dicti Hugonis. Omnia
autem praescripta fideliter and sine fraud observanda pro me and haeredibus
meis, tactis sacrosanctis, juravi and affidavi; Et ne istud alicui hominum
vertatur in dubium, nos praedicti Hugo and Adam sigilla nostra partium hiis
mutuis scriptis apposuimus. Hiis testibus, Stephano Sperry, tunc Cyrographar.
Civitatis Ebor. Daniele de Tottie Clerico, Ricardo de Waleys de Acculum, Ade de
Northfolch, Thoma Edwyn Allutario de Ebor. and aliis. Ex M. S. penes Gul.
Dugdale, Ar.

Covenant (Foedus) The late Solemn League and Covenant, first hatched in
Scotland, was a Seditious Conspiracy, too well known to need any Explication;
it was Voted Illegal and Irreligious by Parliament in May, 1661. and provision
is made against it by the Statute 14 Car. 2. cap. 4. Where it is declared to
have been imposed on the Subjects of this Realm, against the known Laws and
Liberties of the same.

Covent or Convent (Conventus) Signifies the Society or Fraternity of an Abbey
or Priory; as Societas does the number of Fellows in a College. Bracton, lib.
2. cap. 35.

Coverture (Fr.) Any thing that covers, as Apparel, a Coverlet; but it is
particularly applied to the state and condition of a married Woman, who by our
Law is Sub potestate viri, and therefore disabled to contract with any, to the
prejudice of her self or husband, without his consent and privity, or, at
least, without his allowance and confirmation. Broke, hoc titulo. Omnia quae
sunt uxoris, sunt ipsius viri. Vir est caput mulieris. Sine viro respondere non
potest. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 15. and lib. 4. cap. 24. And if the husband alien
the wifes Land, during the Coverture, she cannot gainsay it, during his life.
See Cui ante divortium, and Cui in vita.

Covine (Covina) Is a deceitful Compact or Agreement between two or more, to
prejudice a third person. As if Tenant for Life conspires with another, that
this other shall recover the Land which the Tenant holds, in prejudice of him
in Reversion. Plow. Com. fol. 546.

Count (Fr. Conte) Signifies the original Declaration in a Real Action; as
Declaration is, in a personal. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 26. Libellus with the
Civilians comprehends both. Yet Count and Declaration are sometimes confounded,
as Count in Debt. Kitchen, fol. 281. Count or Declaration in Appeal. Pl. Cor.
fol. 78. Count in Trespass. Britton, cap. 26. See Declaration.

Countee (Fr. Comte. A Comitando, because they accompany the King) Was, next to
the Duke, the most eminent Dignity of a Subject, before, as well as since, the
Conquest; and those, who in ancient time, were created Countees, were Men of
great Estate and Dignity: For which cause, the Law gives them great
privileges; as, their persons may not be arrested for Debt, Trespass, etc.
(because the Law intends, that they assist the King with their Council for the
Public Good, and preserve the Realm by their Prowess and Valor;) they may not
be put upon Juries. If issue be taken, whether the Plaintiff or Defendant be a
Countee, or not, This shall not be tried by the Country, but by the Kings
Writ. Also the Defendant shall not have a day of Grace against a Lord of the
Parliament, because it is intended he attends the Public. And of old the
Countee was Praefectus, or Praepositus Comitatus, and had the charge and
custody of the County, whose Authority the Sheriff now has. Coke, lib. 9. fol.
49. And is therefore called Viscount. See Earl.

Countenance, Seems to be used for credit or estimation. Old Not. Br. fol. 111.
And likewise Anno 1 Edw. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 4. in these words, Sheriffs shall
charge the Kings debtors with as much as they may levy with their Oaths without
abating the debtors Countenance. See Contenement.

Counter (from the Lat. Computare) Is the name of two Prisons in London, the
Poultry Counter, and Woodstreet Counter; whereinto if any enter, he is like to
account ere he get thence.

Counter-mand, Is where a thing formerly executed, is afterward, by some Act or
Ceremony, made void, by the party that first did it. As, if a Man makes his
last Will, and devises his Land to I. S. and afterward enfeoffs another of the
same Land, here this Feoffment is a Countermand to the Will, and the Will void,
as to the disposition of the Land.

Counter-plee, Signifies a Replication to Aid Prier; For, when Tenant by
courtesy in Dower, or other Real. Action, prays the View or Aid of the King, or
him in the Reversion, for his better defense; or else, if a stranger to the
Action begun, desires to be received, to say what he can for the safeguard of
his Estate, that which the Demandant alleges against this request, why it
should not be admitted, is called a Counter-plee. In which sense it is used, 25
Edw. 3. Stat. 3. cap. 7.

Counter-rols, -- That Sheriffs shall have Counter-rols with the Coroners, as
well of Appeals, as of Enquests, etc. Anno 3 Edw. 1. cap. 10.

Countors (Fr. Contours) Have been taken for such Sergeants at Law, as a Man
retains to defend his cause, or speak for him in any Court for their Fee. Horns
Mirror, lib. 2. cap. des Loyers. And of whom thus Chaucer, -- A Sheriff had he
been, and a Contour,
Was no where such a worthy Uavasour.


They were anciently called Serjeant-Countors-Coke on Littl. fol. 17. a.

County (Comitatus) Signifies the same with Shire; the one coming from the
French, the other from the Saxons, both containing a circuit or portion of the
Realm, into which the whole Land is divided, for the better Government of it,
and more easy Administration of Justice: So that there is no part of this
Nation that lies not within some County, and every County is governed by a
yearly Officer, whom we call a Sheriff. Fortescu, cap. 24. Of these Counties,
there are four of special mark, which therefore are termed Counties Palatines,
As Lancaster, Chester, Durham, and Ely. Anno 5 Eliz. cap. 23. we may read also
of the County Palatine of Pembroke, and of Hexam, Anno 33 Hen. 8. cap. 10.
(which last, did belong to the Archbishop of York.) -- This Act, nor any thing
therein contained, shall not extend to the County Palatine of Hexam, within the
County of Northumberland, ne to the County Palatine of Ely, within the County
of Cambridge, etc. But by the Stat. 14 Eliz. cap. 15. this County Palatine of
Hexham was stripped of its Privilege, and reduced to be a part of the County of
Northumberland. The chief Governors of these Counties Palatines, by special
Charter from the King, did heretofore send out all Writs in their own names,
and did all things touching Justice, as absolutely as the Prince himself in
other Counties, only acknowledging him their Superior and Sovereign. But by
the Statute 27 Hen. 8. cap. 24. This power is much abridged, to which I refer
the Reader; as also to Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 137. and 4 Instit. fol. 204, and 221.

Besides these Counties of both sorts, there are likewise unto some Cities,
some Territory, or Lands, or Jurisdiction annexed, as the County of Middlesex,
by King Henry the First, to the City of London. The County of the City of York,
Anno 32 Hen. 8. cap. 13. Chester, Anno 43 Eliz. cap. 15. Canterbury, Lamb.
Eiren. lib. 1. cap. 9. Norwich, Worcester, Coventry, Exeter, etc. The County of
the Town of Kingston upon Hull, 32 Hen. 8. cap. 13. Newcastle upon Tine, etc.
The County of the Town of Haverford West, 35 Hen. 8. cap. 16.

County is, in another signification, used for the County Court, which the
Sheriff keeps every Month, either by himself or his Deputy. Anno 2 Edw. 6.
cap. 25. Cromp. Jur. fol. 221. Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 7. and lib. 3. tract. 2.
cap. 12.

The word Comitatus, is also used for a Jurisdiction or Territory, among the
Feudists.

County Court (Curia Comitatus) Is by Lambert otherwise called Conventus, and
divided into two sorts; one retaining the general name, as, the County Court
held every Month by the Sheriff, or his Deputy the Undersheriff. The other
called the Turn, held twice every year; of both which, you may read in Cromp.
Jurisd. fol. 231. This County Court had, in ancient times, the cognition of
great matters, as may appear by Glanvile, lib. 1. cap. 2, 3, 4. by Bracton, and
Britton in diverse places, and by Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 62. but was abridged by
Magna Charta, cap. 17. and much by 1 Edw. 4. cap. unico. It had also, and has
the Determination of certain Trespasses and Debts under Forty shillings.
Britton, cap. 27. and 28.

Counting House of the Kings Household (Domus Computus Hospitii Regis) Commonly
called the Green-Cloth, in respect of the Greencloth on the Table; where sit
the Lord Steward, the Treasurer of the Kings House, the Comptroller, Master of
the Household, Cofferer, and two Clerks Comptrollers; for daily taking the
Accounts of all Expenses of the Household, making provisions, and ordering
payment for the same; for the good Government of the Kings Household Servants,
and for paying the Wages of those below Stairs. Vide 39 Eliz. cap. 7. and 4
Inst. fol. 131.

Courratier (Fr.) A Horse-courser. 2 Inst. fol. 719.

Coursitour. See Cursiter.

Court (Curia) Signifies the Kings Palace, or Mansion; and more especially the
place where Justice is judicially administered, of which, you may find Thirty
two several sorts in Cromptons Jurisdictions well described; whereof most are
Courts of Record, some not, and therefore are accounted Base Courts, in
comparison of the rest. Besides these, there are also Courts Christian. Smith
de Rep. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 6. which are so called, because they handle matters
especially appertaining to Christianity, and such as, without good knowledge in
Divinity, cannot be well judged of, being held heretofore by Archbishops and
Bishops, as from the Pope, because he challenged the superiority in all Causes
Spiritual, but since his ejection, they hold them by the Kings Authority,
Virtute Magistratus sui, as the Admiral of England does his Court: Whereupon
they send out their Precepts, in their own names, and not in the Kings, as the
Justices of the Kings Courts do. And therefore, as the Appeal from these Courts
did lie to Rome, now by the Stat. 25 Hen. 8. cap. 19. it lies to the King in
his Chancery.

Court Baron (Curia Baronis) Is a Court, which every Lord of a Manor (who in
ancient times were called Barons) has within his own Precincts. Barons in
other Nations, have great Territories and Jurisdiction from their Sovereigns.
But here in England, what they are, and have been heretofore, see in Baron. Of
this Court, and Court Leet, read Kitchen. Sir Edward Coke, lib. 4. among his
Copihold Cases, fol. 26. b. says, That this Court is twofold after a sort; and
therefore, if a Man, having a Manor, grant the Inheritance of the Copiholders
to another, the Grantee may keep a Court for the Customary Tenants, and accept
Surrenders to the use of others, and make both Admittances and Grants; the
other Court is of Freeholders, which is properly called the Court Baron,
wherein the suitors, that is, the Freeholders are Judges; whereas of the other,
the Lord or his Steward, is Judge.

Court of Py-powders. See Py-Powders.

Court of Requests (Curia Requisitionum) Was a Court of Equity, of the same
nature with the Chancery, but inferior to it; principally instituted for the
relief of such Petitioners, as in conscionable Cases, addressed themselves by
Supplication to His Majesty. Of this Court, the Lord Privy Seal was chief
Judge, assisted by the Masters of Requests, and had beginning about 9 Hen. 7.
according to Sir Julius Caesar's Tractate on this subject. Mich. 40 and 41 Eliz.
in the Court of Common Pleas, it was adjudged upon solemn Argument, That this
Court of Requests, or the Whitehal, was no Court that had power of Judicature,
etc. See 4 Part. Inst. fol. 97.

Court of the Legate, Was a Court obtained by Cardinal Woolsey, of Pope Leo the
Tenth, in the Ninth year of Henry the Eighth, wherein he had power to prove
Wills, and dispense with Offenses against the Spiritual Laws, etc. And was but
of short continuance.

Court Christian (Curia Christianitatis) So called, because, as in the Secular
Courts, the Kings Laws do sway, and decide Causes; so in Ecclesiastical Courts,
the Laws of Christ should rule and direct; for which Cause, the Judges in those
Courts are Divines, as, Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, etc. Linwoods words
are these. In Curia Christianitatis, i. Ecclesiae, in qua servantur Leges
Christi, cum tamen in foro regio serventur Leges mundi. 2 Part. Inst. fol. 488.
See before in Court.

Court of Delegates. See Delegates.

Court of Chivalry (Curia Militaris) Otherwise called the Marshal Court; the
Judges, of it, are the Lord Constable of England, and the Earl Marshal of
England: This Court is the Fountain of the Marshal Law, and the Earl Marshal,
is both one of the Judges, and to see execution done. See Constable, and 4
Part. Instit. fol. 123.

JEhan, filz, friar, and uncle au Roys, Duc de Bedford, and d'Anjou, Conte
Richemond and de Kendal, and Conestable d'Angleterre, a nostre treschere Cousin
Jehan Due de Norfolk, Mareshal d'Angleterre salus. Nous vous mandons and
chargeons qui vous facez arrestre and venir devant nous ou nostre Lieutenant a
Westminster a la Quinsiesm du Saint Hillaire prochain venant William Clopton du
Count de Suffolk Esquier, pour adunques respondre devant nous ou nostre
Lieutenant, en la Cour de Chivalrie, a Robert Eland Esquier de Count de
Norfolk de ce que le dit Robert adunques luy sur mettra par voie de Arms, ad
and appose le Seel de ces Arms a un faux and forge fait, as domages du dit
Robert de Cl. and plus a ce quil dit Remandantz par d'evers nous a dit jour,
ove icest nostre mandement, tout ce que vous en aurez faitz. Done soubz le
seel du nostre Office le xxiii. jour de Nov. l'an du regne nostre Signieur le
Roy sisme puis le Conquest cetisme.

Courtilage. See Curtilage.

Couthutlaugh (Sax. Couch, sciens, and Utlaugh, exlex) Is he that willingly
receives a Man outlawed, and cherishes or conceals him. In which case, he was,
in ancient time, subject to the same punishment that the Outlaw himself was.
Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 13. number. 2.

Cranage (Cranagium) Is a liberty to use a Crane for drawing up Wares from the
Vessels, at any Creek of the Sea, or Wharff, unto the Land, and to make profit
of it. It signifies also the Money paid and taken for the same. New Book of
Entries, fol. 3.

Crastino Sancti Uincentii (i. the morrow after the Feast of St. Vincent the
Martyr, which is 22 Januarii) Is the date of the Statutes made at Merton, Anno
20 Hen. 3.

Cravent or Craven. In a trial by Battle, upon a Writ of Right, the ancient Law
was, That the Victory should be proclaimed, and the vanquished acknowledge his
fault, in the audience of the people, or pronounce the horrid word Cravant, in
the name of Recreantise, etc. and presently Judgment was to be given, and after
this, the Recreant should Amittere liberam legem, that is, He should become
infamous, etc. See 2 Part. Instit. fol. 247, 248. We retain the word still for
a Coward. If the Appellant join Battle, and cry Craven, he shall lose liberain
legem; but if the Appellee cry Craven, he shall be hanged 3 Inst. fol. 221.

Crayer. Seems to be a kind of small Sea-Vessel or Ship, mentioned in the
Stat. 14 Car. 2. cap. 27.

Creansor (Creditor, of the Fr. Coyance, persuasio) Signifies him that trusts
another with any debt, be it in Money or Wares. Old Not. Br. fol. 67. Anno ^8
Edw. 3. cap. 5.

Creast-tile. See Roof-tile.

Creek (Creca) Seems to be a part of a Haven, where any thing is landed from
the Sea. So that when you are out of the main Sea within the Haven, look how
many Landing places you have, so many Creeks may be said to belong to that
Haven. See Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 110. a. This word is mentioned in the Stat. 2
Hen. 4. cap. 5. 5 Eliz. cap. 5. and 14 Car. 2. cap. 28. and in Plow. Casu,
Ronyger and Fogassa.

Crocards, A sort of Money. See Pollards.

Croft (Sax) Croftus and Crofta, A little Close or Pitle, enclosed near a
Dwelling House, for any particular use. Possunt etiam dicti Monachi de ersdem
mariscis versus occidentem jacentibus, pro se and hominibus, sive tenentibus
suis, includere Crof^os, sive pratum juxia pontem separaliter quantum illis
placuerit. Ingulf. In some ancient Deeds Crufta occurs, as the Latin word for a
Croft; but Cum Toftis and Croftis, is most frequent.

Crosses (Cruce signati) Are used by Britton (cap. 122.) for Pilgrims, because
they wear the sign of the Cross upon their Garments. Of these, and their
Privileges, read Bracton, lib. 5. p^. 2. cap. 2. and pa. 5. cap. 29. And the
Grand Customary of Normandy, cap. 49. Under this word, are also signified the
Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, created for the de^ence of Pilgrims; and all
those worthy Men of the Nobility and Gentry of England, who in the Reigns of
King Henry the Second, Richard the First, Henry the Third, and Edward the
First, were Cruce signati, as dedicating and listing themselves to the Wars,
for the recovery of Jerusalem, and the Holy Land. Greg. Syntag. lib. 1^. cap.
13 and 14.

Euekingstool or Cokestool (Tumbrella) Is an Engine invented for the punishment
of Scolds and unquiet Women, by Ducking them in the Water, called in ancient
time a Tumbrel. Lamb. Eiren. lib. 1. cap. 12. Bracton writes this word
Tymborella. Kitchen, (cap. Charge in Court Leet, fol. 13. a.) says, Every one
having view of Frank-pledge, ought to have a Pillory, and a Tumbrel. This was
in use even in our Saxons time, by whom it was called S^eal (...), and
described to be Cathedra, in qua rixosae mulieres sedentes, aquis
demergebantur: And was a punishment anciently inflicted upon Brewers and Bakers
transgressing the Laws, who were thereupon, in such a Stool or Chair, to be
ducked and immerged in Stercore, some muddy or stinking Pond.

Cudutlaugh. See Couthutlaugh.

Cut ante divortium, Is a Writ, which a Woman, divorced from her Husband, has
to recover Lands or Tenements from him, to whom her Husband did alienate them
during the marriage, because, during the marrige, she could not gainsay it.
Reg. of Writs, fol. 233. Fit^. Not. Br. fol. 204.

Cui in vita, Is a Writ of Entry, which a Widow has against him, to whom her
Husband alienated her Lands or Tenements in his life time, which must specify,
that During his life, she could not withstand it. Reg. of Writs, fol. 232.
Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 193. See the New Book of Entries, verbo, Cui in vita.

Culagium, Is when a Ship is laid in the Dock to be repaired. M. S. Arth.
Trevor, Arm. de Plac. Edw. 3.

Culvertage, (Culvertaginm, from Culum and vertere, to turn tail.) Omnes cum
equis and armis jussit sub nomine Culvertagii convenire. Matthew. Paris, fol.
233. That is, under the penalty of Cowardice, or being accounted Cowards. See
Gloss. in x. Scriptores.

Cunage (Cunagium) -- De Cunagio Stanneriae, and de emptione totius Stanni in
Com. Devon. and Cornub. Rot. Pat. 21 Edw. 3. See Coinage.

Cuneus, A Mint or place to Coin Money in. Mandatum est Reginaldo de Cornhil,
etc. Sciatis quod concessimus venerabili Patri nostro Cicestr. Fpiscopo, quod
habeat Cuneum suum in Civitate Cicestriae, and quod currat donec nostri in
eadem civitate current, and tunc una cum illis currat. Et ideo vobis
praecipimus, quod ei, vel certo nuncio suo Cuneum illum habere sine dilatione
faciatis. (...). 29 Apr. Claus. 6 Joh. m. 3.

Cuntey-Cuntey, Is a kind of trial, as appears by Bracton, in these words,
Negotium in hoc casu terminabitur per Cuntey-Cuntey, sicut inter Cohaeredes. --
And, In brevi de recto negotium terminabitur per Cuntey-Cuntey, which seems to
be as much as the Ordinary Jury. Bracton, lib. 4. tract. 3. cap. 18.

Curfeu (Ignitegium) of the Fr. Couvrir feu, i. Cover the Fire) Signifies an
Evening Peal, by which the Conqueror commanded every Man to take warning, for
raking up his fire, and putting out his light: So that in many places at this
day, where a Bell is customably rung toward Bedtime, it is said to ring
Curfeu. Hill. 3 Rich. 2. Coram Rege, Rot. 8. London.

Curia. See Court.

Curia advisare vult, Is a Deliberation which the Court sometimes takes, before
they give Judgment in a Cause, wherein there seems to be any point of
difficulty; for which, see the New Book of Entries on this word.

Curia claudenda, Is a Writ that lies against him, who should fence and enclose
his ground, if he refuse or defer to do it. Reg. of Writs, fol. 155. Fitz. Not.
Br. fol. 127. New Book of Entries, verbo Curia claudenda.

Curia Penticiarum. Id est, Curia in civitate Cestriae coram Vice-comite ibidem
in Aula Penticia ejusdem Civitatis. Pl. in Itin. apud Cestriam, 14 Hen. 7. It
is probable this Court was originally held under a Pentice, or Shed covered
with Bords, and thence took denomination.

Curnock, Is four Bushels, or half a Quarter of Corn. Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 12.

Cursitors (Clerici de cursu) Of these there are in the Chancery twenty, who
make out original Writs, and are a Corporation of themselves, and to every
Clerk are appointed certain Counties. 2 Inst. fol. 670.

Courtesy of England, (Jus Curialitatis Angliae) Is where a Man takes a Wife,
seized of Land in Fee-simple, Fee-tail general, or as Heir in Tail special, and
has issue by her, Male or Female, born alive; if the Wife die, the Husband
shall hold the Land, during his life, by the Law of England, And he is called
Tenant by the Courtesy of England; because this Privilege is not allowed in
any other Realm, except in Scotland, where it is called Curialitas Scotiae. See
more upon this word in the Terms of the Law.

Curteyn (Curtana) Was the name of King Edward the Confessors Sword, which is
the first Sword that is carried before the Kings of England, at their
Coronation. Matthew. Paris in Hen. 3. And it is said, the point of it is broken,
which may argue an emblem of Mercy.

Curtilage (Curtilagium) Hortus olitorius, vel ubi olera leguntur. A Gardin;
Yard, Backside, or (as they call it in Herefordshire) a Fold. Persoluat
(decimam) Lactis, hortorum, Curtilagiorum, Lanae, etc. Provinciale Angl. lib.
3. tit. de Decimis. -- Et si in Curtilagio alicujus bladum seminaretur, decimam
garbam illius bladi, sicut in campis percipiet. Inq. 36 Hen. 3. Mihi dici
videtur Curtilagium (says Spelman) a Curtillum and ago, scil. locus ubi curtis
vel curtilli negotium agitur. It is mentioned Anno 4 Edw. 1. cap. unico. Anno
35 Hen. 8. cap 4. and 39 Eliz. cap. 2. See Coke, vol. 6. fol 64. a. and
Bulstrodes Rep. 2 par. fol. 113.

Custode admittendo, and Custode amovendo, Are Writs for the admitting or
removing of Guardians. Reg. of Writs, in indice.

Custodes libertatis Angliae Authoritate Parliamenti, Was the style or title in
which Writs, and other Judicial Proceedings did run, in the Rump time, that is,
from the Decollation of King Charles the First, till the Usurper Oliver was
declared Protector, etc. mentioned in the Statute of 12 Car. 2. cap. 3.

Custom (Consuetudo) has the same signification with us, as with the
Civilians, being by both accounted a part of the Law. Consuctudo quandoque pro
lege servatur (says Bracton) in partibus uhi fuerit more utentium approbata;
longavi enim temporis usus and consuetudinis non est vilis authoritas. Lib. 1.
cap. 3. Custom is a Law or Right not written, which being established by long
use, and the consent of our Ancestors, and those of our Kindred, that are Ultra
Tritavum, has been and daily is practiced. So that allowing the Father to be
so much older then his Son, as pubertas, or the years of generation require,
the Grandfather so much elder then him, and so forth usque ad tritavum, we
cannot say this or that is a Custom, except we can justify, it has continued
so one hundred years: For tritavus must be so much elder then the party that
pleads it; yet, because that is hard to prove, it is enough for the proof of a
Custom, if two or more witnesses can depose they heard their Fathers say, it
was a Custom all their time, and that their Fathers heard their Fathers also
say, it was so in their time. If it be to be proved by Record, the continuance
of one hundred years will suffice. Sir Jo. Davies Rep. in Praef. and fol. 32.

Custom is either general or particular: General is that which is current
through England, whereof you shall read diverse in Doctor and Student, lib. 1.
cap. 7. Particular, is that which belongs to this or that Lordship, City, or
Town.

Custom differs from Prescription, that being common to more; Prescription, for
the most part, particular to this or that Man. Again, Prescription may be for a
far shorter time, than Custom, viz. for five years or less. Out of our Statute
you may have greater diversity, which see collected in Cowels Institutes, tit.
de usucap. and longi temp. praescript.

Custom is also used for the Tribute or Toll (called Tonnage and Poundage)
which Merchants pay to the King for carrying out, and bringing in Merchandise.
Anno 14 Edw. 3. Stat. 1. cap. 21. and 12 Car. 2. cap. 4. In which signification
it is Latined, Custuma. Reg. of Writs, fol. 138. a. and 4 Inst. fol. 29. And
lastly, for such services, as Tenants of a Manor ow to their Lord.

Custom-house, Is a House in London, where the Kings Customs are received, and
the whole business, relating thereunto, transacted. Anno 12 Car. 2. cap. 4.

Customary Tenants (Tenentes per consuctudinem) Are such Tenants as hold by the
Custom of the Manor, as their special Evidence. See Copihold.

Custos brevium, Is an Officer belonging to the Court of Common Pleas, and made
by the Kings Letters Patent, whose Office is to receive and keep all the Writs
retornable in that Court, and put them upon Files, every return by it self, and
to receive of the Protonotaries all the Records of Nisi Prius, called the
Postea's. For they are first brought in by the Clerks of the Assise of every
Circuit to the Protonotary, who entered the Issue in that matter, to enter the
Judgment. And four days after the return thereof, (which is allowed to speak in
Arrest of Judgment) the Protonotary enters the Verdict and Judgment, thereupon
into the Rolls of the Court, and afterward delivers them over to the Custos
Brevium, who binds them into a bundle, and makes entry also of the Writs of
Covenant, and the Concord upon every Fine; and makes forth Exemplifications
and Copies of all Writs and Records in his Office, and of all Fines lovied. The
Fines after they are engrossed are thus divided between the Custos brevium, and
the Chirographer; this always keeps the Writ of Covenant, and the Note; the
other keeps the Concord, and the Foot of the Fine, upon which Foot, the
Chirographer causes the Proclamations to be endorsed, when they are
proclaimed. In the Court of Kings Bench there is likewise a Custos brevium and
Rotulorum, who fileth such Writs as are there used to be filed, and all
Warrants of Attorney, and transcribeth or makes out the Records of Nisi Prius,
etc.

Custos placitorum Coronae (Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 5.) Seems to be all one with
him, whom we now call Custos Rotulorum.) Of which, I find mention in the Writ
De Odio and atia. Reg. of Writs, fol. 133. b.

Custos Rotulorum, Is he, who has the custody of the Rolls or Records of the
Sessions of Peace, and of the Commission of the Peace it self. He is always a
Justice of Peace and Quorum, in the County, where he has his Office; and by
his Office, he is rather termed an Officer or Minister, then a Judge; because
the Commission of the Peace, by express words, lays this special charge upon
him, Quod ad dies and loca praedicta, Brevia, Praecepta, Processus and
Indictamenta praedicta coram te and dictis sociis tuis venire facias. Lamb.
Eiren. lib. 4. cap. 3. page 373. where you may read more touching this Office.
Who shall appoint the Custos Rotulorum in every County. See 37 Hen. 8. cap. 1.
and 3 and 4 Edw. 6. cap. 1. 2 Inst. fol. 674.

Custos of the Spiritualties (oustos spiritualitatis vel spiritualium) Is he
that exercises the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of any Diocese,
during the vacancy of the Sea; the appointment of whom, by the Canon Law,
appertains to the Dean and Chapter. But with us in England, to the Archbishop
of the Province by Prescription. Howbeit, diverse Deans and Chapters (if Gwin
say true in his Preface to his Readings) challenge this by ancient Charters
from the Kings of this Land.

Cutter of the Talleys, Is an Officer in the Exchequer, that provides Wood for
the Talleys, and cuts the sum paid upon them, and then casts the same into the
Court, to be written upon.

Cyricsceat (Sax.) Vectigal Ecclesiae. Primitias seminum quisque ex eo dato
Domicilio; in quo ipso natali die domini commoratur. Spelm. de Council. vol. 1.
fol. 125. See Churchesset.

D.
DAkir. According to the Stat. 51. Hen. 3. De Compositione ponderum and
Mensurarum, A Last of Hides consists of Twenty Dakirs, and every Dakir of Ten
Hides. But by 1 Jac. cap. 33. or Last of Hides or Skins is Twelve dozen. I have
also read of a Dakir of Iron, but find not its quantity.

Damage (Lat. Damnatio, Fr. Dommage) Signifies generally any hurt or hindrance,
that a Man receives in his Estate, but particularly, a part of that the Jurors
are to enquire of, when the Action (be it real or personal) passes for the
Plaintiff. For, after Verdict given of the principal cause, they are asked
their Consciences touching Costs (which are the charges of Suit, called by the
Civilians Expensae litis) and Damages, which comprehend a recompense for what
the Plaintiff or Demandant has suffered, by means of the wrong done him by the
the Defendant or Tenant. Coke on Littl. fol. 257.

Damage Clear (Damna Clericorum) Is now assessed by the Tenth part in the
Common Pleas, and the Twentieth part in the Kings Bench and Exchequer of all
Damages, (exceeding Five Marks) recovered either by Verdict, Confession, or
Judgment of the Court, in all Actions upon the Case, Covenant, Trespass,
Battery, False imprisonment, Dower, and all others, wherein the Damages are
uncertain, which the Plaintiff must pay to the Prothonotary or chief Officer of
that Court, wherein they are recovered, before he shall have any Execution for
them. For example, If one lends another on his word, or note under hand, One
hundred pound, or sells commodity to that value; the Lender or Seller is forced
to sue in an Action of the Case, recovers, must pay Ten pound, if in the Common
Pleas, and Five pound in the Kings Bench or Exchequer, (and so proportionably
for a greater or lesser sum) before he can have Execution. This was originally
no other then a gratuity given the Prothonotaries, and their Clerks, for
drawing special Writs and Pleadings, which afterward grew to a certainty, and
was not, as some have fancied, anciently, a Tenth part of the Damages
recovered; For it does appear by ancient Records, that it has been at an
uncertain rate, sometimes a Sixth, and at other times a Third part. This, by
Act of Parliament, 17 Car. 2. cap. 6. is taken away from and after the 29 of
September, 1672. And till that time, and no longer, Damage Clear shall be paid
out of such Moneys only, as shall be actually levied, or otherwise paid by the
Defendants, and only for the proportion of the Money which shall be so levied
or paid, and no more, or otherwise.

Damage Fesant (Fr. Damage Faisant, i. Doing hurt or damage) As when a
strangers Beasts are doing hurt, or spoil in the Grass, Corn, Woods, etc. of
another Man, without his leave or license. In which case, the party, whom they
damage, may therefore take, distrain, and impound them, as well in the night as
day. But in other cases, as for Rent, Services, and such like, none may
distrain in the night. Stat. De Districtione Scaccarii, Anno 51 Hen. 3.

Danegelt, Danegold, or Dane-geld (Gelt in Dutch signifies Money) Was a Tribute
laid upon our Ancestors of Two shillings for every Hide of Land, through the
Realm by the Danes, who once mastered us, in regard (as they pretended) of
clearing the Seas of Pirates, which greatly annoyed our Coasts in those days.
Camd. Britan. 83. Stow in his Annals, fol. 118. says, This Tribute came to
40000 l. per annum, and began in the time of King Etheldred, who, being much
distressed by the continual invasion of the Danes, to procure his Peace, was
compelled to charge his people with heavy payments. For first he gave them at
five several payments 113000 l. and afterward 48000 l. yearly, which was
released by Edward the Confessor, according to Ingulphus, fol. 510. a. Others
say it continued till Hen. 1. or K. Stephen. See Hoveden par. post. Annal. fol.
344. a. Spelmans Glossarium, and Seldens Marc clausum, fol. 190. -- Et sint
quieti de Lene, Danegeld and Gaywitte, and de omnibus aliis consuetudinibus,
etc. Carta Hen. 7. Ballivis and Burgens. Mountgomer.

Danelage. See Merchenlage.

Darrein, Is a Corruption from the French Dernier, i. Ultimus; and we use it in
the same sense, as

Darrein Continuance. See Continuance.

Darrein Presentment, (ultima Presentatio.) See Assize of Darrein Presentment.

Datife, or Dative, (Dativus,) That may be given, or disposed of. Whether a
Prior shall be Datife, and removable, or perpetual, shall be tried by the
Ordinary. Anno 9 Rich. 2. ca. 4. Si Prior Datife and removeable suffer eschape,
respondeat superior. 45 Ed. 3. 9, 10.

Day, (Dies,) Is sometimes used for the Day of Appearance in Court, either
Originally, or upon Assignation; and, sometimes for the Returns of Writs. For
example, Days in Bank are Days set down by Statute, or Order of the Court,
when Writs shall be returned, or when the Party shall Appear upon the Writ
served; for which, you may read the Statutes 51 Hen 3. ca. 1 and 2. -- Marlb.
ca. 12 -- 52 Hen. 3. and the Statute de Anno Bissextili. 21 Hen. 3. and lastly,
32 Hen. 8. ca. 21. To be dismissed without Day, is to be finally discharged the
Court. He had a Day by the Roll; that is, he had a day of Appearance Assigned
him. Kitchen, fol. 193 and 197. Day, Year, and Wast. See Year, Day, and Wast.
And see Dies.

Deadly Feud, (Feuda and Faida,) Is a Profession of an Irreconcilable Enmity,
till we are revenged even by the death of our Enemy. It is deduced from the
German word (Feed,) which, as Hottoman, (in verbis Feudalibus) says, Modo
bellum, modo capitales inimicitias significat. It is used Anno 43 Eliz. ca. 13.

Dead Pledge, (mortuum vadium.) See Morgage.

De-afforested, That is discharged from being Forest; or, that is freed and
exempted from the Forest-Laws. Anno 17 Car. 1. ca. 16.

Johannes Dei Gratia, etc Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, etc. Sciatis nos omnino
Deafforestaise Forestam de Brewood de omnibus quae ad Forestam and Forestarios
pertinent. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus quod praedicta Foresta and
homines in illa manentes and haeredes eorum sint Deafforestati imperpetuum,
etc. Dat. apud Brug. 13 Martii Anno regni nostri 5.

Dean, (Gr. (...), december,) Is an Ecclesiastical Magistrate, so called, because
he presides over Ten Canons or Prebends at the least. We call him a Dean that
is under the Bishop, and chief of the Chapter, ordinarily in a Cathedral
Church; and, the rest of the Society or Corporation we call Capitulum, the
Chapter. But, how diversely this word is used, read Lindwood, Tit. de Constitut.
ca. 1. verbo, Decani Rurales; where Rural Deans are said to be certain persons
that have Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical over other Ministers and Parishes near
adjoining, assigned them by the Bishop and Archdeacon, being placed and
displaced by them: Such are the Dean of Croiden in Surrey, Dean of Battle in
Kent, etc.

As there are two Foundations of Cathedral Churches in England, the old and the
new, (the new are those which Henry the Eighth upon Suppression of Abbeys
transformed from Abbot, or Prior and Convent, to Dean and Chapter,) so are
there two means of Creating these Deans: For, those of the Old Foundation were
exalted to their Dignity much like Bishops; the King first sending out his
Conge d'Eslire to the Chapter, the Chapter then choosing, the King yielding His
Royal Assent, and the Bishop Confirming him, and giving his Mandate to enstal
him. Those of the New Foundation are by a shorter course Enstalled, by Virtue
of the Kings Letters-Patent, without either Election or Confirmation. This word
is also applied to diverse that are the chief of certain peculiar Churches or
Chapels, as the Dean of the Kings Chapel, the Dean of the Arches, the Dean of
St. Georges Chapel in Windsor, etc. Nec Collegio alicui praefecti, nec
jurisdictione ulla donati, nomine tamen velut honoris gratia insignes, says
Spelman.

De been esse, Are three common Latin words, but their signification more
mysterious, conceived to be thus, To take or do any thing De been esse, is to
accept or allow it, as well done for present; but, when it comes to be more
fully examined or tried, to stand or fall, to be allowed or disallowed,
according to the Merit or Well-being of the thing in its own nature; or (as we
say) Valeat quantum valere potest: So in Chancery, upon motion to have one of
the less-principal Defendants in a Case, examined as a Witness, the Court (not
then thoroughly examining the justice of it, or not hearing what may be objected
on the other side) often orders such a Defendant to be examined de been esse.
i. That his Depositions shall be allowed or suppressed at the Hearing of the
Cause, upon the full debate of the Matter, as the Court shall then think fit,
but for the present they have a well-being, or conditionalallowance. It is used
in Langhams Caso. Croke 3 Part. fol. 68.

Debentur, Was by a Rum^ Act in 1649, ordained to be in the nature of a Bond or
Bill, to charge the Commonwealth (forsooth) to pay the Souldier-Creditor, or
his Assigns the Sum due upon Auditing the Account of his Arrears. The Form of
which Debentur, as then used, you may see in Scobels Rump-Acts Anno 1649, ca.
63. The word is also mentioned in the Act of Oblivion, 12 Car. 2. ca. 8. Sect.
7. and is used in the Exchequer. See Auditor of the Receipts.

Debet and solet, Are Latin words, often used in our Law-Writers. In old Not.
Br. fol. 98. it is said, This Writ De secta molendini, being in the debet and
solet, is a Writ of Right, etc. And again, fol. 69. A Writ of quod permittat
may be pleaded in the County before the Sheriff; and, it may be in the debet,
and solet, or in the debet, without the solet, according as the Demandant
claims. Wherefore note, that those Writs which are in this sort brought, have
these words in them as Formal words, not to be omitted. And, according to the
diversity of the Case, both debet and solet are used, or debet alone; That is,
if a man sue to recover any Right, whereof his Ancestor was disseis'd by the
Tenant or his Ancestor, then he uses only the word debet in his Writ; because
solet is not fit by reason his Ancestor was disseis'd and the Custom
discontinued: but, if he sue for any thing that is now first of all deny^d him,
then he uses both these words; because his Ancestors before him, and he
himself usually enjoyed the thing sued for, as suit to a Mill, or Common of
Pasture, until this present refusal of the Tenant. The like may be said of
debet and detinet, as appears by the Reg. of Writs in the Writ De debito, fol.
140. a.

Debito, or De debito, Is a Writ which lies, where a Man ows another a Sum of
Money by Obligation, or Bargain for any thing sold him, Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 119.
This Writ is made sometime in the detinet, and not in the debet, which properly
falls out, where a Man owes an Annuity, or a certain quantity of Wheat, Barley,
or such like, which he refuses to pay, Old. Not. Br. fo. 75. See Debet and
solet.

December tales. See Tales.

Deceit, (Deceptio, dolus,) Is a Subtle, wily Shift, or Trick; whereunto may
be drawn all manner of Craft, Subtilty, Guile, Fraud, Slight, Cunning, Covin,
Collusion and Practice used to Deceave another Man by any Means; which has no
other more proper or particular Name then Deceit, or Offense. West, pa. 2.
Symbol. tit. Inditements. Sect. 68. See Cosoning, and New Book of Entries,
verbo Disceit.

Decenna, and Decenniers. See Deciners.

Decennary, (Decennaria,) The Limits or Compass of ten Friburghs. See Deciners.

Deceptione, Is a Writ that lies properly for one that receives harm or damage
by him that does any thing deceitfully in the Name of another. (Fitz. Not. Br.
fol. 95.) And is either Original, or Judicial, as appears by Old Not. Br. fol.
50. where you may read the use of both, to this effect; This Writ of Deceit,
when it is Original, lies where deceit is used to a Man by another, by not
sufficiently performing a Bargain or Promise, or by using some Guile, whereby
he may be disinherited, or evil entreated, etc. And, when Judicial, it lies out
of the Rolls of Record, as in the Case where scire facias is sent to the
Sheriff, that he warn a man to be before the Justices at a certain day, and the
Sheriff returns the Writ, served, whereas the Party was not warned, whereby he
that sues the scire facias recovers; then the Party, who ought to have been
warned, shall have the said Writ against the Sheriff. See Reg. of Writs, fol.
112. and Reg. Judicial in the Table, verbo, Deceptione.

Decies tantum, Is a Writ that lies against a Juror, who has taken Money for
giving his Verdict, called so of the effect; because it is to recover ten times
so much as he took. It lies also against Embracers that procure such an
Enquest. Anno 38 Ed. 3. ca. 13. Reg. of Writs, fol. 188. Fitz. Not. Br. fol.
171. New Book of Entries, verbo, Decies tantum.

Decimation, (Decimatio,) the punishing every tenth Soldier by Lot was termed
Decimatio Legionis: Also a tithing, or paying the tenth part. What Decimation
was in the late Usurpers time, (1655,) is still in the Memory of many good
Subjects of this Realm. See Tenths.

Decimis solbendis pro possessionibus alienigenarum, Is a Writ or Letters
Patent, yet extant in the Register, which lay against those that had farmed the
Priors aliens Lands of the King, for the Rector of the Parish, to recover his
Tyth of them. Reg. of Writs, fol. 179.

Deciners alias Decenniers, alias Doziners, (Decenarii, Decearchi,) Signify,
in the Ancient Monuments of our Law, such as were wont to have the oversight
and check of the Friburghs, for Maintenance of the Kings Peace; And, the
limits, or compass of their Jurisdiction was called Decenna. Bracton lib. 3.
Tract. 2. ca. 15. of whom you may also read Fleta, lib. 1. ca. 27. And Reg. of
Writs, fol. 98. b. These seemed to have large Authority in the Saxons time,
taking knowledge of Causes within their Circuit, and redressing Wrongs by way
of Judgment, and compelling Men thereunto, as you may read in the Laws of K.
Edward the Confessor, published by Lambert, Numb. 32. In later times I find
mention of them, as in Britton. ca. 12. who says, in the Kings Person, (for so
he Writes his whole Book,) We will, that all those who are 14 years old, shall
make Oath, That they shall be sufficient and loyal to Us; and, neither be
Felons, nor assenting to Felons: And, We will, That all Profess themselves to
be of this or that Dozein, and make, or offer Surety of their Behavior by
these or those Doziners; except Religious Persons, Clerks, Knights eldest Sons,
and Women. Yet, the same Author in his 29th Chap. says, all of 12 years old
and upwards are punishable for not coming to the Sheriffs Turn, except Earls,
Prelates, Barons, Religious persons, and Women. Stamf. Pl. Cor. fol. 37. has
these words; The like Law is, where the Dozeniers make Presentment, that a
Felon is taken for Felony, and delivered to the Sheriff, etc. And, Kitchen,
(fol. 33.) thus; Religious persons, Clerks; Knights, or Women, shall not be
Deceniers.

A Dozein seems now to extend so far, as every Leet extends; because in Leets
only this Oath is Ministered by the Steward, and taken by such as are twelve
years old and upwards, dwelling within the Precinct of the Leet where they are
sworn. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 261. a. The particulars of this Oath, you may read
in Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 1. number. 1. who sets down fifteen years for
the age of those that are to be sworn to the Kings Peace, but afterward names
twelve years. See Inlaugh.

We may note out of the Premises, a diversity between the ancient and these
modern times, in this Point of Law and Government, as well in the age of those
who are to be sworn, as also that Decennier is not now used for the chief Man
of a Dozein, but for him that is sworn to the Kings Peace; and lastly, That now
there are no other Dozeins but Leets, and that no Man ordinarily gives other
security for keeping the Kings Peace, but his own Oath, and that therefore no
Man answers for another transgression, but every Man for himself. See
Frank-pledge, and 2 Part. Inst. fol 73.

Declaration (Declaratio) Is properly the showing forth, or laying down in
writing the Cause of Action in any suit at Law, wherein the party supposes to
have wrong. This, in an Action Real, is properly called a Count, which ought to
contain Demonstration, Declaration, and Conclusion. In Demonstration, are
contained three things, viz. Who complains, against whom, and for what matter:
In the Declaration there ought to be comprised, how, and in what manner the
Action rose between the parties, when, what day, year, and place, and to whom
the Action shall be given. And in the Conclusion he ought to aver and proffer
to prove his suit, and show the damage he has sustained by the wrong done him.
Terms de la Ley.

Decretals (Decretales) Are a Volume of the Canon Law, so called; or Books
containing the Decrees of sundry Popes; or a Digestion of the Canons of all the
Councils that pertained to one Matter, under one Head.

Dedi (as if it be said in a Feoffment, I. S. has Given, granted, etc.) It is
a Warranty in Law to the Feoffee, and his Heirs. Coke on Littl. fol. 384. a.

Dedimus Potestatem (i. We have given power) Is a Writ whereby Commission is
given to one or more private persons, for the speeding of some Act appertaining
to a Judge. The Civilians call it Delegationem. And it is granted most commonly
upon suggestion, that the party, who is to do something before a Judge, or in a
Court, is so weak, he cannot travel. It is used in diverse Cases, as to take a
Personal Answer to a Bill of Complaint in Chancery, to examine witnesses in a
Cause depending in that Court; to levy a Fine, etc. West, part. 2. Symbol. tit.
Fines, sect. 112. and diverse other, as you may see in Fitz Not. Br and in the
Table of the Reg. of Writs, verbo, Dedimus Potestatem.

Deed (Factum) Is an Instrument written in Parchment or Paper, consisting of
three things, viz. Writing, Sealing, and Delivery, and comprehending a Contract
or Bargain between party and party: Of which, there are two sorts, Deeds
Indented, and Deeds Poll; which names arise, from the form or fashion of them,
the one being cut in and out in the top or side, which we call Indented, the
other being plain. A Deed Indented, is a Deed consisting of two parts, or more
(for there are Tripartite and Quadripartite Deeds) in which it is expressed,
That the parties thereto, have to every part thereof interchangably set their
several Seals. The cause of their Indenting is, that it may appear they belong
to one business or contract. A Deed Poll or polled (anciently called Charta de
una part) is a plain Deed without Indenting; as if we should say, The
Indenting is polled or cut off; and is used, when the Vendor for example only
Seals, and there is no need of the Vendees sealing a Counterpart, by reason the
nature of the Contract is such, as it requires no Covenant from the Vendee,
unless in such case the Vendor will out of caution or curiosity have a
Counterpart, to see, upon any occasion, what Covenants himself has given. See
Coke on Littl. fol. 35. b.

Deemsters or Demsters (from the Saxon dema, i. a Judge or Umpire) All
Controversies (in the Isle of Man) are decided without Process, Writings, or
any Charges, by certain Judges, whom they choose from among themselves, and call
Deemsters. Camd. Brit. tit. British Islands.

Deer-Hays, Are Engines or great Nets, made of Cords to catch Deer. Anno 19 Hen.
7. cap. 11.

De essendo quietum de Tolonio, Is a Writ that lies for those, who are by
privilege freed from the payment of Toll, which read at large in Fitz. Not.
Br. fol. 226.

De expensis militum, Is a Writ commanding the Sheriff to levy four shillings
per diem, for the expenses of a Knight of the Shire. And a like Writ De
expensis Civium and Burgensium, to levy two shillings per diem, for every
Citizen and Burgess of Parliament, 4 Inst. fol. 46.

De facto, (Anno 12 Car. 2. cap. 30.) Which is actually done, done indeed.

Default (Fr. Defaut) Is an Offense in omitting that which we ought to do: Of
this Bracton has a whole Tract, lib. 5. tract. 3. By whom it appears, that
Default is most notoriously taken for nonappearance in Court at a day
assigned. Of this you may also read Fleta, lib. 6. cap. 14. and Coke on Littl.
fol. 259. b.

Defeizance (of the Fr. Desfaire, i. to undo or defeat) Signifies a Condition
relating to a Deed, as to a Recognizance or Statute, which being performed by
the Recognizor, the Deed is disabled and made void, as if it never had been
done. The difference between a Proviso or Condition in Deed, and a Defeizance,
is, That those are inserted in the Deed or Grant; this is usually in a Deed by
it self. Of which you may read, West at large, Par. 1. Symb. lib. 2. sect. 156.

Defend (Fr. Defendre) Signifies, in our ancient Laws and Statutes, to prohibit
or forbid. As -- Usuarios defendit quoque Rex Edwardus, ne remanerent in Regno.
LL. Ed. Conf. cap. 37. and 5 Rich. 2. cap. 7. Of which, thus Chaucer. Where can
you say in any manner age,
That ever God defended Marriage.


And in 7 Edw. 1. we have a Statute, entitled Statutum de defensione portandi
arma, etc. It is defended by Law to Distrain in the Highway. Coke on Littl.
fol. 161.

To this day, in diverse parts of England, we say, God defend, instead of God
forbid. And the Fench Month is more truly called the Defense Month, i. the
Forbidden Month. See Fench Month.

Defendant (Defendens) Is he that is sued in an Action Personal; as Tenant is
he, who is sued in an Action Real. See Impediens.

Defendemus, Is a word used in Feofments and Donations, and has this force,
that it binds the Donor and his Heirs to defend the Donce; if any Man go about
to lay any servitude on the thing given, other then is contained in the
Donation. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 16. number. 10. See Warranty.

Defender of the Faith (Defensor fidei) Is a peculiar title given to the Kings
of England by the Pope, as Catholicus to the King of Spain, Christianissimus to
the King of France, and Advocatus Ecclesiae to the Emperor: Which title was
given by Pope Leo the Tenth to King Henry the Eighth, for writing against
Martin Luther, in behalf of the Church of Rome, and the Bull for it bears date
Quinto Idus Octobr. 1521. which may be seen at length in the Lord Herberts
History of Henry the Eighth, fol. 105.

Deforcement (Deforciamentum) Matthew. Paris, fol. 422. Quicunque deforciaverit
eis dotem, and de ipso deforciamento convicti fuerit. id est, Per vim
abstulerit. A withholding Lands or Tenements by force from the right owner. See
Deforceor, and Coke on Littl. fol. 331. b.

Deforciant (Anno 23 Eliz. cap. 3.) The same with Deforceor.

Deforceor (Deforciator, of the Fr. Forceur, i. expugnator) Is one that
overcomes and casts out by force, and differs from Disseisor: First in this,
because a Man may disseise another without force, which is called Simple
Disseisin. Britton, cap. 53. Next, because a Man may deforce another that never
was in possession. For example, if more have right to Lands, as Common Heirs,
and one entering, keeps out the rest, the Law says, He deforceth them, though he
do not disseise them. Old Not. Br. fol. 118. And Littleton, (cap.
Discontinuance, fol. 117.) says, He who is inseoffed by the Tenant in Tail, and
put in Possession, by keeping out the Heir of him in Reversion being dead, does
deforce him, though he did not disseise him; because he entered, when the
Tenant in Tail was living, and the Heir had no present right. A Deforceor
differs from an Intruder, because a Man is made an Iutruder by a wrongful entry
only into Land or Tenement void of a Possessor; And a Deforceor is he that
holds out the right Heir as abovesaid. Bracton, lib. 4. cap. 1.

Degrading. See Disgrading.

Delegates (Anno 25 Hen. 8. cap. 19.) Are Commissioners so called, because
delegated or appointed by the Kings Commission under the Great Seal, to sit
upon an Appeal to the King in the Court of Chancery in three Cases.

First, When a Sentence is given in any Ecclesiastical Cause, by the Archbishop
or his Official.

Secondly, When any Sentence is given in any Ecclesiastical Cause in places
exempt.

Thirdly, When a Sentence is given in the Admiral Court in Suits, Civil and
Marine, by order of the Civil Law. 4 Part. Inst. fol. 339. Anno 8 Eliz. cap. 5

Deliverance. See Replegiare.

Delf (from the Sax. delfan, to dig or delve) Is a Quarry or Mine, where Stone
or Coal is dug. Anno 31 Eliz. cap. 7. And in a Charter of Edward the Fourth,
there is mention of a Mine or Delf of Copper. Camd.

Demain or Demesne (Dominicum. Gallis, Domanium. Italis, Demanium) Accipitur
multipliciter (says Bracton) Est autem Dominicum, quod quis habet ad mensam
suam and proprie, sicut sunt Bordlands, Anglice, i. Dominicum ad mensam. Item
dicitur Dominicum, Villenagium quod traditur villanis, quod quis tempestive and
and intempestive resumere possit pro voluntate sua and revocare. Lib. 4. tract.
3. cap. 9. number. 5. Demains (according to common speech) are the Lords chief
Manor place, with the Lands thereto belonging, which he and his Ancestors have
from time to time kept in their own Manual occupation; howbeit (according to
Law) all the parts of a Manor (except what is in the hands of Freeholders) are
said to be Demains. And the reason why Copihold is accounted Demain, is because
Copiholders are adjudged in Law to have no other estate, but at the will of the
Lord; so that it is still reputed to be in a manner in the Lords hands.

Demain is sometimes used in a more special signification, as opposite to
Frank-fee: For example, those Lands which were in the possession of King Edward
the Confessor, are called Ancient Demains, and all others Frank-fee; and the
Tenants which hold any of those Lands are called Tenants in Ancient Demain; the
others, Tenants in Frank-fee. Kitchen, fol. 98. See more on this subject in the
Learned Spelman, verbo, Dominicum.

Demand (Fr. Demand, i. postulatio) Signifies a calling upon a Man for any
thing due. It has also a proper signification, distinguished from Plaint: For
all Civil Actions are pursued, either by Demands or Plaints; and the pursuer is
called Demandant or Plaintiff, viz. Demandant in Actions Real, and Plaintiff in
Personal. And where the Party pursuing is called Demandant, the party pursued
is called Tenant; where Plaintiff, there Defendant. If a Man release to another
all Demands, this is the best Release which the Releasee can have, and shall
enure most to his advantage. Littl. fol. 117. a. There are two manner of
Demands, the one in Deed, the other in Law: In Deed, as in every Praecipe,
there is express Demand: In Law, as every Entry in Land, Distress for Rent,
taking or seizing of Goods, and such like acts, which may be done without any
words, are Demands in Law. As a Release of Suits is more large then a Release
of Quarrels or Actions; so a Release of Demands is more large and beneficial,
then either of them. By Release of all Demands, all Executions, and all
Freeholds and Inheritances executory are released; By Release of all Demands to
the Disseisor, the right of Entry in the Land, and all that is contained
therein, is released. And he that releaseth all Demands, excludes himself from
all Actions, Entries, and Seisures; but a Release of all Demands, is no Bar in
a Writ of Error to Reverse an Outlary. Coke, lib. 8. fol. 153, 154.

Demandant (Petens) Is he, who is Actor or Plaintiff in a Real Action, because
he demands Lands, etc. Coke on Littl. fol. 127. b. See Demand.

Demain-Cart of an Abbot, Seems to be that Cart, which the Abbot used upon his
own Demain. Anno 6 Hen. 3. cap. 21.

Demi-haque. See Haque and Haquebuz.

Demise (Dimissio) Is applied to an Estate either in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, or
for term of Life, and so it is commonly taken in many Writs. 2 Part. Inst. fol.
483. The Kings death is in Law, termed the Demise of the King.

Demsters. See Deemsters.

Demurrer (from the Fr. Demeurer, i. Manner in aliquo loco, vel morari) Is a
kind of pause or stop put to the proceedings of any Action upon a point of
difficulty, which must be determined by the Court, before any further
proceedings can be had therein: For in every Action, the Controversy consists,
either in Fact or in Law; if in Fact, that is tried by the Jury; if in Law, the
Case is plain to the Judge, or so hard and rare, as it breeds just doubt. We
call that plain to the Judge, wherein he is assured of the Law; though perhaps
the party and his Council yield not to it: And in such case, the Judge with his
Associats, proceed to Judgment, without more ado; but when it is doubtful, then
stay is made, and a time taken, either for the Court to consider further of it,
and agree if they can; or else, for all the Judges, to meet together in the
Exchequer Chamber, and upon hearing what the Sergeants can say on both sides,
to determine what is Law, And whatsoever they conclude, stands firm without
further Appeal. Smith de Repub. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 13. This Demurrer is in our
Records expressed in Latin by Moratur in Lege. At the Common Law, the Defendant
sometimes demurreth to the Plaintiffs Count or Declaration, and sometimes the
Plaintiff demurs to the Defendants Plea, by averring, That it is not a
sufficient Plea in the Law, etc. In Chancery, the Defendant demurs to the
Plaintiffs Bill, averring it to be defective in such, or such a point, and
demands the Judgment of the Court thereupon, whether he shall be compelled to
make any further or other answer thereunto, etc. See Moratur in Lege.

Denariata terrae. See Fardingdeal of Land.

Denariatus, Precium rei quae Denario constat: Mercis, redditus, terrae. Sciant
-- quod ego Willielmus filius Philippi de Colewal Dedi -- Egidio de la Berne de
Hereford pro quadam summa pecuniae -- Octo Denariatos annui redditus, etc. Sine
dat.

Denelage or Danelage, (From the Sax. dane and laga, lex) Is the Law the Danes
made here in England. See Merchenlago.

Denizen (Fr. Donaison, i. Donatio) Signifies an Alien that is enfranchised
here in England, by the Kings Charter and Donation, and enabled in many
respects, to do, as the Kings Native Subjects do, namely, to purchase and
possess Lands, to be capable of any Office or Dignity. Yet is it short of
Naturalization; because a stranger naturalized may inherit Lands by descent,
which a Denizen cannot. And again in the Charter, whereby a Man is made
Denizen, there is commonly contained some one clause or other, that abridges
him of that full benefit which natural subjects enjoy. And when a Man is thus
enfranchised, he is said to be under the Kings Protection, or Esse ad fidem
Regis Angliae; before which time, he can enjoy nothing in England. Bracton
(lib. 5. tract. 5. cap. 25. number. 3.) says, That he and his goods might be
seized to the Kings use. See Horns Mirror, lib. 1. cap. de la Venue de
Franc-plege, and 2 Part. Inst. fol. 741.

De non Residentia Clerici Regis, Is an ancient Writ, the Form whereof see in 2
Part. Inst. fol. 624.

Deodand (Deodandum) Is a thing given or forfeited, as it were to God for the
pacification of his Wrath, in a Case of Misadventure, whereby a Christian Soul
comes to a violent end, without the fault of any reasonable Creature. As, if a
Horse strike his Keeper and kill him: If a Man, in driving a Cart, falls so, as
the Cart-wheel runs over him, and presses him to death: If one be felling a
Tree, and gives warning to the standers by, to look to themselves, yet a Man is
killed by the fall of it. In the first of these Cases, the Horse; in the
second, the Cart-wheel, Cart, and Horses; and in the third, the Tree is to be
given to God, that is, to be sold and distributed to the Poor, by the Kings
Almoner, for expiation of this dreadful event, though effected by unreasonable,
yea, senseless and dead creatures. Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 1. cap. 2. Bracton, lib.
3. tract. 2. cap. 5. Omnia quae movent ad Mortem sunt Deodanda. What moves to
Death, or kills the Dead, Is Deodand, and forfeited.




Fleta says, This Deodand is to be sold, and the price distributed to the Poor,
for the Soul of the King, his Ancestors, and all faithful people departed this
life. Lib. 1. cap. 25. De Submersis. Which Law seems to bear an imitation of
that in Exodus, cap. 21. Si cornu perierit bos virum vel mulierem, ita ut
moriatur, lapidabitur bos neque comedetur caro ejus, ac Dominus ejus crit
innocens. This word is mentioned in the Stat. De Officio Coronatoris, Anno 4
Edw. 1. See 3 Part. Inst. fol. 57.

Deoneranda pro rata portionis, Is a Writ that lies where one is distrained for
a Rent, that ought to be paid by others proportionably with him. For example, a
Man holds ten Oxgangs of Land, by Fealty, and ten shillings Rent of the King,
and aliens one Oxgang thereof to one, and another to another in Fee: Afterward,
the Sheriff or other Officer distrains only one of them for the Rent, he that
is so distrained, may have this Writ for his relief. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 234.

Departer or Departure Is a word properly applied to him, who, first pleading
one thing in Bar of an Action, and being replied unto, does in his Rejoinder,
wave that, and show another matter contrary, or not pursuing his first Plea.
Plowden in Reneger and Fagossa, fol. 7, 8. Or it may be applied to a Plaintiff,
who in his Replication, shows new matter from his Declaration. As in Crokes 2
Part, Bagshaws Case, fol. 147. The Defendant hereupon demurred, because it was
a departure from the Declaration. So if a Man plead a General Agreement in Bar,
and in his Rejoinder allege a special one, this shall be adjudged a Departure
in Pleading.

Departure in despite of the Court, Is when the Tenant or Detendant appears to
the Action brought against him, and has a day over in the same Term, or is
called after, though he had no day given him, so it be in the same Term; if he
do not appear, but make default, it is a Departure in despite of the Court,
and therefore he shall be condemned; which departure is always of the part of
the Tenant or Defendant, and the Entry of it is, Quod praedictus A, licet
solenniter exactus, non revenit, sed in contemptum Curiae, recessit and
defaltum fecit Coke, lib. 8. fol. 62.

Departers of Gold and Silver. See Finors.

Depopulation (Depopulatio) A wasting, pilling, or destruction; a desolation,
or unpeopling of any place. Cokes 12 Rep. fol. 30.

Depopulatores agrorum, It appears by the Stat. 4 Hen. 4. cap. 2. that they
were great offenders by the ancient Law, and that the Appeal or Indictment of
them, ought not to be General, but in Special manner. They are called
Depopulatores Agrorum, for that by prostrating or decaying the Houses or
Habitation of the Kings people, they depopulate, that is, dispeople the Towns.
3 Part. Inst. fol. 204.

Deposition (Depositio) Is the Testimony of a Witness, otherwise called a
Deponent, put down in writing by way of answer to Interrogatories, exhibited to
that purpose in the Court of Chancery; And when such witness is examined in
open Court, he is said to be examined Viva voce. Deposition is also used for
death; as in Provin. Angl. lib. 2. tit. De feriis. Ordinamus quod Festum
Depositionis Sancti Johannis de Beverlaco, 7 die Mail. -- Per Provinciam
nostram antedictam perpetuit temporibus colebretur.

Deprivation (Deprivatio) A depriving, bereaving, or taking away. -- With the
loss or deprivation of all the Spiritual Promotions, whereof, etc. Anno 2 and 3
Edw. 6. cap. 20. Deprivation of Bishops and Deans. Anno 39 Eliz. cap. 8.

De quibus sur Disseisin, Is a Writ of Entry. See Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 191.

Deraign or Dereyn (Disrationare vel dirationare) Signifies generally, to
prove, as Dirationabit jus suum haeres propinquior. Glanvil. lib. 2. cap. 6.
And, Dirationabit terram illam in Curia mea, He proved that Land to be his own.
Idem, lib. 2. cap. 20. Bracton uses it in the same sense, Habeo sufficientem
disratiocinationem and probationem, lib. 4. tract. 6. cap. 16. And so he uses
disrationare, lib. 4. cap. 22. And to Dereyn the Warranty, Old Not. Br. fol.
146. To Deraign that right, 3 Edw. 1. cap. 40. And Westminster. 2. cap. 5. Anno 13
Edw. 1. cap. 5. When the Parson of any Church is disturbed to demand Tithes in
the next Parish, by a Writ of Indicavit, the Patron shall have a Writ to demand
the Advowson of the Tithes, being in demand, and when it is Deraigned, then
shall the Plea pass in the Court Christian, as far forth as it is Deraigned in
the Kings Court. In some places the Substantive Dereinment is used in the very
literal signification with the French Disrayer or desranger, that is, turning
out of course, displacing or setting out of order; as Deraignment or departure
out of Religion, Anno 31 Hen. 8. cap. 6. and 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 13. And
Dereinment or discharge of their profession. 33 Hen. 8. cap. 29. Which is
spoken of those Religious Men, who forsook their Orders and Professions. So
Kitchen, fol. 152. The Leasee enters into Religion, and afterward is
dereigned. And Britton, cap. 21. has these words Semounse desrenable, for a
Summons that may be challenged, as defective, or not lawfully made. Of this you
may read something more in Skene, verbo, Disrationare, where, in one
signification, he confounds it with our waging and making of Law. See Lex
Deraisnia.

Descent. See Descent.

De son tort demesne (Fr.) Are words of Form, used in an Action of Trespass by
way of Reply to the Defendants Plea. For example, A. sues B. in such an Action,
B. answers for himself, that he did that which A. calls a trespass, by the
command of C. his Master; A. says again, that B. did it, de son tort demesne,
sans ceo que C. luy command, modo and forma -- That is, B. did it of his own
wrong, without that that C. commanded him, in such form, etc.

Detinet. See Debito and Debet and Solet.

Detinue, (detinendo,) Is a Writ that lies against him, who, having Goods or
Chattels delivered him to keep, refuses to re-deliver them. See Fitz. Not. Br.
fo. 138. To this is answerable in some sort actio depositi in the Civil Law.
And he takes his Action of Detinue, who intends to recover the thing detained,
and not the Damages sustained by the Detinue. Kitchen, fol. 176. See the New
Book of Entries, verbo, Detinue.

Devastaverunt bona Testatoris, Is a Writ lying against Executors, for paying
Legacies and Debts without Specialties, to the prejudice of the Creditors that
have Specialties, before the Debts on the said Specialties are due; for in this
Case the Executors are as liable to Action, as if they had wasted the Goods of
the Testator riotoufly, or converted them to their own use; and are compellable
to pay such Debts by Specialty out of their own Goods, to the value of what
they so paid illegally. For the orderly payment of Debts and Legacies by
Executors, so as to escape a Devastation or charging their own Goods; See the
Office of Executors, ca. 12.

Devenerunt, (lat.) Is a Writ anciently directed to the Escheator, when any of
the Kings Tenants, holding in Capite, dyed; and when his son and heir, within
age, and in the Kings custody, dyed; then this Writ went forth, commanding the
Escheator, that he, by the Oath of good and lawful men, enquire what Lands and
Tenements, by the death of the Tenant, came to the King. See Dyer, fol. 360.
Pl. 4. and Keilways Rep. fol. 199. a. Though this Writ in the sense abovesaid
be disused, yet a new use of it is prescribed by Act of Parl. 14 Car. 2. ca.
11. Entitled, An Act for preventing frauds, and regulating abuses in His
Majesty's Customs.

Divest, (Devestire) Is contrary to Invest; for, as Invest signifies to deliver
the posession of any thing; so Divest signifies the taking it away.

Devise, or Divise, (from the French, Deviser, to confer, or converse with; or
from Diviser, to divide, or sort into several parcels) Is properly that act, by
which a Testator gives, or bequeaths his Lands or Goods, by his last Will in
Writing. He who makes the Devise is called the Devisor; and he to whom the
Devise is made, the Devisee. The words of a Will the Law interprets in a larger
and more favorable sense then those of a Deed; For, if Land be Devised to a
man, to have to him for ever, or to have to him and his Assigns; in these two
Cases the Devisee shall have a Feesimple; but, given in the same manner by
Feoffment, he has but an Estate for term of life. So, if one Devise Land to an
Infant in his Mothers Belly, it is a good Devise; but, it is otherwise by
Feoffment, Grant or Gift, for in those Cases, there ought to be one of ability,
to take presently, otherwise it is void. 14 Eliz. Dyer. 304. and Coke on Litt.
fol. 111.

Deboires of Caleis, (Anno 2 Rich. 2. Stat. 1. ca. 3.) Were the Customs due to
the King, for Merchandise brought to, or carried out of Caleis, when our Staple
was there. -- Paying their Customs and Devoyres to the King. Anno 34 Ed. 3.
ca. 18. Devoire in French signifies Duty.

Devorce. See Divorce.

Dictum de Kenelworth, Was an Edict or Award, between King Henry the Third and
all those Barons and others, who had been in Arms against him; and so called,
because it was made at Kenelworth-Castle in Warwickshire. Anno 51 Hen. 3.
containing a composition for the Lands and Estates of those who had forfeited
them in that Rebellion.

Dicker of Leather, Is a quantity consisting of Ten Hides; The word probably
comes from the Greek, (...), which signifies Ten.

Diem claufit extremum, Was a Writ that Issued out of the Chancery, to the
Escheator of the County, upon the death of any of the Kings Tenants in Capite,
to inquire by a Jury, of what Lands he died seized, and of what value, and who
was next heir to him. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 251.

Dies. In the Common Law there are Dies juridici, and Dies non juridici. Dies
non juridici are all Sundays in the Year; and, in Easter-Yerm, the Feast of
the Ascension of our Lord; in Trinity Term, the Nativity of St John Baptist; in
Michaelmas Term the Feasts of All Saints, and All Souls; and, in Hillary Term,
the Purification of the Blessed Virgin- Mary. And this was the Ancient Law of
England, and extends not only to Legal Proceedings, but to Contracts. 2 Part.
Inst. fol. 264.

Dies datus, Is a Day, or time of Respit given to the Tenant or Defendant by
the Court. Brook, tit. Continuance.

Dignitaries, (dignitarii,) Are those who are advanced to the Ecclesiastical
dignity of Dean, Archdeacon, Prebendary, etc. See 3 Part. Inst. fol. 155.

Dieta rationabilis, Is in Bracton used for a reasonable days Journey. Lib. 3.
Tract. 2. ca. 16.

Dignity Ecclesiastical, (Dignitas Ecclesiastica,) Is mentioned in the Stat. 26
Hen. 8. ca. 31 and 32. ejusdem, ca. 15. And is by the Canonists defined to be,
Administratio cum jurisdictione and potestate aliqua conjuncta; whereof you may
read diverse examples in Duarenus. de Sacris Eccles. Ministris and Beneficiis,
lib. 2. ca. 6. Of Dignities and Prebends Came. reckons in England 544. Britan.
pa. 161.

Dilapidation, (dilapidatio,) A wastful spending, or destroying; or the letting
Buildings run to ruin and decay for want of due reparation. Anno 13 Eliz. ca.
10. Money recovered for dilapidations shall be employed in repair of the same
Houses. Anno 14 Eliz. ca. 11.

Dioces, (diocesis, from the Greek (...) and (...),) signifies with us the
Circuit of every Bishops Jurisdiction; for, this Realm has two sorts of
Divisions, one into Shires or Counties, in respect of Temporal Policy; another
into Diocesses, in order to Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, of which we reckon 22
in England, and 4. in Wales.

Dimidietas, The one half. Sciant -- quod ego Matilda filia Willielmi le
Franceys dedi -- Waltero de Stetton dimidietatem illius Burgagii, etc. sine
dat. Ex libro Cart. Priorat. Leominstr.

Disability, (disabilitas,) Is, when a man is disabled, or made incapable, to
inherit or take that benefit which otherwise he might have done; which may
happen four ways; by the act of the Party, or his Ancestor; by the act of Law,
or of God. Disability by the parties own act, is, If I bind my self, that upon
surrender of a Lease, I will grant a new Estate to the Lessee, and afterward I
grant over my Reversion; In this case, though I afterward repurchase the
reversion, yet I have forfeited my Obligation, because I was once disabled to
perform it. Coke lib. 5. fol. 21. Also if a Man be Excommunicated, he cannot,
during that time, sue any Action, but shall be thereby disabled. Coke lib. 8.
fol. 69. Disability by the act of an Ancestor is, if a man be attainted of
Treason or Felony; by this attainder, his blood is corrupt, and both himself
and children disabled to inherit. Disability by the Act of Law is most
properly, when a Man by the sole act of the Law is disabled; and so is an Alien
born, who is disabled to take any benefit thereby. Disability by the Act of
God, is, where a man is not of whole Memory, which disables him so, that in all
cases, where he passes any Estate out of him, it may, after his death, be
disanull'd; for it is a Maxim in Law, That a Man of full Age shall never be
recceav'd to disable his own person. Coke. lib. 4. fol. 123, 124.

Disalt, Signifies as much as to disable. Littleton in his Chapter of
Discontinuance.

Discarcatio, An unloading. Ex Codice M. S. in Turr. Land.

Disboscatio, A turning Wood-ground into Arable or Pasture, an assarting. See
Assart.

Disceit. See Deceit and Deceptione.

Descent, (Latin, Discensus. French Descente,) An order or means whereby Lands
or Tenements are derived unto any Man from his Ancestors; As to make his
descent from his Ancestors, (Old Not. Br. fol. 101.) is to show how and by what
particular degrees the Land in question came to him from his Ancestors. This
Descent is either Lineal or Collateral; Lineal Descent is conveyed downward, in
a right-line, from the Grandfather to the Father, and from the Father to the
Son, and from the Son to the Nephew, etc. Collateral Descent springs out of the
side of the whole blood, as Grandfathers brother, Fathers brother, etc. If one
die seized of Land (in which another has right to enter,) and it descends to
his Heir, such descent shall take away the others right of entry, and put him
to his Action for recovery thereof. Stat. 32 Hen. 8. ca. 33. Coke on Litt. fol.
237.

Disclaimer, (from the French, Clamer, with the privative Dis,) Is a Plea
containing an express denial, renouncing, or disclaiming. As, if the Tenant sue
a Replevin upon a Distress taken by the Lord, and the Lord Avow, saying, That
he holds of him, as of his Lord, and that he Distreyned for Rent not paid, or
Service not performed; then the Tenant, denying to hold of such Lord, is said
to Disclaim, and the Lord proving the Tenant to hold of him, the Tenant loses
his Land. Also if a man denying himself to be of the Blood or Kindred of
another in his Plea, is said to Disclaim his Blood. See Coke on Litt. fol. 102.
and Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 197. If a man Arraigned of Felony, Disclaim Goods;
being cleared, he loses them. See Broke, and New Book of Entries, tit.
Disclaimer: And Stamf. Pl. Cor. fol. 186. In Chancery, if a Defendant by his
Answer Disclaim the having any interest in the thing in question, this is also
called a Disclaimer.

Discontinuance, (Discontinuatio,) Signifies an interruption, intermission, or
breaking off; as Discontinuance of Possession, or of Process: The effect of
Discontinuance of Possession is this, That a Man may not enter upon his own
Land or Tenement alienated, whatsoever his right be to it, of his own self, or
by his own authority, but must bring his Writ, and seek to recover Possession
by Law: As if a Man alien the Lands he has in right of his Wife, or if Tenant
in Tail make any Feoffment, or Lease for Life, not warranted by the Stat. 32
Hen. 8. by Fine, or Livery of Seizin, such Alienations are called
Discontinuances; which are indeed impediments to an Entry, whereby the true
owner is left only to his Action. See the Institutes of the Common Law, ca.
43. and Cokes Reports, lib. 3. Case of Fines. The effect of Discontinuance of
Plea, is, That the opportunity of Prosecution is lost, and not recoverable, but
by beginning a new Suit; For to be Discontinued, and to be put without Day is
all one, and nothing else but finally to be dismissed the Court for that
instant. So Crompton, in his Jurisdict. fol. 131. uses it, in these words, If
a Justice Seat be Discontinued, by the not coming of the Justices, the King may
renew the same by His Writ, etc. In this signification Fitz. (in his Not. Br.)
uses it diverse times, as Discontinuance of Corody, fol. 193. a. To Discontinue
the right of his Wife, fol. 191. L. and 193. L. Discontinuance of an Action,
Discontinuance of an Assize, fol. 182. D. 187. B. Anno 31. Eliz. ca. 1. -- 12
Car. 2. ca. 4. and 14 ejusdem, ca. 10. Coke on Littl. fol. 325.

Disfranchise, (14 Car. 2. ca. 31.) To take away ones Freedom or Privilege; it
is the contrary to Enfranchise, which vide.

Disgrading or Degrading (Degradatio) Is the punishment of a Clerk, who, being
delivered to his Ordinary, cannot purge himself of the offense, whereof he was
convict by the Jury, and it is the privation or devesting of the Holy Orders
which he had, as Priesthood, Deaconship, etc. Stamf. Pl. Cor. fol. 130 and 138.
There is likewise the Disgrading of a Lord, Knight, etc. Sir Andrew Harkley,
Earl of Carlisle was convicted. degraded, and attainted of Treason, Hill. 18
Edw. 2. Coram Rege, Rot. 34, 35. And by the Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 15. William
Lord Monson, Sir Henry Mildmay, and others therein named, were degraded from
all Titles of Honor, Dignities, and Preheminencies, and none of them to bear or
use the Title of Lord, Knight, Esquire, or Gentleman, or any Coat of Arms for
ever after, etc. By the Canon Law there are two sorts of degrading, one
Summary, by word only; the other, Solemn, by devesting the party degraded of
those Ornaments and Rights, which are the Ensigns of his Order or Degree. See
Seldens Titles of Honor, fol. 787.

Disherison (Fr. Desheritement) Is an old word, signifying as much as
Disinheriting. It is used in the Statute of Vouchers, made 20 Edw. 1. Our Lord
the King, considering his own damage and disherison of his Crown, etc. And in
8. Rich. 2. cap. 4.

Disheritor. -- The Sheriff shall forthwith be punished, as a Disheritor of our
Lord the King, and his Crown. Anno 3 Edw. 1. cap. 39. One that disinheriteth,
or puts another out of his inheritance.

Dismes (Decimae) Are Tithes, or the Tenth Part of all the Fruits, either of
the Earth or Beasts, or our Labor, due to God; and consequently to him, who is
of the Lords lot, and had his share, viz. our Pastor. Also the Tenths of all
Spiritual Livings, yearly given to the Prince (called a Perpetual Dism, Anno 2
and 3 Edw. 6. cap. 35.) Which in ancient times were paid to the Pope, till he
gave them to Richard the Second, to aid him against Charles the French King,
and those others that upheld Clement the Seventh against him. Pol. Virg. Hist.
Angl. lib. 20. Lastly, It signifies a tribute levied of the Temporalty.
Holinshed in Hen. 2. fol. 111.

Disparagement (Disparagatio) Was used especially for matching an Heir in
Marriage under his or her degree, or against decency. See Cowels Institutes,
tit. De Nuptiis, sect. 6. and Coke on Littl. fol. 107. b.

Dispauper, When any person by reason of his poverty, attested by his own Oath,
of not being worth 5 l, his Debts being paid, is admitted to sue in forma
pauperis; if afterward, before the suit be ended, the same party have any
Lands, or Personal estate fallen to him, or that the Court, where the suit
depends, think fit, for that or other reason, to take away that privilege from
him, then he is said to be dispaupered, that is, put out of the capacity of
suing in Forma Pauperis.

Disrationare, Est contrarium ratiocinando asserere, vel quod assertum est
ratiocinando destruere. We now call it Traversare, to Traverse. See Gloss. in
december Scriptor. And Deraign.

Disseisin (Fr. Dissaisine, not from Disseisir, as Cowel mistakes it) Signifies
an unlawful dispossessing a Man of his Land, Tenement, or other immovable or
incorporeal right. And how far this extends, see Bracton, lib. 4. cap. 3.
Therefore the Assizes are called Writs of Disseisin, that lie against
Disseisors in any Case, whereof some are termed little Writs of Disseisin,
being Vicontiel, that is suable before the Sheriff in the County Court, because
determined by him without Assise. Reg. of Writs, fol. 98. As, for Nusances of
no great prejudice.

Disseisin is of two sorts, either Simple Disseisin, committed by day without
force and arms, (Bracton, lib. 4. cap. 4, Britton, cap. 42, 43, 44.) Or
Disseisin by Force, for which see Deforceor and Fresh Disseisin. See
Redisseisin and Post disseisin. See Skene, verbo Disseisina. How many ways
Disseisin is committed, see Fleta, lib. 4. cap. 1. Sect. Fit autem; and when it
is lawful, cap. 2. Wrongful Disseisin is no descent in Law. 32 Hen. 8. cap. 33.

Disseisor, Is he that disseiseth or puts another out of his Land: And
Disseisee is he that is so put out. Anno 4 Hen. 4. cap. 7.

Disseisoresse, Is she that disseiseth another. Coke on Littl. fol. 357. b.

Distress (Fr.) Signifies most commonly a Compulsion in certain Real Actions,
whereby to cause a Man to appear in Court, or to pay Rent, or other duty
denied; or it is the thing distreined. The effect whereof most commonly is, To
compel the party Distreined to Replevy the Distress, and so take his Action of
Trespass against the Distreiner, or else to compound neighborly with him for
the Debt or Duty, for which he Distreins. There are diverse things not
distreinable, as another Man's Gown in the House of a Tailor, or Cloth in the
House of a Fuller, Sheerman, or Weaver: For they, being common Artificers, it
is presumed such things belong not to themselves, but to others. Victual is not
distreinable, nor Corn in Sheaves, unless they be in a Cart: For a Distress
ought to be of such things, whereof the Sheriff may make Replevin, and deliver
again in as good Case, as they were at the time of the taking. A Man may
Distrein for Homage of his Tenant, for Fealty, Escuage, and other services, and
for Fines, and Amerceaments assessed in a Leet, but not in a Court Baron, and
for Damage-feasant, etc. But not for Rent due for any Land, except upon the
same Land charged therewith, etc. When one has taken a Distress, it behooves
him to bring it to the Common Pound, or he may keep it in an open place, so
that he give notice to the party, that he (if the Distress be a Quick-beast)
may give it food. See the Stat. De districtione Scaccarii, 51 Hen. 3.

Distress, is by Britton, cap. 71. divided into Personal and Real. Distress
Personal is made by distreining a Man's movable Goods, and seizing all the
profits of his Lands and Tenements from the Test, or date of the Writ, for the
Defendants contempt, in not appearing to an Action brought against him, after
he was Summoned or Attached; and the Issues so returned by the Sheriffs, are
forfeited to the King, and Estreated into the Exchequer.

Distress Real, is made upon immovable Goods. This differs from an Attachment
in this (among others) that it cannot be taken by any common person, without
the compass of his own Fee; except it be presently after the Cattle, or other
thing, is driven or born off the Ground, purposely to avoid the Distress. Fitz.
Not. Br. fol. 904. See Attach. and the Stat. 17 Car. 2. cap. 7.

Distress is also divided into Finite and Infinite; Finite is that which is
limited by Law, how often it shall be made to bring the party to trial of the
Action, as once, (...), etc. Old Not. Br. fol. 43. Distress infin^^^, is
without limitation, until the party come; as against a Jury, which refuses to
appear upon Certificate of Assise, the Process is Venire facias, Habeas
corpora, and Distress infinite. Old Not. Br. fol. 113. Then it is divided into
a Grand Distress (Anno 52 Hen. 3. cap. 7.) which Fitzherbert calls Magnam
Districtionem, and an Ordinary Distress. A Grand Distress is that which is made
of all the Goods and Chattels that the party has within the County. Britton,
cap. 26. fol. 52. But see whether it be not sometimes all one with a Distress
infinite. Idem, fol. 80. With whom also the Statute of Marlbridge seems to
agree. Anno 52 Hen. 3. cap. 7, 9 and 12. See Grand Distress and Attachment.

District (Districtus) Is the place in which a Man has the power of
distreining, or the Circuit or Territory wherein one may be compelled to
appear. Britton, cap. 120. Where we say, Horse de son Fee, others say, Extra
districtum suum.

Distringas, Is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, or any other Officer,
commanding him to Distrein one for a Debt to the King, etc. or for his not
appearance at a day. See great diversity of this Writ in the Table of Register,
Judic. verbo Distringas. This was sometimes of old called Constringas, as
appears by this Writ in Henry the First or second days. Lib. Rames. sect. 227.
Henricus Rex Angliae hominibus Abbatis de Ramesia salutem. Praecipio quod cito
and just reddatis Abbati Domino vestro, quicquid ei debetis in censu, and
firma, and debitis, and placitis, sicut just monstrare poterit quod ei
debeatis. Quod si nolueritis, ipse vos inde constringat per pecuniam vestram.
Test Cancellar, apud Gloucester. By Pecuniam vestram, in those days was
understood Bona and catalla.

Dividend, in the Exchequer seems to be one part of an Indenture. Anno 10 Edw.
1. cap. 11. and 28 Ejusdem, Stat. 3. cap. 2.

Dividend in the University, is that share or part, which every one of the
Fellows does equally and justly divide, either by an Arithmetical or
Geometrical Proportion of their Annual stipend.

Divise. See Devise.

Divorce (Divortium a divertenda) Is a Separation of two; de facto married
together; of which, there be two kinds, one A Vinculo Matrimonii; the other, A
mensa and thoro. The Woman divorced, A Vinculo Matrimonii receives all again
that she brought with her. This only arises upon a nullity of the marriage,
through some essential impediment, as Consanguinity or Affinity within the
degrees forbidden, Precontract, Impotency, etc. Of which Impediments, Divines
reckon fourteen, comprehended in these Verses,

Error, Conditio, Votum, Cognatio, Crimen,
Cultus, Disparitas, Vis, Ordo, Ligamen, Honestas,
Si sis affinis, Si forte coire nequibis,
Si Parochi and duplicis desit presentia testis,
Raptave sit mulier, nec parti reddita tutae.
Divorce, Is a Judgment Spiritual, wherefore, if there be occasion, it ought to
be reversed in the Spiritual Court. See Coke, lib. 7. Kennes Case. Idem, lib.
5. fol. 98. And on Littl. fol. 235.

In the Old Law, the Woman divorced was to have of her husband a writing (as S.
Jerome and Josephus testify) to this effect, I promise, that hereafter I will
lay no claim to thee; which was called A Bill of Divorce.

Docket, Is a Brief in Writing. Anno 2 and 3 Ph. and Ma. cap. 6. West writes it
Dogget, by whom it seems to be some small piece of Paper or Parchment,
containing the effect of a greater Writing. Symbol. par. 2. tit. Fines, sect.
106.

To do Law (Facere Legem) Is as much as to make Law. Anno 23 Hen. 6. cap. 14.
See Make.

Dogdraw, Is a manifest deprehension of an Offender against Venison in a
Forest, when he is found drawing after a Dear by the scent of a Hound, led in
his hand. There are four of these noted by Manwood, par. 2 cap. 18. number. 9.
viz. Stablestand, Dogdraw, Back bear, and Bloodihand.

Dogger, A kind of little Ship. Anno 31 Edw. 3. stat. 3. cap. 1. -- All the
Ships called Doggers and Landships, etc.

Dogger-fish. Ibidem, cap. 2. Seems to be Fish brought in those Ships to
Blackness Haven, etc.

Dogger-men (25 Hen. 8. cap. 4.) Seamen that belong to Dogger-ships.

Dogget. See Docket.

Doitkin, Was a kind of base Coin of small value, prohibited by the Stat. 3
Hen. 5. cap. 1. Hence we still retain the phrase, Not worth a Doitkin.

Dole (Dola. Sax. doel. Pars, portio, a doelan, dividere, distribuere) Is a
part or portion most commonly of a Meadow, so called to this day. As
Dole-Meadow (Anno 4 Jac. cap. 11.) where several persons have shares. In le
Suthmede (i. prato australi) habet Prior per sortem illam quae vocatur
Crumddprest, tres Dolas, sicut sors illa cadit. Et in qualibet Dola, habet 4
Polas, sive octo andenas (i. Swaths) jacentes simul. Lib. Priorat. Dunstable,
cap. 5.

Dolefish, Seems to be that Fish, which the Fishermen, yearly employed in the
North-Seas, do of Custom receive for their allowance or shares. See the Stat.
35 Hen. 8. cap. 7.

Dolg-bote (Sax.) A recompense, amends, or satisfaction made for a Scar or
Wound. Sax. Dict. LL. Aluredi Regis, cap. 23. Dolgbot legitur.

Dom-boc (Sax.) Liber judicialis. Leg. Edovardi Regis senioris, cap. 8. Bid
swa Domboc taece, i. Compenset sicut Liber judicialis statuerit. Some Book of
Statutes or Decrees proper to the English Saxons; such happily as that wherein
the Laws of former Saxon Kings were contained. That Chapter seeming to refer to
the Laws of King Ina, cap. 29.

Domesday or Domesdei (Liber Judiciarius, alias Censualis Angliae) Comes from
the Saxon dom, i. Judgment, not Domus Dei, (as some Authors have it) is a Book,
which now remains in the Exchequer, containing two great Volumes; It was made
in William the Conquerors time, according to Camden in his Britannia, who
proves it out of Ingulphus, that flourished in the same time; and whose words
are, Totam terram descripsit, nec erat Hyda in tota^ Anglia^, quin valorem ejus
and possessorem scivit, nec lacus, nec locus aliquis, quin in Regis Rotulo
extitit descriptus, ac ejus reditus and proventus, ipsa possessio and ejus
possessor Regiae notitiae manifestatus, juxta taxatorum fidem, qui electi de
qualihet patria territorium proprium describebant. Iste Rotulus vocatus est
Rotulus Wintoniae, and ab Anglis, pro sua generalitate, quod omnia Tenementa
totius terrae continuit, Domesday cognominatur. So it is called in the Stat. 1
Rich. 2. cap. 6. And in Ockams Lucubrations de fisci Regis ratione, which seems
to be taken out of Liber Rubeus, in the Exchequer.

It is called Liber Judiciarius; Quia in eo totius Regni descriptio diligens
continetur, singulorumque fundorum valentia exprimitur: And Domesday (as
Gervas. Tilbur. says) Non quod in eo de propositis aliquibus dubiis feratur
sententia, sed quod a praedicto Judicio non liceat ulla ratione discedere. It
was begun in the year 1081. and finished 1086. Camden calls it Gulielmi librum
Censualem, the Tax-Book of William. See more, if you please, in Spelm. Gloss.
and 4 Inst. fol. 269. I find it also written Domesdey, in an ancient Record.

Domicellus and Domicella. John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, had by Katherine
Swinford, before marriage, four illegitimate Children, viz. Henry, John,
Thomas, and Joan; and, because they were born at Beaufort in France, they were
vulgarly called Henry de Beaufort, etc. John before 20 Rich. 2. was Knighted,
and Henry became Priest. At the Parliament holden 20 Rich. 2. the King, by Act
of Parliament in form of a Charter, did legitimate these Children. Rex --
Charissimis consanguineis nostris nobilibus viris Johanni Militi, Henrico
Clerico, Thomae Domicello ac dilectae nobis nobili mulieri Johannae Beaufort
Domicellae, Gormanis praecharissimi Avunculi nostri, Johannis Ducis Lanc. natis
ligeis nostris, salutem, etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. 9. dic Febr. per ipsum
Regem in Parliamento. In this Act (says Sir Edw. Coke, 4 Inst. fol. 37.) the
said Thomas, before his Legitimation, could not be called Esquire; and
therefore had the Addition Domicello, derived of the French word Domoicel,
which (says he) signifies a young Soldier not yet Knighted, or nobly born, etc.
which is a mistake; for there is no such French word as Domoicel, but Damoisel;
nor can Domicellus properly be derived from thence, but is an obsolete Latin
word, and anciently given* as an Appellation or Addition to the Kings (natural)
Sons in France, and sometimes to the eldest Sons of Noblemen there; from
whence, doubtless, we borrowed the words. See Spel. Gloss. verbo Domicellus.
Tidemannus permissione Divina Wigorn. Episcopus dilecto in Christo filio
Johanni de Fulwode nostrae Dioc. Domicello, salutem. -- Dat. 7 Febr. 19 Rich.
2. Here it is used to a private Gentleman, as Lord of a Manor.

Dominica in Ramis Palmarum, Palm Sunday. Md. quod ego Henricus de Erdington
feci Homagium and fidelitatem Domino Will. de Stafford apud Bromshulf in Com.
Staff. dic Mercurii prox. ante Dominicam in Ramis Palmarum, Anno Regni Regis
Edw. xxiii, pro terris and tenementis quae teneo in villa de Hunstanscote in
Com. War. etc.

Domo Reparanda, Is a Writ that lies for one against his neighbor, by the fall
of whose House, he fears damage to his own. Reg. of Writs, fol. 153. In which
Case, the Civilians have the Action De damno infacto.

Donative (Donativum) Is a Benefice merely given and collated by the Patron to
a Man, without either Presentatiou to, or Institution by, the Ordinary, or
Induction by his command. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 35. E. See the Stat. 8 Rich. 2.
c. 4. And where a Bishop has the gift of a Benefice, it is properly called a
Donative, because he cannot present to himself. Petrus Gregorius, de
Beneficiis, cap. 11. number. 1. has these words. -- If Chapels founded by
Laymen, were not approved by the Diocesan, and (as they term it) spiritualized,
they are not accounted Benefices, neither can they be conferred by the Bishop,
but remain to the pious disposition of the Founders; wherefore the Founders and
their Heirs, may give such Chapels, if they will, without the Bishop. Gwin in
the Preface to his Readings, says, That the King might of ancient time, found
a Free-Chappel, and exempt it from the Jurisdiction of the Diocesan: So also
may he, by his Letters Patent, give License to a common person to found such a
Chapel, and make it Donative, not presentable; and that the Chaplain shall be
deprivable by the Founder, or his Heir, and not by the Bishop, which seems to
be the original of Donatives in England. Fitzherbert says, fol. 23. That there
are some Chantries which a Man may give by his Letters Patent. All Bishoprics
were, in ancient time, Donative by the King. Coke, lib. 3. fol. 75.

Donor, Is he who gives Lands or Tenements to another in Tail; and Donee is he
to whom the same are given.

Doom (Sax. dom) A Judgment, Sentence, Ordinance, or Decree; also sense or
signification. Substantiva quaedam (says Mr. Somner) exeunt in Dom, ubi
compositionis gratia videtur appositum, and quandoque munus denotat vel
Officium, item Ditionem and Dominium, ut in Kingdom, Earldom, etc. -- Habeat
Grithbriche and Forstal, and Dom, and Some, and Wreche in Mari. Mon. Angl. 1.
par. fol. 284. a.

Dorture (Dormitorium) Is the Common Room or Chamber where all the Religious of
one Convent slept and lay all night. Anno 25 Hen. 8. cap. 11.

Dote Assignanda, Is a Writ that lay for a Widow, where it was found by Office,
That the Kings Tenant was seized of Tenements in Fee or Fee-tail, at the day of
his death; and that he held of the King in Chief, etc. In which Case, the Widow
came into the Chancery, and there made Oath, That she would not marry without
the Kings leave. Anno 15 Edw. 3. cap. 4. And hereupon she had this Writ to the
Escheator, for which, see Reg. of Writs, fol. 297. and Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 263.
These Widows are called the Kings Widows. See Widow.

Dote unde nihil habet, Is a Writ of Dower that lies for the Widow, against the
Tenant, who bought Land of her Husband in his life time, whereof he was solely
seized in Feesimple or Feetail, in such sort, as the issue of them both might
have inherited. Fitz. Not. Br. fol 147.

Dotis Admensuratione. See Admeasurement, and Reg. of Writs, fol. 171.

Doubles (Anno 14 Hen. 6. cap. 6.) Signify as much as Letters Patent, being a
French word made of the Latin Diploma.

Double Plea (Duplex Placitum) Is that wherein the Defendant alleges for
himself two several matters, in Bar of the Plaintiffs Action, whereof either is
sufficient to effect his desire, which shall not be admitted for a Plea. As, if
a Man allege several matters, the one nothing depending upon the other, the
Plea is accounted Double, and not admittable; but, if they be mutually
depending each of other, then is it accounted single. Kitchen, fol. 223. See
Brook, hoc tit. And Sir Tho. Smith gives this reason why such Double Plea, is
not admitted by our Law; because the trial is by Twelve rude Men, whose Heads
are not to be troubled with over many things at once. Lib. 2. de Rep. Angl.
cap. 13.

Domus Conversorum. See Rolls.

Domus Dei, The Hospital of S. Julian in Southampton, so called. Mon. Angl. 2
par. fol. 440. b.

Double Duarrel (Duplex Querela) Is a Complaint made by any Clerk, or other, to
the Archbishop of the Province, against an Inferior Ordinary, for delaying
Justice in some Cause Eccsesiastical; as to give Sentence, Institute a Clerk
presented, or the like; and seems to be termed a Double Quarrel, because it is
most commonly made against both the Judge and him, at whose suit Justice is
delayed. Cowels Interp.

Dowager (Dotata) A Widow endowed, or that has a Jointure; a Title or
Addition, applied in general to the Widows of Princes, Dukes, Earls, and
Persons of Honor only.

Dower (Dos and Dotarium) The first (Dos) properly signifies that which the
Wife brings her Husband in Marriage, otherwise called Maritagium, Marriage
Goods. The other, (Dotarium or Doarium) that Portion of Lands or Tenements,
which she has for term of her life from her Husband, if she outlive him.
Glanvile, lib. 7. cap. 1. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 38. Britton, cap. 101. in
Princip. Some Authors have for distinction, called the First a Dowry, and the
other a Dower, but they are often confounded. Of the former our Law Books speak
little, of the later, there are five kinds, viz.

1. Dower per Legem Communem 2. Dower per Consuetudinem. 3. Dower ex Assensu
Patris. 4. Dower ad Ostium Ecclesiae. 5. Dower de la Plus Bele.
Dower by the Common Law, Is a Third Part of such Lands, as the Husband was
sole seized of in Fee, during the Marriage, which the Wife is to enjoy, during
her life; for which, there lies a Writ of Dower. Dower by Custom, gives the
Wife, in some places, half her Husbands Lands, so long as she lives sole, as in
Gavelkind: And as Custom may enlarge, so may it abridge Dower, and restrain it
to a fourth part. Ex Assensu Patris, ad Ostium Ecclesiae, the Wife may have so
much Dower, as shall be so assigned or agreed upon, but it ought not to exceed
a third part of the Husbands Lands. Glanv. lib. 6. cap. 1. And if it be done
before Marriage, it is called a Jointure. Dower de la Plus Bele, Is when the
Wife is endowed of the fairest, or best part of her Husbands Estate. See Coke
on Littl. fol. 33. b. Romany non in usu fuit uxoribus Dotes retribuere, ideo
verbo genuino carent quo hoc dignoscitur; and rem ipsam in Germanorum moribus
miratur Tacitus. Dotem. (inquit) non uxor Marito, sed uxori Maritus affert.
Spelm.

To the consummation of Dower three things are necessary, viz. Marriage,
Seizin, and the Husbands death. Binghams Case, 2 Rep. If the Wife be past the
age of nine years at the death of her Husband, she shall be endowed; If a Woman
elope, or go away from her Husband with an Adulterer, and will not be
reconciled, she loses her Dower, by the Stat. of Westminster. 2. ca. 34. 2 Part
Inst. fol. 433.

Camden (in his Brit. tit. Sussex,) relates this memorable Case, (out of the
Parl. Records, 30 Edw. 1.) Sir John Camois, son of the Lord Raph Camois, of his
own free will gave and demised his own Wife Margaret, Daughter and Heir of John
de Gaidesden, unto Sir Will. Panell Knight; and, unto the same William, Gave,
Granted, Released, and Quit-claimed all her Goods and Chattels, etc. So that
neither he himself, nor any Man else in his Name, might make Claim, or ever
Challenge any Interest in the said Margaret, or in her Goods or Chattels, etc.
By which Grant, when she demanded her Dower in the Manor of Torpull, part of
the Possessions of Sir John Camois her first Husband, there grew a Memorable
Suit in Law, but wherein she was overthrown, and Judgment pronounced, That she
ought to have no Dower from thence^, upon the Stat. of Westminster. 2. Quia recessit
a marito suo in vita sua, and vixit ut Adultera cum praedicto Guilielmo, etc.
This Case is cited also in 2 Inst. fol. 435.

Of Dower Read Fleta, who Writes largely and Learnedly of it, Lib. 5. ca. 22.
and seq. --

Among the Jews, the Bridegroom, at the time of the Marriage, gave his Wife a
Dowry Bill, the Form whereof you may see in Moses and Aaron, pa. 235.

Dozein, (Decenna,) In the Stat. for view of Frankpledge, made 18 Ed. 2. one of
the Articles for Stewards in their Leets to enquire of, is; If all the Dozeins
be in the Assize of our Lord the King, and which not, and who received them.
Art. 3. See Deciners. Also there is a sort of Devonshire Kersies, called
Dozens. Anno 5 and 6 Ed. 6. ca. 6.

Drags. Anno 6 Hen. 6. ca. 5. seem to be Wood or Timber, so joined together, as
that, swimming or floating upon the Water, they may bear a burden or load of
other Wares down the River.

Drawlatches. Anno 5 Edw. 3. ca. 14. and 7 Rich. 2. ca. 5. Lamb. (in his Eiren.
lib. 2. ca. 6.) calls them Miching Thieves; as Wasters and Roberds-men, mighty
Thieves; saying the Words are grown out of use.

Dreit-Dreit, Signifies a double-right, that is, Jus possessionis and jus
Dominii. Bracton lib. 4. ca. 27. and lib. 4. Tract. 4. ca. 4. and lib. 5.
Tract. 3. ca. 5. Coke on Litt. fol. 266.

Drenches, or Drenges, (Drengi) Were Tenentes in Capite, says an ancient M. S.
Domesday Tit. Lestrese. Roger. Pictaviens. Neuton. Hujus Manerii aliam terram
15 homines quos Drenches vocabant, pro 15 Maneriis tenebant. They were (says
Spelman,) e genere vassallorum non ignobilium, cum singuli qui in Domesd.
nominantur singula possiderent Maneria. Such as at the coming in of the
Conqueror, being put out of their Estates, were afterward, upon complaint unto
him, restored thereunto; for that they being before owners thereof, were
neither in auxilio or consilio against him: of which number was Sharneburne of
No^rfolk. Sir Edward Coke, on Littl. fol 5. b. says, Dreuchs are Free-Tenants
of a Manor: misprinted doubtless for Drenches. In Cukeney manebat quidam homo,
qui vocabatur Gamilbere; and fuit ver us Dreynghe ante Conquestum, tenuit duas
Carucatas terrae de Domino Rege in Capite, pro tali servicio, de ferrando
Palefridum Dom. Regis super quatuor pedes de Cluario Dom. Regis, quotiescunque
ad Manerium suum de Mansfeld jacuerit, and si inclaudet Palefridum Domini
Regis, dabit ei Palefridum quatuor Mercarum. Mon. Angl. 2. p. fol. 598. a.

Drengage, (Drengagium, vel servitium Drengarii,) The Tenure by which the
Drenches held their Lands, of which see Trin. 21 Ed. 3. Ebor. and Nortbumb.
Rot. 191. Notandum est, eos omnes eorumve antecessores, qui e Drengorum class
erant, vel per Drengagium tenuere, sua incoluisse patrimonia ante adventum
Normannorum. Spelm.

Dry Exchange, (Anno 3 Hen. 7. ca. 5. (cambium siccum,) Seems to be a cleanly
term, invented for the disguising foul Usury; in which something is pretended
to pass on both sides, whereas in truth nothing passes but on the one side, in
which respect it may well be called Dry. Of this Lud. Lopes tract. de Contract.
and Negotiat. lib. 2. ca. 1. Sect. Deinde postquam, writes thus, Cambium est
reale vel siccum; Cambium reale dicitur, quod consistentiam very Cambii realem
habet, and Cambium per trans, and Cambium minutum. Cambium autem siccum est
Cambium non habens existentiam Cambii, sed apparentiam ad instar arboris
exsiccatae, quae humore vitali jam carens, apparentiam arboris habet, non
existentiam.

Dry rent, rent seck. See Rent.

Drift of the Forest, (Agitatio animalium in Foresta,) Is an exact View, or
Examination, what Cattle are in the Forest, that it may be known whether it be
over. charged or not, and whose the Beasts are; and, whether they are
Commonable Beasts etc. When, how often in the Year, by whom, and in what manner
this Drift is to be made, See Manwood, Part. 2. ca. 15. and 4 Inst. fol. 309.

Drinklean, (Sax. drinc-lean,) In some Records written Potura Drinklean; Is a
Contribution of Tenants toward a Potation, or an Ale provided to entertain the
Lord, or his Steward; a Scot-ale.

Drofdennes, -- Quod Dominus debet habere Drofdennes arbores de crescentia xl.
annorum and infra. Kane. Pasch. 44 Edw. 3. quaere. Drofdenn, (among our Saxons)
signified a Grove, or Woody place, where Cattle were kept; and, the Keeper of
them was called Drofman.

Drofland, or Dryfland, (from the Sax. dryfene. i. Driven,) Was anciently a
Quitrent, or Yearly payment made by some Tenants to their Landlords, for
driving their Cattle through the Manor to Faires and Markets. Mr. Philips
Mistaken Recompense, fol. 39.

Droit,, (French, Droict,) In Law there are six kinds of it, viz.

1. Jus recuperandi. 2. Jus intrandi. 3. Jus habendi. 4. Jus retinendi. 5. Jus
percipiendi. 6. Jus possidendi.
All these several sorts of rights, following the relations of their objects,
are the effects of the Civil Law. Vide Coke on Littl, fol. 266 and 345. b. --
Of mere droit, and very right. Anno 27 H. 8. ca. 26.

Droit de Advowzen. See Recto de Advocatione Ecclesiae.

Droit close. See Recto clausum.

Droit de Dowre. See Recto dotis.

Droit sur disclaimer. See Recto sur disclaimer.

Droit patent. See Recto patens and Calthrops Rep. fol. 132.

Duces tecum, Is a Writ, commanding one to appear at a day in the Chancery, and
to bring with him some Evidences, or other thing which the Court would view.
Which is also granted, where a Sheriff, having in his custody a Prisoner in an
Action Personal, returns, upon a Habeas Corpus, that he is adeo languidus,
that, without danger of death, he cannot have his Body before the Justices. See
New Book of Entries on this Word.

Duel, (Duellum, according to Fleta,) Est singularis pugna inter duos ad
probandam veritatem litis, and qui vicerit, probasse intelligitur, etc. Stat.
de Finibus levatis, 27 Edw. 1. The trial by Duel, Combat, or Campfight, in
doubtful Cases is now difused, though the Law on which it was grounded be still
in force. See 3 Part. Inst. fol. 221. and see Combat. Per libertatem habere
duellum, Johannes Stanley Ar. clamat, quod si aliquis placitaverit aliquent de
libero tenemento in Curia sua de Aldford per breve Domini Comitis de recto
patent. tenere and terminare praedictum placitum per duellum, prout jus est per
Communem legem. Plac. in Itin. apud Cestriam 1. 4. Hen. 7.

Stephanus de Nerbona omnibus -- Sciatis me dedisse Willielmo filio Radulphi de
Filungele pro homagio and servicio suo, and propter Duellum quod fecit pro me,
-- Duas virgatus terrae, -- Sine Dat. M. S. penes Will. Dugdale, Ar.

Duke, (Lat. Dux, Fr. Duc,) Signified among the ancient Romans, Ductorem
exercitus, such as Led their Armies; Since which they were called Duces, to
whom the King committed the Custody or Regiment of any Province. In some
Nations at this day the Sovereigns of the Country are called by this Name, as
Duke of Russia, Duke of Savoy, etc. In England Duke is the next in Secular
Dignity to the Prince of Wales; And, (as Camden says,) Heretofore in the Saxons
time, were called Dukes, without any addition, being ineer Officers and Leaders
of Armies. After the Conqueror came in, there were none of this Title till
Edward the Thirds days, who made Edward his Son Duke of Cornwall, after which
there were more made, in such sort, as their Titles descended to their
Posterity; They were created with Solemnity per cincturam gladii, Cappaeque and
circuli aurei in Capite impositionem. Vide Came. Britan. p. 166. Zazium de
feudis, pa. 4. Number. 7. Cassan. de Consuetud. Burg. pa. 6 and 10. And Ferns
Glory of generosity, pa. 136.

Dutchy-Court, Is a Court wherein all matters appertaining to the Duchy, or
County-Palatine of Lancaster are decided by the decree of the Chancellor of that
Court; the Original of it was in Henry the Fourths days, who, obtaining the
Crown by Deposing Richard the Second, and having the Duchy of Lancaster by
Descent, in Right of his Mother, was seized thereof as King, and not as Duke;
So that all the Liberties, Franchises and Jurisdictions of the said Duchy
passed from the King by his Great Seal, and not by Livery or Atturnement, as
the Possessions of Everwick, the Earldom of March, and such others did, which
had descended to the King by other Ancestors then the Kings; But, at last,
Henry the Fourth, by Authority of Parliament, passed a Charter, whereby the
Posessions, Liberties, etc. of the said Dutcky were severed from the Crown; yet
Henry the Seventh reduced it to its former nature, as it was in Henry the
Fifths days. Crom. Jur. fol. 136.

The Officers belonging to this Court, are, the Chancellor, Attorney,
Receiver-General, Clerk of the Court, Messenger: Besides which, there are
certain Assistants, as one Attorney in the Exchequer, one Attorney of the
Duchy in Chancery, four Persons learned in the Law, retained of Council with
the King in the said Court; whereof Gwin (in Preface to his Readings,) speaks
thus; It grew out of the grant of King Edward the Third, who gave that Duchy
to his Son John of Gant, and endowed it with such Royal Right, as the County
Palatine of Chester had. And, for as much as it was afterward extinct in the
Person of King Henry the Fourth, by reason of the Union of it with the Crown,
the same King (suspecting himself to be more rightfully Duke of Lancaster, then
King of England,) determined to save his Right in the Duchy, whatever should
befall the Kingdom; and therefore he separated the Duchy from the Crown, and
settled it so in the natural Persons of Himself and his Heirs, as if he had
been no King or Politic Body at all; In which condition it continued, during
the Reign of Henry the Fifth, and Henry the Sixth, that descended from him,
But, when Henry the Fourth had, (by recovery of the Crown,) recontinued the
Right of the House of York, he feared not to appropriate that Duchy to the
Crown again; yet so, that he suffered the Court and Officers to remain as he
found them; In which manner it came, together with the Crown, to Henry the
Seventh, who, liking well of Henry the Fourths Policy, (by whose Right also he
obtained the Kingdom,) made a like separation of the Duchy, and so left it to
His Posterity, who still enjoy it. Cowel.

Dum fuit infra aetatem, Is a Writ, which lies for him, (who, before he came to
full age, made a Feoffment of his Land,) to recover it again from the Vendee.
Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 192.

Dum non fuit compos mentis, He, who being not of found Memory, and Aliens any
Lands or Tenements, may have this Writ against the Alience. Fitz. Not. Brev.
fol. 202.

Duplicat, Is used by Crompton for a second Letters Patent, granted by the Lord
Chancellor, in a Case wherein he had formerly done the same, and was therefore
thought void. Crom. Jurisd. fol. 215. Also a second Letter written and sent to
the same party and purpose, as a former, for fear of a miscarriage of the
first, or for other reason, is called a Duplicat. The word is used 14 Car. 2.
ca. 10.

Duress, (Duritia,) Is, where one is kept in Prison, or restrained of his
Liberty, contrary to the Order of Law; or threatened to be killed, maym'd, or
beaten: And, if such person, so in Prison, or in fear of such Threats, make any
Specialty, or Obligation, by reason of such Imprisonment, or Threats, such Deed
is void in Law: and, in an Action brought upon such Specialty, the Party may
Plead, That it was made by Duresse; and so avoid the Action. Broke in his
Abridgment joyneth Dures and Manasse together. i. duritiam and minas; hardship,
and threatenings.

Dyke-reeve, A Bailiff, or Officer, that has the care and oversight of the
Dykes and Draines in Deeping-Fens, etc. mentioned Anno 16 and 17 Car. 2. ca. 11.

E.
EAlderman, or Ealdorman, (Aldermannus) Among the Saxons, was as much as Earl
among the Danes. Came. Britan. pa. 107. Also, an Elder, Senator or Statesman;
and, at this day we call them Aldermen, who are Associates to the Chief Officer
in the Common Counsel of a City, or Borough-Town. 24 H. 8. ca. 13. Sometimes
the Chief Officer himself is so called. See Alderman.

Earl, (Sax. Eorl, Comes,) This Title, in ancient times, was given to those,
who were Affociates to the King in his Councels, and Martial-Actions; And, the
manner of their Investiture into that Dignity, was, Por cincturam gladio
Comitatus; without any Formal Charter of Creation. See Mr. Dugdales
Warwickshire, fol. 302. But, the Conqueror, (as Camden notes) gave this
Dignity, in Fee, to His Nobles, annexing it to this or that County, or
Province; and, allotted them, for their Maintenance, a certain proportion of
Money arising from the Princes Profits, for the Pleadings, and Forfeitures of
the Provinces: For example, he brings an ancient Record in these words;
Henricus 2. Rex Angliae, bis verbis Comitem creavit; Sciatis nos fecisse
Hugonem Bigot Comitem de Norf. etc. de tertio denario de Norwic. and Northfolk;
sicut aliquis Comes Angliae liberius Comitatum suum tenet. About the Reign of
King John, and ever since, our Kings have made Earls by their Charter, of this
or that County, Province, or City; but, of late, giving them no Authority over
the County, nor any part of the Profits arising by it; only some Annual Fee
out of the Exchequer, etc. The manner of their Creation is, by Girding them
with a Sword. Came. pa. 107. but, see the Solemnity described more at large in
Stowes Annals, pa. 1121. Their place is next to a Marquess, and before a
Viscount. Comitatus a Comite dicitur, aut vice versa. See more on this Subject
in Spelmans Gloss. verbo Comites; and in Seldens Titles of Honor, fol. 676.
and see Countee.

Easement, (Aisiamentum, from the French, Aise. i. commoditas,) Is a Service,
or Convenience, which one Neighbor has of another by Charter, or Prescription,
without Profit; as, a Way through his Ground, a Sink, or such like, Kitchen,
fol. 105. Whioh, in the Civil-Law is called Servitus praedii. -- Praecipias R.
quod just and sine dilatione permittat habere H. aisimenta sua in Bosco and in
pastura de villa illa, etc. Breve Regium vetus, apud Glanvil. lib. 12. ca. 14.

Eberemurder, (Sax. ebere-mord.) Apertum Murdrum; Was one of those Crimes,
which, by Henry the Firsts Laws, ca. 13. Emendari non possunt. Hoc ex scelerum
genere fuit, nullo pretio, (etiam apud Saxones nostros,) expiabilium, cum alia
licuit pecuniis commutare. Spelman.

Ecclesia, (Lat.) Is most used for that place where Almighty God is Served,
commonly called a Church. But Fitz. says, by this word Ecclesia, is meant
only a Parsonage; and therefore, if a Presentment be made to a Chapel, as to
a Church, by the name Eoclesia, this does change the nature of it, and makes it
presently a Church. Not. Br. 32. When the Question was, Whether it were
Ecclesia aut Capella pertinens ad matricem Ecclesiam; The issue was, Whether it
had Baptisterium and Sepulturam: for, if it had the Administration of
Sacraments and Sepulture, it was in Law judged a Church. Trin. 20 Edw. 1. in
banco, Rot. 177. 2 Inst. fol. 363.

Ecclesiastical Persons, Are, either Regular, or Secular; Regular are such as
lead a Monastical Life, under certain Rules; and, have Vowed Obedience,
perpetual Chastity, and wilfal Poverty: When a Man is Professed in any of the
Orders of Religion, he is said to be a Man of Religion, a Regular, or
Religious; of this sort are Abbots, Priors, Monks, Friars, etc. Secular are
those, whose ordinary Conversation is among Men of the World, and Profess the
Undertaking the Charge of Souls, and live not under the Rules of any Religious
Order; such, are Bishops, Parish Priests, etc.

Eele fares, alias Eele vare, (Anno 2. 5. H. 8.) The Fry, or Brood of Eeles.

Effractores, (Lat.) Burglars, that break open Houses to steal. Qui furandi
causa domos effringunt, vel se (...) carcere proripiunt; Etiam qui scrinia
expoliant. MS.

Egyptians, (Aegyptiani) Are, in our Statutes, a Counterfeit kind of Rogues;
who, being English or Welsh People, disguise themselves in strange habits,
smearing their faces and bodies, and framing to themselves an unknown Canting
Language, wander up and down; and, under pretense of Telling Fortunes, Curing
Diseases, and such like, abuse the Common People, by stealing all that is not
too hot, or too heavy for their carriage. Anno 1 and 2 Phil. and Ma. ca. 4.
Anno 5 Eliz. ca. 20. These are like those whom the Italians call Cingari.

Ejectione custodiae, Ejectment de guard, Is a Writ, which lay properly against
him that did cast out the Guardian from any Land, during the Minority of the
Heir. Reg. of Writs, fol. 162. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 139. There are two other
Writs not unlike this, the one termed Droit de guard, or, Right of guard; the
other Ravishment de guard, which see in their places.

Ejectione firmae, Is a Writ, which lies for the Lessee for years, who is
ejected before the expiration of his term, either by the Lessor, or a stranger.
Reg. of Writs, fol. 227. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 220. See Quare ejecit infra
terminum, and New Book of Entries, verbo Ejectione firmae.

Eigne, (French, Aisne,) Eldest, Firstborn. As Bastard eigne and mulier
puisne. Litt. Sect. 399. See Mulier.

Einecia, (borrowed of the French, Aisne i. Primogenitus,) signifies Eldership.
Stat. of Ireland, 14 Hen. 3. Of this read Skene, verbo Eneya. And see Esnecy.
-- Eyniciam filiam suam maritare; to Marry his eldest Daughter.

Eire, alias Air, (from the old French word Err. i. Iter, as a grand err. i.
magnis itineribus,) Signifies the Court of Justices Itinerant; For Justices in
Air are those whom Bracton in many places calls Justiciarios Itinerantes. The
Air of the Forest is the Justice Seat, otherwise called; which, by ancient
Custom, was held every three years by the Justices of the Forest, journying up
and down to that purpose. Bracton. lib. 3. Tract. 2. ca. 1 and 2. Britton. ca.
2. Cromp. Jur. fol. 156. Manwood par. 1. pa. 121. Read Skene, verbo, Iter;
whereby, as by many other places, you may see great affinity between these two
Kingdoms in the Administration of Justice and Government. See Justice in Air.

Election, (Electio,) Is, when a Man is left to his own Free Will, to take or
do one thing or another, which he pleases. In case an Election be given of two
several things, he who is the first agent, and ought to do the first act, shall
have the Election: As if a man make a Lease, rendering a Rent, or a Robe, the
Lessee shall have the Election, as being the first agent, by payment of the
one, or delivery of the other. Coke on Litt. pa. 144. b.

Election de Clerk, (Electione clerici) Is a Writ that lies for the choice of a
Clerk, assigned to take and make Bonds, called Statute-Merchant; and is granted
out of the Chancery, upon suggestion, that the Clerk formerly Assigned is gone
to dwell in another place, or has impediments to follow that business,; or,
not Land sufficient to answer his transgression, if he should deal amiss, etc.
Fitz, Not. Br. fol. 164.

Elegit, (from the words in it Elegit sibi liberari,) Is a Writ Judicial, and
lies for him that has recovered Debt or Damages, or upon a Recognizance in any
Court, against one not able in his Goods to satisfy, and directed to the
Sheriff, commanding him to make delivery of half the Parties Lands, and all his
Goods; Oxen and Beasts for the Plough excepted. Old. Not. Br. fol. 152. Reg. of
Writs, fol. 299, and 301. and the Table of the Reg. Judicial, which expresses
diverse uses of this Writ. The Creditor shall hold the Moity of the said Land so
delivered to him, till his whole Debt and Damages are satisfy d; and, during
that term he is Tenant by Elegit. Westminster. 2. cap. 18. See Coke on Litt. fol.
289. b.

Elk, A kind of Ewe to make Bows, Anno 33 Hen. 8. ca. 9.

Eloine, (from the French, Esloigner; to remove, banish, or send a great way
from,) -- If such as be within Age be Eloined, so that they cannot Sue
Personally, their next Friends shall be admitted to Sue for them. Anno 13 Edw.
1. ca. 15.

Elopement, Is, when a Married Woman of her own accord departs from her
Husband, and lives with an Adulterer; whereby, without voluntary submission, or
reconcilement to her Husband, she shall lose her Dower, by the Stat. of Westminster.
2. ca. 34. according to this old Dystich, Sponte virum mulier fugiens, and
Adultera facta,
Dote sua careat, nisi sponso sponte retracta.


A Woman, thus leaving her Husband, is said to Elope, and her Husband in this
case shall not be compelled to allow her any Alimony. See Alimony. I am
persuaded the word is taken from the Saxon geleowan. i. To depart from one
place to dwell in another, the Saxon w being easily mistaken for a p.

Emblements, (from the French, Embl^vence de bled. i. Corn sprung, or put up
above ground,) Signifies strictly the Profits of Land which has been Sowed;
but, the word is sometimes used more largely, for any Profits that arise and
grow naturally from the Ground, as Grass, Fruit, Hemp, Flax, etc. If Tenant for
Life sow the Land and die, his Executor shall have the Emblements, and not he
in reversion; But, if Tenant for years sow the Land, and before severance the
term expires, there the Lessor, or he in reversion shall have the Emblements,
and not the Lessee. Vide Coke. lib. 11. fol. 51.

Embraceor, (Anno 19 Hen. 7. ca. 13.) Is he, that, when a Matter is in Trial
between Party and Party, comes to the Bar with one of the Parties, (having
received some Reward so to do,) and speaks in the Case, or privately labors the
Jury, or stands there to survey, or overlook them, whereby to awe, or put them
in fear. The Penalty whereof is 20 l. and Imprisonment at the Justices
discretion, by the said Statute.

Embracery, Is the Act or Offense of Embraceors. To instrnct the Jury, or
promise reward for, or before appearance, is Embracery. Noys Rep. fol. 102.

Embre, or Embring-dayes, (Anno 2 and 3 Edw. 6. ca. 19.) Are those, which the
ancient Fathers called Quatuor tempora, and are of great Antiquity in the
Church, being observ^d on Wednesday, Friday and Saturday next after
Quadragesima Sunday, Whitsunday, Holyrood day in September, and St. Lucy's day
in December; and, are so called from the Saxon ymb-ren. i. cursus vel circulus;
because constantly observed at set seasons in the course or Circuit of the
Year. They are mentioned by Britton, ca. 53. and others. In 3 Part. Inst. fol.
200. it is said, These Embring days are the week next before Quadragesima,
which is a great mistake.

Emendals, (Emenda,) Is an old word, still used in the Accounts of the
Inner Temple; where, so much in Emendals at the fcot of an Account, signifies
so much in the Bank or Stock of the House, for Reparation of Losses, or other
emergent occasions; Quod in restaurationem damni tribuitur, says Spelman.

Empanel, (Ponere in Assisis and Juratis,) Signifies the Writing and Entering
the Names of a Jury into a Parchment Schedule, or Roll of Paper, by the
Sheriff, whom he has Summoned to appear for the performance of such Public
Service, as Juries are employed in. See Panel.

Emparlance, (From the French, Parler, to speak,) Signifies a Desire or
Petition in Court of a Day to pause, what is best to do; (the Civilians call
it, Petitionem induciarum.) Kitchen, (fol. 200.) says, If he imparl, or pray
continuance, etc. where praying continuance is spoken interpretatively; and
fol. 201. mentions imparlance general and special; The first seems to be that,
which is made only in one word, and in general terms: Emparlance special,
where the Party requires a Day to deliberate; adding also these words, Saluis
omnibus advantagiis tam ad jurisdictionem Curiae, quam ad breve and narrationem
-- or such like. Britton uses it for the conference of a Jury upon the Cause
committed to them, ca. 53. See Imparlance.

Encheson, (French,) Signifies occasion, cause, or reason, wherefore any thing
is done. 50 Ed. 3. ca. 3. See Skene in hoc verbum.

Encroachment, or Accroachment, (Fr. Accrochement. i. A grasping, or hooking,)
Signifies an unlawful encroaching, or gathering in upon another man; As, if two
men's Grounds lying together, the one presses too far upon the other; or, if a
Tenant owe two shillings Rent-service, and the Lord exacts three. So Hugh and
Hugh Spencer encroached unto them Royal Power and Authority. Anno 1 Edw. 3. in
Proaem.

Enditement, (Indictamentum, from the French, Enditer. i. Defer nomen
alicujus,) Is a Bill or Declaration drawn in form of Law, for the benefit of
the Commonwealth, and exhibited by way of Accusation against one for some
offense, either Criminal or Penal, and preferred unto Jurors, and, by their
Verdict found, and Presented to be true before a Judge or Officer that has
power to punish, or certify the Offense. An Indictment is always at the Suit
of the King, and differs from an Accusation in this, That the Preferrer of the
Bill is no way tied to the Proof of it, upon any Penalty, except there appear
conspiracy. See Stamf. pl. Cor. lib. 2. ca. 23. usque 34. Enditements of
Treason, and of all other things ought to be most curiously and certainly
penned. Coke. 7. Rep. Calvin's Case. The day, year and place must be put in. See
the Stat. 37 Hen. 8. ca. 8. And 3 Part. Inst. fol. 134.

Endowment, (Dotatio,) Signifies the bestowing or assuring of a Dower. See
Dower. But, it is sometimes used Metaphorically, for the setting forth or
severing a sufficient portion for a Vicar toward his perpetual maintenance,
when the Benefice is appropriated. See Appropriation, and the Stat. 15 Rich. 2.
ca. 6.

Endowment de la plus belle part, Is, where a man dying seized of some Lands
holden in Knights-service, and other some in Soccage, the Widow is sped of her
Dower, in the Lands holden in Soccage, as being the fairer or better part. Of
which see Lattleton at large, lib. 1. cap. 5.

Enfranchise, (French, Enfranchir,) To make Free, to Incorporate a man into any
Society or Body Politic, to make one a Free Denizen.

Enfranchisement, (French,) Signifies the Incorporating a Man into any Society
or Body Politic; For example, he that by Charter is made Denizen of England,
is said to be Enfranchised; and so is he that is made a Citizen of London, or
other City, or Burgess of any Town Corporate; becaufe he is made partaker of
those Liberties that appertain to the Corporation, whereinto he is
Enfranchised. So a Villain was Enfranchised, when he was made Free by his Lord.

Englecerie, Englecherie, or Engleschyre (Engleceria) Is an old abstract word,
signifying the being an Englishman. For example, if a Man were privily slain or
murdered, he was in old time accounted Francigena, (which comprehended every
alien, especially Danes) until Englecerie was proved, that is, until it were
made manifest, that he was an Englishman. Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 15.
number. 3.

This Englecery (for the abuses and troubles that afterward were perceived to
grow by it) was absolutely taken away, by Stat. 14 Edw. 3. cap. 4.

Enheritance. See Inheritance.

Enitia pars. See Esnecy.

Enquest, Fr. (Lat. Inquisitio) Is especially, taken for that Inquisition of
Jurors, or by Jury, which is the most usual trial of all Causes, both Civil and
Criminal in this Realm. For in Causes Civil, after proof is made on either
side, so much as each party thinks good for himself, if the doubt be in the
fact, it is referred to the discretion of Twelve indifferent Men, impannelled
by the Sheriff for the purpose; and as they bring in their Verdict, so Judgment
passes: For the Judge says, the Jury finds the Fact thus, then is the Law
(if their Verdict do not contradict it) thus, and so we judge. As to the
Enquest in Causes criminal, see Jury, and see Sir Tho. Smith de Repub. Angl.
lib. 2. cap. 19. An Enquest is either of Office, or at the Mise of the party.
Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 3. cap. 12.

Entail (Feudum talliatum, Fr. Entaille, i. inscisus.) Is a Substantive
Abstract, signifying Fee-tail or Fee entailed; that is abridged, curtailed, or
limited, and tied to certain conditions. See Fee and Tail.

Entendment (Fr. Entendement) Signifies as much as the true meaning, intent, or
signification of a Word, Sentence, Law, etc. See Kitchen, fol. 224. See
Intendment.

Enterplede (Fr. Entreplaider) Signifies to discuss or try a Point incidently
falling out, before the Principal Cause can be determined. For example, Two
persons being found Heirs to Land by two several Offices in one County, the
King is brought in doubt, to which of them, Livery ought to be made; therefore
before Livery be made to either, they must Enterplede, that is formally try
between themselves, who is the right heir. Stamf. Praerog. cap. 12. See Broke
tit. Enterpleder.

Entiertie or Intiertie (From the Fr. Entierete, (...). Entireness) The whole:
Contradistinguished in our Books to Moity.

Entire Tenancy, Is contrary to Several Tenancy, and signifies a sole
possession in one man, whereas the other signifies a joint or common one in
more. See Broke Several Tenancy. See New Book of Entries, verbo Entier-tenancy.

Entry (Fr. Entree, i. Introitus, ingnessus) Properly signifies the taking
possession of Lands or Tenements. See Plowden, Assize of Freshforce in London,
fol. 93. b. It is also used for a Writ of Possession, for which see Ingressu;
and read West, pa. 2. Symbol. tit. Recoveries, sect. 2, 3. who there shows for
what it lies, and for what not. Of this Britton in his 114 Chapter writes to
this effect. The Writs of Entry savor much of the Right of Property. As for
example, some are to recover Customs and Services, in which are contained these
two words (solet and debet) as the Writs Quo Jure, Rationabilibus Divisis,
Rationabili Estoverio, with such like. And in this Plee of Entry there are
three degrees: The first is, where a Man demands Lands or Tenements of his own
Seisin, after the term expired; the second is, where one demands Lands or
Tenements, let by another, after the Term expired; the third, where one demands
Lands or Tenements of that Tenant, who had Entry by one, to whom some Ancestor
of the Plaintiff did let it for a Term now expired. According to which degrees,
the Writs, for more fit remedy, are varied. And there is yet a fourth form,
which is without degrees, and in case of a more remote Seisin, whereunto the
other three degrees do not extend. The Writ in the second degree is called a
Writ of Entry In le Per; in the third degree, a Writ of Entry In le per and
cui; and in the fourth form without these degrees, it is called a Writ of Entry
In le post; that is, after the Disseisin, which such a one made to such a one.
And if any Writ of Entry be conceived out of the Right Case, so that one form
be brought for another, it is abateable.

In these four degrees, are comprehended all manner of Writs of Entry, which
are without certainty and number. Thus far Britton, by whom you may perceive,
that those words Solet and debet, and those other, In le per, in le per and
cui, and In le Post, which we meet with many times in Books shortly and
obscurely mentioned, signify nothing else but diverse Forms of this Writ,
applied to the Case, whereupon it is brought, and each Form taking its name
from the words contained in the Writ. And of this read Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 193.

This Writ of Entry differs from an Assize, because it lies for the most part
against him, who entered lawfully, but holds against Law; whereas an Assize lies
against him that unlawfully disseised; yet sometimes a Writ of Entry lies upon
an Entrusion. Reg. of Writs, fol. 233. b. See the New Book of Entries, verbo
Enter Br^vis, fol. 254. col. 3. There is also a Writ of Entry in the nature of
an Assize. Of this Writ, in all its degrees, see Fleta, lib. 5. cap. 34. and
seq.

Entrusion (Intrusio) Is a violent or unlawful entrance into Lands or Tenements
(void of a Possossor) by him that has no right at all to them. Bracton, lib.
4. cap. 2. For example, a Man steps into Lands, the owner whereof lately died,
and the right heir, neither by himself or others, has as yet taken possession
of them. See the difference between Abator and Intrudor, in Coke on Littl. fol.
277. Though the New Book of Entries, fol. 63. C. latins Abatement by this word
Intrusionem. See Abatement, see Disseisin, and Britton, cap. 65. Entrusion is
also taken for the Writ brought against an Intrudor, which see in Fitz. Not.
Br. fol. 203.

Entrusion de Guard, Is a Writ, that lies, where the Infant within age, entered
into his Lands, and held his Lord out. For in this Case, the Lord shall not
have the Writ De Communi custodia, but this. Old Not. Br. fol. 90.

Envoice. See Invoice.

Enure, Signifies to take place or effect, to be available. Example, A Release
shall Enure by way of extinguishment. Littleton, cap. Release. And a Release,
made to a Tenant for term of life, shall Enure to him in the Reversion.

Eques Auratus (Lat.) A Knight, so called, because anciently it was lawful for
Knights only to beautify and gild their Armor, and Caparisons for their
Horses with Gold. Fern's Glory of generosity, page 102. Eques Auratus is not
used in Law; but Chivalier or Miles. Cokes 4 Inst. fol. 5.

Equity (Equitas) Is the Correction or Qualification of the Law, generally
made, in that part wherein it fails, or is too severe. For, Ad ea quae
frequentius accidunt jura adaptantur: As, where an Act of Parliament is made,
That whosoever does such a thing, shall be a Felon, and suffer Death, yet if a
Madman, or an Infant of tender years do the same, they shall be excused.
Breaking of Prison, is Felony, in the prisoner himself, by the Statute De
Frangentibus Prisonam; yet if the Prison be on fire, and they within break
Prison to save their lives; this shall be excused by the Law of Reason. So to
save my life, I may kill another that assaults me.

Erminstreet. See Watlingstreet.

Errant (Errans) Is attributed to Justices of Circuit. Pl. Cor. fol. 15. and
Bailiffs at large. See Justices in Air, and Bailiff. See Air.

Error (Error) Signifies more specially an Error in Pleading, or in the
Process. (Broke, tit. Error.) Whereupon, the Writ, which is brought for remedy
of this oversight, is called a Writ of Error, in Latin, De Errore Corrigendo,
thus defined by Fitz. Not. Er. fol. 20. A Writ of Error does also lie to
redress false Judgment given in any Court of Record, as in the Common Bench,
London, or other City, having power (by the Kings Charter, or Prescription) to
hold Plea of Debt or Trespass above xxs. This is borrowed from the French
practice, which they call Proposition d'Erreur; whereof you may read in
Gregorius de Appell. page 36. In what diversity of Cases this Writ lies, see
the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 9. R^g. of Writs in the Table, and Reg. Judicial,
fol. 34. There is likewise a Writ of Error to Reverse a Fine, West, par. 2.
Symbol. tit. Fin^s, 151. New Book of Entries, verbo Error. For preventing
Abatements of Writs of Error upon Judgments in the Exch^qu^r, see 16 Car. 2.
cap. 2. and 20 Ejusdom, cap. 4. And for Redressing and Prevention of Error in
Fines and Recoveries, the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 3. for Inrolling them.

Errore corrigendo. See Error.

Escambio (from the Span. Cambiar, to change) Is a License granted to one, for
the making over a Bill of Exchange to another over Sea. Reg. of Writs, fol.
194. a. For by the Statute of 5 Rich. 2. cap. 2. Merchant ought to Exchange, or
return Money beyond Sea without the Kings License.

Escape (from the Fr. Eschapper, i. Effugere) Signifies a violent or privy
evasion out of some lawful restraint. For example, if the Sheriff, upon a
Capias directed to him, take one, and endeavor to carry him to the Goal, and he
by the way, either by violence or slight, breaks from him; this is called an
Escape. Stamf. (lib. 1. cap. 26 and 27. Pl. Cor.) names two kinds of Escape;
voluntary and negligent. Voluntary, is when one Arrests another for Felony, or
other crime, and afterward lets him go: In which Eseape, the party that permits
it, is by Law guilty of the fault committed by him that escapes, be it Felony,
Treason, or Trespass. Negligent Escape is, when one is Arrested, and afterward
escapes against his will that arrested him, and is not pursued by fresh suit,
and taken again, before the party pursuing has lost the sight of him. Read
Cromptons Justice, fol. 36.

Eschange or Exchange (Escambium) -- Hanc terram cambiavit Hugo Briccuino quod
modo tenet Comes Moriton, and ipsum Scambium valet duplum. Domesday. See
Exchange.

Escheat (Esehaeta, from the Fr. Escheoir, i. cadere, accidere) Signifies any
Lands, or other profits, that casually fall to a Lord within his Manor, by way
of Forfeiture, or by the Death of his Tenant, leaving no Heir general nor
special; Mag. Charta, cap. 31. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 143. T. Escheat is also used
sometimes for the place or circuit, in which the King or other Lord has
Escheats of his Tenants. Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 2. Pupilla ocull par.
2. cap. 22. Escheat (thirdly) is used for a Writ, which lies, where the Tenant
having Estate of Fee-simple in any Lands or Tenements holden of a Superior
Lord, dies seized without Heir general or special: In which case the Lord
brings this Writ against him that possesses the Lands, after the death of his
Tenant, and shall thereby recover the same in lieu of his services. Fitz. Not.
Br. fol. 144. In the same sense, as we say, The Fee is Escheated, the Feudists
use Feudum Aperitur. See Coke on Littl. fol. 92. b.

Escheator (Escaetor) Was an Officer (appointed by the Lord Treasurer) who
observed the Escheats due to the King in the County, whereof he was Escheator
and certified them into the Chancery or Ex^hequer, and found Offices after the
Death of the Kings Tenants, which held by Knights-service in Capite, or
otherwise by Knights-service; he continued in his Office but one year, nor
could any be Escheator above once in three years, Anno 1 H. 8. cap. 8. and 3
Ejusdem, cap. 2. See more of this Officer, and his Authority, in Crom. Just. of
Peace. Fitzberbert calls him an Officer of Record, Not. Br. fol. 100. because
that which he certified by virtue of his Office, had the credit of a Record.
Officium Escaetriae, is the Escheatorship. Reg. of Writs, fol. 259. b. This
Office, having its chief dependence on the Court of Wards, is now, in a manner,
out of date. See 4 Inst. fol. 225.

Escbequer (Scaccarium, from the Fr. Eschequier, i. Abacus, tabula lusoria) Is
a Court of Record, wherein all Causes touching the Revenue of the Crown, are
heard and determined, and wherein the Revenue of the Crown is received. Pol
Virgil, lib. 9. Hist. Angl. says, the true word in Latin is Statarium, and by
abuse called Scaccarium. Camden in his Britan. pa. 113. says, This Court, or
Office, took name A Tabula ad quam Assidebant, the Cloth which covered it,
being parti-colored or Chequered. We had it from the Normans, as appears by
the Grand Custumary, cap. 56. where it is thus described, The Eschequer is
called an Assembly of High Justiciers, to whom it appertains to amend that
which the Bailiffs, and other Inferior Justiciers, have misdone, and
unadvisedly judged, and to do right to all men without delay, as from the
Princes Mouth.

This Court consists of two parts, whereof one is conversant, especially in the
Judicial Hearing and Deciding all Causes pertaining to the Princes Coffers,
anciently called Scaccarium Computorum; the other is called the Receipt of the
Exchequer, which is properly employed in the receiving and payment of Money.
The Officers belonging to both these, you may find named in Came. Brit. cap.
Tribunalia Angliae, to whom I refer you. The Kings Exchequer, which now is
settled at Westminster, was in diverse Counties of Wales. Anno 27 Hen. 8. cap. 5.
and 26. See Orig. Juridiciales, fol. 49. and 4 Part. Inst. fol. 103.

Escuage (Scutagium, from the Fr. Escu, i. a Buckler or Shield) Signifies a
kind of Knights-service, called Service of the Shield; the Tenant, holding by
it, was bound to follow his Lord into the Scottish or Welsh Wars, at his own
charge. For which see Chivalry. Escuage is either uncertain or certain. Escuage
uncertain, is properly Escuage and Knights-service, being subject to Homage,
Fealty, and (heretofore) Ward and Marriage; so called, because it was uncertain
how often a man should be called to follow his Lord into those Wars, and what
his charge would be in each journey. Escuage certain, is that which yearly pays
a certain Rent in lieu of all Services, being no further bound, then to pay his
Rent, be it a Knights Fee, half, or the fourth part of a Knights Fee, according
to the quantity of his Land; and this loses the nature of Knights-service,
though it hold the name of Escuage, being in effect Soccage. Fitz. Not. Br.
fol. 84. This is taken away and discharged by Act of Parliament, 12 Car. 2.
cap. 24. See Capite.

Eskippeson. Shipping. Cesie Endenture faite parentre lui noble home Mons.
Thomas Beauchamp Count de Warwyke d'une part and John Russell Escuier d'autre
part, Tesmoigne, etc. Et que le dit John aura Eskypesoun covenable pour son
passage and repassage outre mere, as cusiages le dit Count, etc. done a
Warwyke. 2 Jan. 50 Edw. 3.

Esnecy (Aeisnecia, Fr. Aisneesse, i. Dignitas Primogeniti) Is a Prerogative
allowed the eldest Coparcener to choose first after the Inheritance is divided.
Fleta, lib. 5. cap. 10. sect. In Divisionem. Salvo capitali Mesuagio
primogenito Filio pro dignitate Aeisneciae suae. Glan^. lib. 7. cap. 3. Jus
Esnetiae, i. Jus Primogeniturae. In the Statute of Marlbridge, cap. 9. it is
called Initia pars Haereditatis. See Coke on Lattl. fol. 166. b.

Esples (Expletia, from Expleo) Are the full Profits, which the Ground or Land
yields, as the Hay of the Meadows, the Feed of the Pasture, the Corn of the
Arable, the Rents, Services, and such like Issues. The Profits comprised under
this word, the Romans properly call Accessiones.

Note, that in a Writ of Right of Land, Advowson, or such like, the Demandant
ought to allege in his Court, That he or his Ancestors took the Esplees of the
thing in demand, else the Pleading is not good. T. Ley.

Espervarius, and Sparverius (Fr. Espervier,) A Spar-Hawk. Char. Foresta, cap.
14. -- Reddit. solut. Willielmo Talboys Arm. ad Manerium suum de Kyme pro
omnibus serviciis secularibus unum Espervarium vel 2 s. per annum ad Festum
Sancti Mich. etc. Comput. Davidis Gefferon Collect. Redd. de Wragby. Anno 35
Hen. 6. -- Dicunt quod Ricardus de Herthall die quo obiit tenuit Manerium de
Poley in Com War. in Dominico suo ut de feodo per fidelitatem and servitium
unius Espervarii vel 2 s. ad Festum S. Jacobi, etc. Esc. de Anno 19 Edw. 2.
number. 53.

Esquier, Was originally he, who attending a Knight in time of War, did carry
his Shield, whence he was called Escuier in French, and Scutifer or Armiger in
Latin: Howbeit this Addition has not of long time had any respect at all to
the Office, or employment of the person to whom it has been attributed, but
been merely a title of dignity; and next in degree below a Knight. Those to
whom this title is now of right due, are, All the Younger Sons of Noblemen, and
their Heirs-male for ever: The Four Esquiers of the Kings Body; the Eldest Sons
ot all Baronets; so also of all Knights of the Bath, and Knights Batchelors,
and their Heirsmale in the right Line: Those that serve the King in any
Worshipful Calling (to use Camdens words) as the Sergeant Surgeon, Sergeant
of the Ewry, Master Cook, etc. Such as are created Esquiers by the King, with a
Collar of S. S. of Silver, as the Heralds and Sergeants at Ar(...) The chief
of some ancient Families, are likewise Esquiers by Preseription; those that
hear any Superior Office in the Commonwealth, as High Sheriff of any County,
who retains the title of Esquire during his life, in respect of the great trust
he has had, of the Posse Comitatus; He, who is a Justice of Peace has it,
during the time he is in Commission, and no longer; if not otherwise qualified
to bear it: Utter Barrasters, in the late Acts of Parliament for Pol-Money,
were ranked among Esquires, and so wete many wealthy Men, (by reason they were
commonly reputed to be such,) and paid accordingly: In Walsinghams History of
Richard the Second, we read of one John Blake, who is said to be Juris
Apprenticius, and has the Addition of Scutifer there given him; but, whether
entitled thereto by reason of that his Profession, or otherwise, does not
appear. See Camd. Brit. fol. 111. And 2 Inst. fol. 595.

A Principe fiunt Armigeri vel scripto vel Symbolo vel munere. Scripto, cum Rex
sic quempiam constituerit. Symbolo, quum collum ergo alicujus argenteo
sigmatico (hoc est torque ex SS confecto) adornaberit, eumve argentatis
calcaribus (ad discrimen equitum, qui aureis usi sunt) donavorit. Tales in
occidentali Angliae plaga (ut aliquando didici in conventu rei antiquae
studiosorum) White spurrs dicti sunt. Munere, cum ad munus quempiam evocaverit,
vel in Aula vel in Reipub. Armigero^ designatum: cujusmodi multa hodie,
patribus nostris incognita. Inter Armigeros qui fiunt (non nascuntur) primarii
habentur quatuor illi Armigeri ad Corpus Regis (Esquires of the Body;) quos and
Equitum filiis primogenitis anteponendos asserunt. Thus the Learned Spel. in
whose Glossarium you may find mention of another species of Esquires, viz.
Squier born de quater Cotes.

OMnibus -- Walterus de Pavely miles filius quondam Reginaldi de Pavely
salutem. Novertitis me obligari Rogero Marmion filio quondam Philippi Marmion
omnibus diebus vitae suae in una Roba cum pellura de secta Armigerorum meorum
annuatim ad Festum Nativitatis Domini percipiend. sine aliqua contradictione
vel retractione mei vel haeredum meorum aut assignatorum. Ad quam quidem
solutionem Robae praedictae cum pellura annuatim ad terminum supradictum
fideliter persoluendum obligo me and haredes meos, bona and catalla nostra
mobilia and immobilia ubicunque fuerint inventa in maneriis meis in Hundredo de
Westbury existentibus vel extra, etc. sine dat. Ex codice M. S. penes Gul.
Dugdale Arm.

Essendi quietum de Tolonio, Is a Writ that lies for Citizens and Burgesses of
any City or Town that have a Charter or Prescription to exempt them from paying
Toll through the whole Realm, if it chance that the same is any where exacted
of them. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 226.

Essoin, (Essonium, from the Fr. Essonie, or Exonnie. i. Causarius miles, he
that has his presence forborne or excused upon any just cause, as sickness or
other impediment,) Signifies an alleadgment of an Excuse for him that is
summoned, or sought for to appear and answer to an Action real, or to perform
Sure to a Court Baron upon just Cause of absence: It is as much as excusatio
with the Civilians. The causes that serve to Essoin any Man Summoned, are
diverse, yet drawn to five Heads, whereof the First is ultra mare; the Second,
de terra sancta; the Third, de malo veniendi, which is also called the common
Essoin; the Fourth is de malo lecti; the Fifth de servitio Regis. For further
knowledge of these, I refer you to Glanvile, lib. 1. Bracton. lib. 5. tract. 2.
per totum. Britton, ca. 122 -- 125. and to Horns Mirror, lib. 7. ca. des
Essoins, who mentions some more Essoins, touching the Service of the King
Celestial, then the rest do. Of these Essoins you may read further in Fleta,
lib. 6. ca. 8. and seq. and, that these came to us from the Civil-Lawes and the
Normans is well showed by the grand Custumary, where you may find in a manner
all that our Lawyers say of this matter, ca. 39. to 45.

Essoins and Profers, Anno 32 Hen. 8. ca. 21. See Profer.

Essonio de malo lecti, Is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, for sending four
lawful Knights to view one that has Essoined himself de malo lecti. Reg. of
Writs, fol. 8. b.

Establishment of Dower, Seems to be the assurance or settlement of Dower, made
to th Wife by the Husband, or his Friends, before or at Marriage. And
Assignment is the setting it out by the Heir afterward, according to the
Establishment. Britton. ca. 102, 103.

Estandard, or Standard, (Fr. Estandart. i. Signum, vexillum,) An Ensign for
Horsemen in War, and is commonly that of the King, or Chief General: But, it is
also used for the Principal or Standing-Measure of the King, to the scantling
whereof all the Measures throughout the Land, are, or ought to be framed by the
Clerks of the Market, Aulneger, and other Officers, according to their several
Offices; For it was established by Magna Charta, 9 Hen. 3. ca. 9. That there
should be but one scantling of Weights and Measures through the whole Realm;
which was confirmed by the. Stat. 14 Edw 3. ca. 12. From henceforth there shall
be one Weight, one Measure, and one Yard, according to the Standard of the
Exchequer throughout all the Realm. 17 Car. 1. ca. 19. It is called a Standard
with good reason, because it stands constant and immovable, and has all other
Measures coming toward it for their Conformity, as Soldiers in the field have
their Standard or Colors to repair to. Of these Measures read Britton, ca. 30.

Estate, (Fr. Estat. i. Conditio,) Signifies especially that Title or Interest
which a Man has in Lands or Tenements, as Estate simple, otherwise called Fee
simple, and Estate conditional, or upon condition, which is (according to Litt.
lib. 3. ca. 5.) either upon Condition in Deed, or upon Condition in Law; The
first is, where a Man by Deed indented, infeoffs another in Fee, reserving to
him and his heirs yearly a certain Rent, payable at one Feast or at diverse,
upon condition, that if the Rent he behind, etc. it shall be lawful for the
Feoffer and his heirs to enter -- Estate upon condition in Law, is such, as
has a Condition in Law annexed to it, though it be not specified in writing:
For example, if a Man grant to another by his Deed, the Office of a Parker, for
life; This Estate is upon condition in the Law, or implied by Law, viz. If the
Parker so long shall well and truly keep the Park, etc. We read also of an
Estate particular, which is an Estate for life, or for years. Perkins,
Surrenders 581.

Esterling. See Sterling.

Estopel, (from the Fr. Estouper. i. Oppilare, Obstipare,) Is an impediment, or
bar of an Action, growing from his own Fact, who has, or otherwise might have
had his Action; For example, a Tenant makes a Feoffment by collusion to one,
the Lord accepts the Services of the Feoffee, by this he debars himself of the
Wardship of his Tenants heir. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 142. k. And Broke, hoc
titulo. Coke lib. 2. Casu Goddard, defines an Estopel to be a bar or hindrance
to one to plead the truth, and restrains it not to the impediment given a man
by his own act only, but by another also. Lib. 3. Case of Fines, fol. 88.
There are three kinds of Estopel, viz. By matter of Record, by matter in
Writing, and by matter in Paiis; Of which see Coke on Litt. fol. 352. a.

Estovers, (Estoveria, from the Fr. Estouver. i. Fovere,) Signifies
nourishment, or maintenance: Bracton. (lib. 3. tract. 2. ca. 18. number. 2.) uses
it for that sustenance, which a man, apprehended for Felony, is to have out of
his Lands or Goods for himself and his Family, during his Imprisonment; And the
Stat. 6 Ed. 1. ca. 3. uses it for an allowance in meat or cloth. It is also
used for certain allowances of Wood, to be taken out of another Man's Woods;
Westminster. 2. ca. 25. 20 Car. 2. ca. 3. West, pa. 2. Symbol. tit. Fines. Sect. 26.
says, Estovers comprehends House-bote, Hay-bote and Plow-bote; As, if one has
in his Grant these general words, De rationabili Estoverio in boscis, etc. He
may thereby claim these three. In some Manors the Tenants have Common of
Estovers, that is, necessary Botes out of the Lords Woods, As at Orleton in
Com. Heref. where the Tenants paid the Lord a Wood-hen yearly by way of Rent or
Retribution for the same. Rationabile Estovorium. See Alimony.

Estray, (from the old Fr. Estrayeur, Lat. Extrahura. Pecus quod elapsum a
custode campos pererrat, ignoto Domino,) Signifies any beast that is not wild,
found within any Lordship, and not owned by any man; in which Case, if it be
Cried according to Law in the next Market Towns, and it be not claimed by the
Owner within a Year and a day, it is the Lords of the Soil. See Britton. ca.
17. See Estrays in the Forest, Anno 27 Hen. 8. ca. 7. New Book of Entries,
verbo, Trespass concernant Estrey. The ancient Law of K. Inas was -- Diximus de
ignotis pecoribus, ut nemo habeat sine testimonio Hundredi vel bominum
Decennae. i. Sectatorum Letae. Spel.

Estreat, (Extractum,) Is used for the Copy or true Note of an Original
Writing; and especially of Amerciaments, or Penalties set down in the Rolls of
a Court, to be levied by the Bailiff or other Officer upon every Man for his
Offense. See Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 57, and 76. And so-it is used, We stm. 2. ca.
8.

Clerk of the Estreats. See in Clerk.

Estrepe, (Fr. Estropier. i. Mutilare,) To make spoil by a Tenant for life in
Lands or Woods to the prejudice of him in reversion.

Estrepement, or Estrepament, (From the Fr. Estropier. i. mutilare,) Signifies
spoil made by the Tenant for term of life upon any Lands or Woods to the
prejudice of him in the Reversion, Stat. 6. Edw. 1. ca. 13. And, it may seem by
the derivation, that Estrepament is properly the unreasonable soaking, or
drawing away the heart of the Land, by Plowing and Sowing it continually,
without Manuring, or other good Husbandry; And yet Estropier signifying
mutilare, it may no less properly be applied to those that cut down Trees, or
lop them farther then the Law allows. It signifies also a Writ, which lies in
two Cases, the one, when a Man, (having an Action depending, as a Formdon, dum
fuit infra atatem, Writ of right, or such like, wherein the Demandant is not to
recover Damages,) sues, to inhibit the Tenant from making wast, during the
Suit. The other is for the Demandant, who is adjudged to recover Seisin of the
Land in question, and before Execution sued by the Writ Habere facias
possessionem, for fear of waste to be made before he can get possession, sues
out this Writ. See more in Fitz. Not. Br. fol 60 and 67. Reg. of Writs, fol.
76. And Reg. Judic. fol. 37. In ancient Records we often find Vastum and
Estrepamentum facere. Videturque Estrepamentum gravius Vasti genus designare.
Spel.

Etheling, or Aetheling, in the Saxon signifies Noble, and it was (among our
English Saxons) the title of the Prince, or Kings Eldest Son; as we read in
Camden, Edgar Aetheling England's dearling.


Everwicscire, Yorkshire, anciently so called. Willielmus Rex Angliae Thumae
Archiepiscupo and Bertramo de Verdon and Baronibus suis Francis and Anglis de
Everwicscire, etc. Carta Will. Conq.

Evidence, (Evidentia,) Is used generally for any proof, be it testimony of
Men, Records, or Writings. Sir Tho. Smyth has these words, (Lib. 2. c. 17.)
Evidence in this signification is Authentical Writings of Contracts, Written,
Sealed, and Delivered. And (lib. 2. ca. 23.) speaking of the Prisoner that
stands at the Bar to plead for his life, he says thus; Then he tells what he
can say for himself; after him likewise all those, who were at the apprehension
of the Prisoner, or, who can give any Indices or Tokons, which we call in our
language Evidence, against the Malefactor. It is called Evidence, because
thereby the point in Issue is to be made evident to the Jury; probationes
debent esse evidentos. i. Perspicuae and faciles. See Coke on Litt. fol. 283.

Exactor Regis, The Kings Exactor; Qui publicas pecunias, tributa, vectigalia,
and res fisco debitas exegit. Sometimes taken for the Sheriff. Hoc enim sensu,
niger liber Seac. par. 1. ca. ult. Tabulas, quibus vicecomes censum Regium
colligit, Rotulum Exactorium vocatur.

Examiners in the Chancery, (Examinatores,) Are two Officers, that examine, upon
Oath, Witnesses produced on either side, upon such Interrogatories as the
Parties to any Suit do exhibit for that purpose; and sometimes the Parties
themselves are, by particular Order, examined also by them.

Excambiator, Was anciently used for an Exchanger of Land -- Ita quod
unusquisque eorum qui damna sustinuit aliquo casu contingente, quod Excambiator
refundat dampna, misas and expensas quocunque casu proveniente. Ex libro
Cartarum Priorat. Leominstr. de anno 2 Edw. 2.

Exception, (Exceptio,) Is a stop or stay to an Action, being used in the Civil
and Common Law both alike, and in both divided into dilatory and peremptory. Of
these see Bracton, lib. 5. Tract. 5. per totum. And Britton, ca. 91, 92.

Exchange, (Cambium vel excambium,) Is used peculiarly for that compensation,
which the Warrantor must make to the Warrantee, value for value, if the Land
warranted be recovered from the Warrantee. Bracton lib. 2. ca. 16. and lib. 1.
cap. 19. It signifies also generally as much as permutatio with the Civilians,
as the Kings Exchange, Anno 1 Hen. 6. ca. 1 and 4. -- 9 Ed. 3. Stat. 2. ca. 7.
which is the place appointed by the King for exchange of Plate or Bullion for
the Kings Coin. These places have been diverse heretofore, as appears by the
said Statutes; but, now there is only one, viz. the Tower of London, conjoined
with the Mint; which, in time past, might not be, as appears by 1 Hen. 6. ca. 4.

Exchangeors, Are those that return Money beyond Sea by Bills of Exchange,
which, (by the Stat. 5 Rich. 2. ca. 2.) ought not to be done without the Kings
License. See Excambiator.

Exchequer. See Eschequer.

Excise, Is a Charge, or Imposition laid upon Beer, Ale, Sider, and other
Liquors within the Kingdom of England, Wales and Berwick, by Act of Parliament,
12 Car. 2. ca. 13. during the Kings life, and, according to the Rates in the
said Act mentioned. See 13 Car. 2. ca. 13. -- 15. ejusdem. 9. And 17 ejusdem,
ca. 4.

Excommengement (Anno 23 Hen. 8. cap. 3.) Is in Law-French, the same with
Excommunication.

Excommunication (Excommunicatio) Is a Censure inflicted by the Canon or
Ecclesiastical Judge, depriving the person offending from the lawful Communion
of the Sacraments, and sometimes of the liberty, of even conversing with the
faithful. And it is divided, In majorem and minorem: Minor est per quam quis a
Sacramentorum participatione conscientia vel sententia arcotur. Major, quae non
solum a Sacramentorum, verum-etiam fidolium Communione oxcludit, and ab omni
actu legitimo separat and dividit. Venatorius de Sent. Excom. Auctoritate Dei
Patris omnipotentis and Filii and Spiritus Sancti; and beatae Dei genetricis
Mariae, omniumque Sanctorum, Excommunicamus, Anathematizamus, and a limitibus
sanctae Matris Ecclesiae sequestramus illos malefactores, N. consentaneos
quoque and participes; and nisi resipuerint, and ad satisfactionem venerint,
sic extinguatur lucerna eorum ante viventem, in saecula saeculorum: Fiat, fiat.
Amen. Ex Emendat. Legum Will. Conquestor. in lib. vocat. Textus Roffensis.

Excommunicato Capiendo, Is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, for apprehending
him who stands obstinately Excommunicated Forty days: For the contempt of such
a one, not seeking absolution, may be certified or signified into Chancery,
whence issues this Writ, for the laying him up without Bail or Mainprise,
until he conform himself. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 62. Anno 5 Eliz. cap. 23. and
Reg. of Writs, fol. 65.

Excommunicato Deliberando, Is a Writ to the Undersheriff for Delivery of an
Excommunicate person out of prison, upon Certificate from the Ordinary of his
Conformity, to the Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 63. Reg. of
Writs, fol. 67.

Excommunicato Recipiendo, Is a Writ, whereby persons excommunicate, being for
their obstinacy committed to prison, and unlawfully delivered thence, before
they have given caution to obey the Authority of the Church, are commanded so
be sought for, and laid up again. Reg. of Writs, fol. 67. a.

Executione Facienda, Is a Writ, commanding Execution of a Judgment, the diverse
uses whereof, see in the Table of Register Judicial.

Executione facienda in Witheinamium, Is a Writ that lies for the taking his
Cartle, who formerly had conveyed out of the County the Cattle of another: So
that the Bailiff, having authority from the Sheriff to Replevy the Cattle so
conveyed away, could not execute his charge. Reg. of Writs, fol. 82. b.

Execution (Executio) Signifies the last performance of an Act, as of a Fine or
Judgment. Execution of a Fine, is the obtaining Actual Possession of the things
contained in it, by virtue thereof, which is either by En^y into the Lands, or
by Writ; whereof see West at large, Par. 2. Symbol. tit. Fines, sect. 137.
Executing of Judgments, Statutes, and such like, see in Fitz. Not. Br. in
Indice 2. verbo, Execution. -- Coke (vol. 6. casu Blumfield, fol. 87. a.) makes
two sorts of Executions; one final, another with a quousque, tending to an end
An Execution Final, is that which makes Money of the Defendants Goods, or
extends his Lands, and delivers them to the Plaintiff, which he accepts in
satisfaction, and is the end of the Suit, and all that the Kings Writ commands
to be done. The other Writ, with a Quousque, is tending to an end, but not
final, as in the Case of Capias ad Satisfaciendum, etc. which is not final, but
the Body of the party is to be taken, to the intent, to satisfy the Demandant;
and his imprisonment is not absolute, but until he satisfy. Idem, ibid.

Executor (Executor) Is he that is appointed by any Man's last Will and
Testament, to have the Execution thereof, and the disposing of all the
Testators substance, according to the tenor of the Will. See the Duty of
Executors, a Book so entitled.

Executor de son tort, Or of his own wrong, is he that takes upon him the
Office of an Execator by intrusion, not being so constituted by the Testator,
or deceased, nor (for want of such Constitution) constituted by the Ordinary to
administer. How far he shall be liable to Creditors, see 43 Eliz. cap. 8. Dyer
166. and the Duty of Executors, cap. 14.

Exemplification of Letters Patent (An. 13 Eliz. cap. 6.) Is a copy or example
of Letters Patent, made from the Inrollment thereof, and sealed with the Great
Seal of England; which Exemplifications are as effectual to be showed or
pleaded, as the Letters Patent themselves. Nothing but matter of Record ought
to be exemplified. 3 Inst. fol. 173. See Pages Case, 5 Rep.

Exemplificatione, Is a Writ granted for the Exemplification of an Original.
See Reg. of Writs, fol. 290.

Ex gravi Querela, Is a Writ that lies for him, to whom any Lands or Tenements
in Fee, (within a City, Town, or Borough, wherein Lands are devisable) are
devised by Will, and the Heir of the Devisor enters, and detains them from him.
Reg. of Writs, fol. 244. Old Not. Br. fol. 87. See Fitz. Not. Br. fol 198. L.

Exhibit (Exhibitum) When any Deed, Acquittance, or other writing, is in a suit
in Chancery exhibited to be proved by Witnesses, and the Examiner certifies on
the back of it, that the Deed was showed to such a one at the time of his
Examination, this is there called an Exhibit. The word is mentioned Anno 14
Car. 2. cap. 14.

Exigendaries of the Common Bench (Exigendarii de Banco Communi) Are otherwise
10 Hen. 6. cap. 4. called Exigenters, which Vide.

Exigent (Exigenda) Is a Writ that lies, where the Defendant in an Action
Personal cannot be found; nor any thing of his within the County, whereby to be
attached or distrained, and is directed to the Sheriff, to proclaim and call
him five County days one after another, charging him to appear under pain of
Outlary. This Writ also lies in an Indictment of Felony, where the party
indicted cannot be found. Smith de Repub. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 19. It is called
an Exigent, because it exacteth the party, that is, requires his appearance or
forthcoming to answer the Law; for if he come not at the last days
Proclamation, he is said to be Quinquies Exactus, and then is Outlawed. Cromp.
Jurisd. fol. 188. See the New Book of Entries, verbo, Exigent.

Exigenters (Exigendarii) Are four Officers of the Court of Common Pleas, who
make a^l Exigents and Proclamations in all Actions, wherein Process of Outlary
lies, and Writs of Supersedeas, as well as the Pronotaries, upon such Exigents
as were made in their Offices. 18 Hen. 6. cap. 9. But the making the Writs of
Supersedeas, is since taken from them by an Officer in the Court of Common
Pleas, erected by King James, by his Letters Patent in the later end of His
Reign.

Ex mero motu (Lat.) Are formal words used in the Kings Charters, and Letters
Patent, signifying, that he does what is contained therein Of his own will and
motion, without Petition or Suggestion made by any other; and the effect of
these words is to Bar all Exceptions, that might be taken to the Instrument,
wherein they are contained, by alleging, that the Prince in passing such a
Charter was abused by salse suggestion. Kitchen, fol. 352.

Ex Officio. By virtue of a Branch of the Stat. 1 Eliz. cap. 1. the Queen, by
Her Letters Patent might authorize any person or persons, etc. To administer an
Oath Ex Officio, whereby the supposed Delinquent was compelled to confess,
accuse or purge himself of any criminal matter, and thereby be made liable to
censure or punishment, etc. The Branch of which Statute relating to the said
Oath is repealed, 17 Car. 1. cap. 11.

Exoneratione Sectae, Was a Writ that lay for the Kings Ward to be disburdened
of all suit, etc. to the County, Hundred, Leet, or Court Baron, during the time
of his Wardship. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 158.

Ex Part (Lat.) Partly, or of one part. In the Court of Chancery it has this
signification, A Joynt-Commission is that wherein both Plaintiff and Defendant
join; A Commission Ex part, is that which is taken out and executed by one
Party only.

Ex part talis, Is a Writ that lies for a Bailiff or Receiver, who, having
Auditors assigned to hear his account, cannot obtain of them reasonable
allowance, but is cast into Prison by them. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 129. The manner
in this Case is, to take this Writ out of the Chancery, directed to the
Sheriff, to take four Mainpernors to bring his Body before the Barons of the
Exchequer, at a day certain, and, to warn the Lord to appear at the same time.

Expectant. Used with this word Fee, differs from Fee-simple; For example,
Lands are given to a Man and his Wife in Frank-Marriage, To hold to them and
their Heirs; In this case they have Fee-simple; Bat, if it be given to them and
the heirs of their body, etc. they have Tail, and Fee-expectant. Kitchen,
fol. 153.

Explees. See Esplees.

Expeditate, (Expeditare vel expaaltare,) In the Forest Laws signifies to cut
out the Bal^ of great Dogs fore-feet, for preservation of the Kings Game. Every
one that keeps any great Dogs, not expeditated, forfeits three shillings to the
King. The Ball of the foot of Mastists is not to be cut off, but the three
Claws of the fore-foot to the skin. 4 Part. Inst. fol. 308. -- Nullus Dominicos
canes Abbatis and Monachorum expaaltari cogat. Charta, Hen. 3. Abbati de
Rading. -- and sint quieti de espeditamentis canum. Ex magno Rot. Pipae, de
Anno 9 Ed. 2.

Expenditors, (Anno 37 Hen. 8. ca. 11.) Seems to signify those that pay,
disburse, or expend the Tax in the said Statute mentioned. Anno 7 Jac. ca. 20.
Paymasters.

Expensis militum levandis, Is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, for levying
allowance for the Knights of the Parliament, Reg. of Writs, fol. 191. b.

Explorator, A Scout. -- In memoriam Henrici Croft Equitis aurati Exploratoris
in Hibernia generali^, qui obiit Anno 1609. Scoutmaster-general. Also a
Huntsman or Chaser. -- Idem Abbas habens Exploratores suos statim ponere fecit
retia, etc. In Itin. Pickering, 8 Ed. 3. Rot. 4.

Extend, (Extendere,) To value the Lands or Tenements of one bound by Statute,
etc. that has forfeited his Bond, to such an indifferent rate, as by the yearly
rent, the Creditor may in time be paid his Debt; The course, and circumstances
of this see in Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 131.

Extendi facias, Is ordinarily called a Writ of Extent, whereby the value of
Lands is commanded to be made and levied in diverse cases, which see in the
Table of the Register of Writs.

Extent, (Extenta,) Sometimes signifies a Writ, or Commission to the Sheriff
for the valuing of Lands or Tenements; Sometimes the Act of the Sheriff, or
other Commissioner upon this Writ. Broke tit. Extent. fol. 313. An. 16 and 17
Car. 2. ca. 5.

Extinguishment, (from Extinguo,) Signifies an effect of consolidation; For
example, if a Man have a yearly rent due to him out of my Lands, and afterward
purchase the same Lands, now both the property and rent are consolidated, or
united in one possessor, and therefore the rent is said to be extinguished. So,
where a Man has a Lease for years, and afterward buys the property, this is a
consolidation of the property of the Fruit, and an Extinguishment of the Lease.
And, if there be Lord, Mesn and Tenant, and the Lord purchase the Tenancy, then
the Mesnalty is extinct; but, the Mesne shall have the surplusage of the Rent,
if there be any, as rent-seck. Terms ley.

Extirpatione, Is a Writ judicial that lies against him, who, after a Verdict
found against him for Land, etc. does maliciously overthrow any House, or
extirpate any Trees upon it; And, it is twofold; one ante judicium, the other
post judicium. Reg. judicial. fol. 13. 56. 58.

Extortion, (Extortio,) Is an unlawful or violent wringing of Money, or
Money-worth from any Man. For example, if an Officer; by terrifying another in
his Office, take more then his ordinary Fees or Duties, he commits, and is
Inditeable of this offense: To this, (in Wests Judgment,) may be referred the
exaction of unlawful Usury, winning by unlawful games, and (in one word) all
taking of more then is due, by color or pretense of right; as excessive Toll in
Milners, excessive prizes of Alc, Bread, Victuals, Wares, etc. Part 2. Symb.
tit. Inditements Sect. 65. -- Manwood, (Part 1. pa. 216.) says, Extortion is
color Officii, not virtute Officii -- Crompton (in his Justice of Peace, fol.
8.) says, to this effect, Wrong done by any Man in properly a Trespass, but
excessive wrong is called Extortion; and, this is most properly in Sheriffs,
Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Officers whatsoever, who, by color of their Office,
work great oppression and wrong to the Kings Subjects, in taking excessive
Rewards or Fees, for executing their Office; In the same Author, fol. 48. you
may see great diversity of Cases touching Extortion. See also 3 Part. Inst.
fol. 149.

Extracts. See Estreats.

Air. See Eire.

Eyet, (Insuletta,) A little Island; I have seen it corruptly written in some
modern Conveyances, Eight.

F.
F. He that shall maliciously strike any person with a Weapon in Church or
Churchyard, or draw any Weapon there with intent to strike, shall have one of
his Ears cut off; and, if he have no Ears, then shall be marked on the Cheek
with a hot Iron, having the Letter F. whereby he may be known for a Fray-maker
or Fighter. Anno 5 and 6 Edw. 6. ca. 4.

Fabrick-Lands, Are lands given toward the maintenance, rebuilding or repair
of Cathedrals, or other Churches, and mentioned in the Act of Oblivion. 12 Car.
2. ca. 8. In Ancient time almost every one gave by his Will more or less to the
Fabric of the Cathedral or Parish Church where he lived. -- In Dei nomine
Amen. Die veneris ante Festum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae, Anno Dom.
1423. Ego Ricardus Smyth de Bromyard condo Testamontum meum in hunc modum,
Inprimis lego animam meam Deo and beatae Mariae and omnibus Sanctis, Corpusque
meum sepeliendum in Cimiterio Beatae Edburgae de Bradway. Item lego Fabricae
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Hereford. xii d. Item lego Fabricae Capella Beatae Mariae
de Bromyard xl d. Item lego Fratribus de Woodhouse xx d. Residuum vero bonorum,
etc. These Fabric-lands the Saxons called Tymber-londs.

Faculty, (Facultas,) As it is restrained from the Original and Active
signification, to a particular understanding in Law, is used for a privilege
or especial power granted to a man by favor, indulgence and dispensation, to
do that, which by the Common Law he cannot; as, to eat Flesh upon days
prohibited, to Marry without Banes first asked, etc. Anno 28 Hen. 8. ca. 16.

The Court of Faculties belongs to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and his
Officer is called Magister ad facultates; his power is to grant Dispensations,
as, to Marry, to eat Flesh on days prohibited; the Son to succeed the Father
in his Benefice; one to have two or more Benefices incompatible, etc. This
Authority was given by the Statute 25 Hen. 8. ca. 21. See 4 Part. Inst. fol.
337.

Faint, alias Feint-Action, (Fr. feinct,) Is as much as Fained-Action; that is,
such an Action, as albeit the words of the Writ be true; yet, for certain
causes, he has no Title to recover thereby: And, a false action is, where the
words of the Writ are false. Coke on Lit. fol. 361. yet sometimes they are
confounded.

Faint-Pleader, (from the Fr. Feinte, Falsus,) Signifies a false, covenous or
collusory manner of pleading, to the deceit of a third party, 34 and 35 Hen. 8.
ca. 24.

Fair-pleading. See Beaupleder.

Faitours, (a French word, antiquated, or somewhat traduced; for, the modern
French is Faiseur. i. Factor,) Is used in the Stat. 7 R 2. ca. 5. in the evil
part, signifying a bad Doer; or, it may not improbably be interpreted an idle
Liver, taken from faitardise, which signifies a kind of number or sleepy Disease,
proceeding of too much sluggishness, which the Latins call Veturnus: For, in
the said Statute it seems to be a Synonymon with Vagabond.

Falda, A Sheepfold. -- Et quod oves sint levantes and cubantes in propria
falda Canonicorum praedictorum. Rot. cart. 16 Hen. 2. m. 6.

Faldage, (Faldagium,) Is a privilege which many Lords anciently retained to
themselves, of setting up sheep-folds, or Pens, in any Fields within their
Manors, the better to manure them; and this not only with their own, but with
their Tenants Sheep, which is called Secta faldae; This Faldage is called in
some places a Fold-course, or Free-fold; and, in some ancient Charters
Fald-soca. i. Libertas faldae, or Libertas foldagii. -- Rogerus Rusteng
concessit Eccesiae B. Mariae de Wimondbam 40 acras terrae in Scarnebrune, cum
dimidia Fald-soca, etc. Chartular. Monasterialis Ecclesiae praedict. pa. 48. --
De Faldagio habendo ad ducentos bidentes; ad plus, in villa de Atheburgh, Mon.
Angl. 2 Par. fo. 275. a.

Falesia, (Fr. Falaize,) A Bank, Hill, or down by the Seaside. Coke on Litt.
fol. 5. b.

Falkland, alias Folkland. See Copyhold and Freehold.

False Amprisonment, Is a Trespass committed against a man, by Imprisoning him
without lawful cause; It is also used for the Writ brought upon this Trespass.
Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 86. K. and 88. P. vide Broke, and New Book of Entries,
verbo, False Imprisonment.

False Prophecies. See Prophecies.

False returno brevium, Is a Writ lying against the Sheriff, for false
returning of Writs. Reg. judicial. fol. 43. b.

Falsify, Seems to signify as much as to prove a thing to be false. Perkins,
Dower. 383, 385. Also to say or do falsely; as to falsify, or counterfeit the
Kings Seal. Rex -- Vic. Lincoln. Scias quod dedimus Adae de Essex Clerico
nostro, pro servicio suo, omnes terras and tenementa quae fuerunt Will. de
Scrubby, cujus terrae and tenementa sunt excaeta nostra, per Feloniam quam
fecit de falsificatione Sigilli nostri. T. apud Linc. 28. Nou. etc. Claus. 6
Joh. m. 12. in dorso.

Familia, Pro hida, massa, manso, carucata. -- Donavit terram quinquaginta
Familiarum ad construendum Monasterium. Beda Hist. Eccl. lib. 4 ca. 3. This
term Hide, is, by our Writers, sometimes called a Manse, sometimes a Family,
sometimes Carucata, or a Plough-land; containing as much as one Plough and Oxen
could cultivate in one year. Cressy's Church-Hist. fol. 723. b. Ubi Beda
Familiam, Saxonicus ejus interpres coaetaneus passim hide redderet,
Anglo-Normannis Carucata terrae. Gloss. in x. Script.

Fanatics, (Anno 13 Car. 2. ca. 6.) Is used as a general name for Quakers,
Anabaptists, and other dissenters from the Church of England.

Faonatio, or Feonatio, (from the Fr. Faonner,) a fawning, or bringing forth
young, as Does do. Carta Forestae, ca. 8.

Farding, or Farthing of Gold, (quasi fourth-thing,) was a Coin used in ancient
times, containing in value the fourth part of a Noble, viz. xx d. Silver, and
in weight the sixth part of an Ounce of Gold, that is, of 5 s. in Silver;
mentioned 9 H. 5. Stat. 2. cap. 7. thus; Item, that the King do to be ordained
good and just weight, of the Noble, half-Noble, and Farthing of Gold, with the
rates necessary to the same, for every City, etc. Whereby it plainly appears to
have been a Coin; as well as the Noble and half-Noble.

Farandman, (Sax. Faran, to Travel,) A Merchant-Stranger, or Pilgrim; to whom,
by the Laws of Scotland, Justice ought to be done with all expedition, that
his business or journey be not hindered.

Fardel of Land, (Fardella terrae,) Is, (according to some Authors, (the fourth
part of a Yard-land. Yet Noy, (in his complete Lawyer, pa. 57.) says, Two
Fardels of Land make a Nook, and four Nooks make a Yard-land.

Farding deal, (Sax feord i. quarta and del, or doele. pars.) alias Farundel of
Land, (Quadrantata terrae,) Signifies the fourth part of an Acre. Crom. Jur.
fol. 220. Quadrantata terrae is read in the Reg. of Writs, fol. 1. b. where you
have also Denariata and obolata, solidata and librata terrae, which must
probably rise in proportion of quantity from the Fardingdeal, as an halfpenny,
penny, shilling or pound rise in value; Then must Obolata be half an Acre,
Denariata an Acre, Solidata twelve Acres, and Librata twelve score Acres; yet,
I find Viginti libratas terrae vel redditus. Reg. fol. 94. a. and fol. 248. b.
whereby it seems Librata terrae is so much as yields xx s. per annum; and,
Centum solidatas terrarum, tenementorum and redituum, fol. 249. a. And, in
Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 87. f. Viginti libratas terrae vel reditus, which argues it
to be so much Lands as twenty shillings per annum. See Furlong. Others hold
Obolata to be but half a Perch, and Denariata a Perch. See Spelmans Gloss.
verbo, Obolata terrae. -- Sciatis me Rogerum de Ichtefeld dedisse -- Medietatem
unius Feorwendel terrae de meo dominio, etc. Mon. Angl. 2 Pa. fo. 913. b.

Fare (Sax.) A voyage or passage; or the Money paid for passing by Water. Anno
2 and 3 Ph. and Ma. cap. 16.

Farley or Farle^, In the Manor of West Slapton in Com. Devon. if any Tenant
die possessed of a Cottage, he is by the Custom to pay to the Lord six pence
for a Farley. Which I suppose may be in Lieu of a Heriot: For in some Manors
Westward, they distinguish Farleu to be the best good, as Hariot is the best
Beast payable at the Tenants death.

Farm (From the Sax. Feorme, i. Food.) Reditus est qui in ^locandis praediis
Domino elocanti reservatur. See Ferm, and Spelm. Gloss. verbo, Firma.

Farthing of Land (Sax. Feorthling) Seems to be some great quantity, and to
differ much from Fardingdeal: For I find in a Survey Book of the Manor of
West Slapton in Devonshire, entered thus. A. B. holds six Farthings of Land at
126 l. per annum some hold it to be a Yardland. See Fardel, Fardingdeal, and
Farding.

Fat or Uate, Is a great Wooden Vessel, which among Brewers and Maulsters, is
used to measure Malt for expedition, containing a Quarter. Mentioned Stat. 1
Hen. 5. cap. 10. and 11 Hen. 6. cap. 8. It is likewise a Vessel or Pan of Lead,
for the making of Salt, at Droitwich in the County of Worcester, whereof the
several Owners or Proprietors do claim Estates of Inheritance and Burgesship.

Fautors (Anno 16 Rich. 2. cap. 5.) Favorers, supporters, or maintainers.

Fealty (Fidelitas, Fr. Feaulte, i. Fides) Signifies an Oath taken, at the
admittance of every Tenant, to be true to the Lord of whom he holds his Land:
And he that holds Land; by this only Oath of Fealty, holds in the freest
manner; because, all that have Fee, hold per fidem and ^iduciam, that is, by
Fealty at the least. Smith de Repub. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 8. This Fealty is also
used in other Nations, as in Lombardy and Burgundy. Cassanaeus de consuetud.
Burgund. page 419. And indeed, as the very first creation of this tenure grew
from the love of the Lord toward his Followers; so did it bind the Tenant to
Fidelity, as appears by the whole course of the Feods; and the breach thereof,
is loss of the Fee. Hotoman in his Commentaries, de verbis Feudalibus, shows a
Double Fealty, one general, to be performed by every Subject to his Prince; the
other special, required only of such, as in respect of their Fee, are tied by
this Oath toward their Landlords; we may read of both in the Grand Custumary
of Normandy, etc.

Fealty special is with us performed, either by Freemen or by Villains; the
form of both see, Anno 17 Edw. 2. in these words, When a Freeman shall do
Fealty to his Lord, he shall hold his right hand upon a Book, and shall say
thus, Hear you my Lord R. that I. P. shall be to you, both faithful and true,
and shall ow my Fealty to you for the Land that I hold of you, at the terms
assigned. So help me God, and all his Saints. When a Uillain shall do Fealty to
this Lord, he shall hold his right hand over the Book, and say thus, Hear you
my Lord A. that I. B. from this day forth, unto you shall be true and faithful,
and shall ow you Fealty, for the Land that I hold of you in Villange, and shall
be justified by you, in Body and Goods: So help me God, and all his Saints. See
Reg. of Writs, fol. 302. a. Fidelitas est fidei, ubsequii and servitii ligamen,
quo generaliter subditus Regi, particulariter vassallus domino astringitur Spel.

Fee (Feodum alias Feudum) Is applied to all those Lands and Tenements, which
we hold by perpetual right, and by an acknowledgment of any superiority to a
higher Lord. Those that write of this subject, divide all Lands and Tenements,
wherein a Man has a perpetual estate to him, and his heirs, into Allodium and
Feudum.

Allodium is defined to be every Man's own Land, etc. which he possesses merely
in his own right, without acknowledgment of any service or payment of any Rent
to any other, and this is a property in the highest degree.

Feudum, is that which we hold by the benefit of another, and in the name
whereof we ow Service, or pay Rent, or both, to a Superior Lord. And all our
Land here in England (the Crown Land, which is in the Kings own hands, in right
of His Crown excepted) is in the nature of Feudum, or Fee: For though many have
Land by descent from their Ancestors, and others have dearly bought Land for
their Money, yet is it of such nature, that it cannot come to any, either by
descent or purchase, but with the burden that was laid upon him, who had Novel
Fee, or first of all received it, as a benefit from his Lord, to him, and to
all such, to whom it might descend, or any way be conveyed. So that there is no
Man that has Directum Dominium, i. The very Property or Demain in any Land,
but the Prince, in right of His Crown. Camd. Britan. page 93. For, though he
that has Fee, has Jus perpetuum and utile Dominium, yet he ows a duty for it,
and therefore it is not simply his own; which thing, I take those words, we use
for the expressing our deepest Rights in any Lands or Tenements, to import; for
he that can say most for his estate, says thus, I am seized of this, or that
Land, or Tenement, in my Demain, as of Fee; and that is as much, as if he had
said, it is my Demain or Proper Land after a sort, because it is to me and my
heirs for ever, yet not simply mine, because I hold it in the nature of a
benefit from another; yet the Stat. 37 Hen. 8. cap. 16. uses the word (Fee) of
Lands invested in the Crown, but it proceeds from an ignorance of the nature of
the word; for Fee cannot be without Fealty sworn to a Superior, as you may read
partly in the word Fealty, but more at large in those that write De Feudis; and
namely Hotoman, both in his Commentaries and Disputations; since no Man may
grant, that our King or Crown owes Fealty to any Superior, but God only. And
all that write De Feudis, hold, that Feudatarius has not an entire property in
his Fee.

Fee is divided into Fee absolute, otherwise called Fee-simple, and
Fee-conditional, otherwise termed Fee-tail. Fee-simple (Feudum simplex) is that
whereof we are seized To us and our heirs for ever. Fee-tail (Feudum taliatum)
is that whereof we are seized, with limitation, to us, and the heirs of our
Body; etc. Which Fee-tayle is both general and special; General is, where Land
is given to a Man and the heirs of his body; the reason whereof is showed by
Littleton, lib. 1. ca. 2. because a Man seized of Land by such a gift, if he
Marry one or more Wives, and have no issue by them, and, at length marry
another by whom he has issue, this issue shall inherit the Land. Fee-tayl
special is that, where a Man and his Wife are seized of Lands to them and the
heirs of their two bodies; because in this case, the Wife dying without issue,
and he Marrying another by whom he has issue, this issue cannot inherit the
Land, being especially given to such heirs, etc. This Fee-tayl has Original
from the Stat. of Westminster. 2. ca. 1. Yet see Bracton, lib. 2. ca. 5. number. 3. Item
quaedam absoluta and larga and quaedam stricta and coarcta, sicut certis
haeredibus. To whom add Plowden casu, Willion, fol. 235. For, before that
Statute, all Land given to a Man and his heirs, either general or special, was
accounted in the nature of Fee, and therefore held to be so firmly in him to
whom it was given, that, any limitation notwithstanding, he might alienate it
at his pleasure, Coke on Litt. fol. 19. for redress of which inconvenience the
said Statute was made, whereby it is ordained, that if a Man give Lands in Fee,
limiting the heirs to whom it shall descend, with a reversion to himself or his
heirs for default, etc. that the form and true meaning of his gift shall be
observed. He that has Fee then, holds of another by some duty or other which
is called Service.

This word Fee is sometimes used for the compass or circuit of a Lordship or
Manor. Bracton lib. 2. ca. 5. in eadem villa and de eodem Feodo. Thirdly, It
is used for a perpetual right incorporeal, as, to have the keeping of Prisons
in Fee. Old. Not. Br. fol. 41. Rent granted in Fee. eodem fol. 8. Sheriff in
Fee. Anno 28 Ed. 1. Stat. 13. ca. 8. Lastly, Fee signifies a reward or ordinary
duty given a man for the execution of his Office, or the performance of his
industry in his Art or Science; As the Lawyer or Physician is said to have his
Fee, when he has the consideration of his pains taken, the one with his
Client, the other with his Patient.

Fee expectant, Is by the Feudists termed Feudum expectativum. See Expectant.

Fee Farm, or Fee Ferm, (Feudi firma vel feofirma,) Is, when the Lord, upon
creation of the Tenancy, reserves to himself and his heirs, either the rent,
for which it was before letten to Farm, or at least a fourth part of that rent.
2 Part Inst. fo. 44. and, that without homage, fealty, or other services, other
then are especially comprised in the Feoffment, but, by Fitzh. it seems the
third part of the value may be appointed for the Rent, or the finding of a
Chaplain to Sing Divine-Service, etc. Not. Br. fol. 210. C. And, the Nature of
it is this, That, if the Rent be behind, and unpaid for the space of two years,
then the Feoffor or his heirs have Action to recover the Lands, as their
Demesnes. Britton. ca. 66. number. 4. But observe out of Wests Symbol. part 1.
lib. 2. Sect. 463. that the Feoffment may contain services and suit of Court,
as well as rent: And, the Author of the New Terms of Law says, That Feeferm
owes fealty, though not expressed in the Feoffment, since Fealty belongs to
all kinds of Tenures. See Ferm.

Felo de se, Is he that commits Felony by murdring himself. See Crom. Justice
of P. fo. 28. and Lamb. Eiren. lib. 2. ca. 7. The Saxons called him Selfbana,
Self-bane.

Felony, Felonia, (Fr. Felonnie.) Sir Edward Coke says, Ideo dicta est
Felonia, quia fieri debet felleo animo, lib. 4. fol. 124. b. We account any
offense Felony that is in degree next Petit Treason, and compriseth diverse
particulars, as Murder, Theft, Killing ones self, Sodomy, Rape, Willful burning
of Houses, and diverse such like, which are to be gathered especially out of the
Statutes, whereby many offenses are daily made Felony, which were not so
before. Felony is discerned from lighter offenses, in that the punishment
thereof is death: yet not always; For petit Larceny, (which is the stealing
any thing under the value of twelve pence) is Felony, as appears by Broke tit.
Coron. number. 2; his reason is, because the Indictment against such a one must
run with these words, Felonice cepit, yet not punished by Death, though it be
loss of Goods. Other exception I know not, but that a Man may call that Felony,
which is under Petit-Treason, and punished by death: Of this there are two
sorts, one lighter, which, for the first time, may be relieved by Clergy,
another that may not; which, may also be known by the Statutes; for, Clergy is
allowed where it is not expressly taken away. Of this read Stamf. pl: Cor. lib.
1. (but many offenses are made Felony by Statute since he wrote,) and Lamb.
Justice of P. lib. 2. ca. 7. in a Table drawn for the purpose. Felony is also
punished by loss of Lands not intailed, and Goods and Chattels, both real and
personal; yet the Statutes make difference in some cases concerning Lands, as
appears by 37 Hen. 8. ca. 6. Felony ordinarily works corruption of Blood,
unless a Statute, ordaining an Offense to be Felony, says, It shall not corrupt
the Blood; As 39 Eliz. c. 17.

Feme covert, (Fr.) a Married Woman, (Anno 27 Eliz. ca. 3.) who is also said to
be under Covert baron.

Fence-moneth, (Mensis prohibitionis, or Mensis vetitus,) Is a Month wherein
the Female Deer do fawn, and therefore it is unlawful to Hunt in the Forest
during that time, which begins fifteen days before Midsommer, and ends fifteen
days after, in all 31 days. See Manwood, Part 2. cap. 13. per totum, and the
Stat, 20 Car. 2. ca. 3. It is also called the Defense Month, that is, the
Forbidden Month; for, the Latin is, Ponantur in defenso. There are also
certain Fence, or Defense Months, or seasons for Fish, as well as wild Beasts,
as appears by Westminster 2. ca. 13. in these words; All waters where Salmons are
taken shall be in Defense for taking of Salmons from the Nativity of our Lady
unto St. Martins-day. And likewise that young Salmons shall not be taken nor
destroyed by Nets, etc. from the midst of April, to the Nativity of St. John
Baptist. See also 13 R. 2. Stat. 1. ca. 19.

Fengeld, (Sax.) Pecunia vel tributum ad arcendos hosts erogatum. M. S. Antiq.

Feodal, (Feodalis vel feudalis,) of, or belonging to the Fee, Fee-Farm, or
Fee-simple. Anno. 12 Car. 2. ca. 24.

Feodary, Feudary, or Feudatary, (Feudatarius,) Was an Officer, Authorized and
made by the Master of the Court of Wards, by Letters Patent under the Seal of
that Office; His Function was, to be present with the Escheator at the finding
any Office, and to give Evidence for the King, as well concerning the value, as
the tenure, to Survey the Land of the Ward, after the Office found, and rate
it. He did also assign the Kings Widows their Dowers, and receive all the Rents
of Wards lands within his Circuit. This Officer is mentioned Anno. 32 Hen. 8.
ca. 46, and seems to be totally taken away by 12 Car. 2. ca. 24. Noblemen had
also particular Feodaries. Humfrey Count de Stafford and de Perch Seigneur de
Tunbridge and de Cauz, a nostre Feodier en le Count de Warwick, etc. Saches
que nous -- Dat. 17 H. 6.

Feofment, (Feofamentum, from the Gothish word feudum,) Signifies Donationem
feudi, any Gift, or Grant of any Honors, Castles, Manors, Messuages, Lands,
or other corporeal and immovable things of like nature, to another in Fee;
that is, to him and his heirs for ever, by the delivery of seisin, and
possession of the thing given, whether the gift be made by word, or writing:
when it is in writing it is called a Deed of Feofment; and, in every Feofment
the giver is called the Feoffer, (Feofators) and, he that receives, by virtue
thereof, the Feoffee, (Feofatus.) Litt. lib. 1. ca. 6. says, the proper
difference between a Feoffor and a Donor, is, that the first gives in
Fee-simple, the other in Feetay(...) Feofamentum est ipsum Donum, Concessio vel
actus feofandi. See Coke on Litt. fol. 9.

Ferdella terrae, Is ten Acres. See Virgata and Fardel.

Ferdendel. See Fardingdeal.

Ferdfare, Significat quictantiam eundi in Exercitum. Fleta, lib. 1. ca. 47.

Ferdwit, Significat quietantiam murdri in exercitu. Fleta, lib. 1. ca. 47. --
Et sint quieti de Fictwite, Flictwite, and Ferdwite, and Hengewite, and
Leirwite, etc. Carta 11 H. 3. m. 33.

Ferial-days, (Dies Feriales,) Feriae, (according to the Latin Dictionary,)
Signifies Holy Days, or days vacant from Labor and Pleading: But, in the
Stat 27 Hen. 6. ca. 5. Ferial days are taken for Working days; For, S.
Silvester ordained -- Sabbati and Dominici diei nomine retento, reliquos
hebdomadae dies feriarum nomine distinctos, ut jam ante in Ecclesia vocari
coeperant, appellari. So that Ferial days are properly all the days of the
Week, except Saturday and Sunday.

Ferling, (Ferlingus. Sax. feorthling,) The fourth part of a Penny; Quadrans.
Quando Quarterium frumenti venditur pro 12 denar. tunc panis wastelli de
Ferling is ponderabit 5 lib. and 16 Sol. Assis. panis and Cervis. Anno 51 Hen.
3. Came. tit. Huntingdon, says, there were in this Borough four Ferlings, that
is, quarters of Wards.

Ferlingata terrae, The fourth part of a Yardland. December acrae faciunt
Ferlingatam, 4 Ferlingatae faciunt Virgatam, 4 Virgatae faciunt Hidam, 5 Hidae
faciunt Feodum militare. Esc. 12 Ed. 2. n. 18. Ebor. In Ancient Records
ferlingus terrae is also used. See Mon. Angl. 2 Part. fol. 8. a. and elsewhere
Ferdlingus terrae.

Ferm or Farm, (Lat. Firma. Sax. feorme. Fr. Ferme,) Signifies a Mouse and
Land, taken by Lease in writing or parol. This in the North-parts is called a
Tack; in Lancashire a Ferm-holt, in Essex a Wike. I find locare ad firmam
sometimes to signify with others, as much as to let, or set to Farm with us;
the reason may be in respect of the sure hold they have above Tenants at Will.
Vide Vocab. utriusque Juris, ver^o, Afflictus. How many ways Ferm is taken see
Plowden, Casu Wriothesley, fol. 195. and Terms Ley, verbo, Farm.

Fermisona, The Winter season of Deer, as Tempus Pinguedinis is the Summer
season. -- Quod idem Hugo and haeredes sui de caetero quolibet anno possunt
capere in praedicto Parco. (de Blore) unam damam in Fermisona inter Festum
Sancti Martini and Purif. Beatae Mariae, and unum damum in Pinguedine inter
Festum Sanctae Crucis in Mayo and Festum S. Crucis in Septembr. imperpetuum:
Ita quod qualemcunque bestiam tempore Pinguedinis vel Fermisonae bersaverint,
vel cum praedictis canibus ceperint, illa bestia cis remanebit; and si sit in
Fermisona allocabitur cis pro dama, and si sit in Pinguedine, allocabitur cis
pro dama, etc. Fin. Concor. in Guria Dom. Regis apud Litchfield coram Roger. de
Turkilby, etc. inter Hugonem de Acovre quer. and Will. de Aldeleley Defore.
Penes Williel. Dugdale, Arm. See Tempus Pinguedinis.

Rex -- dilecto Ric. Cassel custodi Manerii de Brustwyk salutem. Cum mittamus
dilectum valettum nostrum Johannem de Fulham ad instantem. Fermisonam in Pareis
nostris ibidem, prout vobis and sibi melius ad opus nostrum fore videritis
faciend, capiend. Vbbis mandamus, etc. Claus. 30 Edw. 1. m. 18.

Ferrure (Fr.) The Shooing of Horses. See Bouche of Court.

Festingmen -- Ut illud Monasterium (sc. de Breodun) sit liberatum ab illis
incommodis, quae nos Saxonica lingua Festingmen dicimus. Certa Berhtuulfi Regis
Merciorum. In Mon. Angl. 1. par. fol. 123. a; The Saxon festenmon signifies
Fidejussor, a surety: So that by this Charter probably they were to be free
from the Franck-pledge, and not bound for any Man's forthcoming, who should
transgress the Law.

Feud or Feed (Feida alias Faida) Signifies in the German tongue Guerram, i.
Bellum. Lambert writes it Feeth, and says it signifies Capitales inimicitias.
Feud is used in Scotland, and the North of England, for a Combination of Kindred
to revenge the death of any of their Blood, against the killer, and all his
race, or any other great enemy. See Skene verbo Affidatio, and 43 Eliz. cap. 13.

Feudal. See Feodal.

Feudary. See Feudary.

Feud-bote (Sax. foehthbote) A recompense for engaging in a Feud or Faction,
and for the damages consequent: It having been the custom of ancient times, for
all the Kindred to engage in their Kinsmans quarrel, according to that of
Tacitus, de Moribus German. Suscipere tam inimicitias, seu patris, seu
propinqui, quam amicitias, necesse est. Sax. Dict.

Fictale, Fildale, and Filckale (Bract. lib. 3. fol. 117.) A kind of
Compotation or Entertainment made by Bailiffs, to those of their Hundreds for
their gain; or (according to Sir Edw. Cokes 4. Instit. fol. 307.) an Extortion
Color compotationis. See Scotale.

Fieri facias, Is a Writ Judicial, that lies at all times within the year and
day, for him that has recovered in an Action of Debt or Damages, to the
Sheriff, to command him to levy the Debt or Damages, of his Goods, against whom
the Recovery was had. This Writ had beginning from Westminster. 2. cap. 18. See Old
Not. Br. fol. 152. And great diversity thereof in the Table of Regist. Judic.
verbo, Fieri facias.

Fifteenth (Decima quinta) Is a Tribute or Imposition of Money laid upon any
City, Borough, or other Town through the Realm, not by the Poll, or upon this
or that Man, but in general upon the whole City or Town; and is so called,
because it amounts to a Fifteenth part of that which the City has been valued
at of old, or to a Fifteenth part of every Man's Goods and Personal Estate,
according to a reasonable valuation. This is imposed by Parliament, and every
Town, through the Realm, knows what a Fifteenth for themselves amounts unto,
because it is always the same: Whereas the Subsidy, which is raised of every
particular Man's Lands or Goods, must needs be uncertain, because every Man's
Estate is uncertain: And in that regard, the Fifteenth seems to have been a
Rate anciently laid upon every Town, according to the Land or Circuit belonging
to it, whereof Camden mentions many in his Britan. viz. page 171. Bath geldabat
pro viginti hidis, quando schira geldabat, and page 181. Old Sarum pro
quinquaginta hidis geldabat, etc. Which Rates were according to Domesday. So
that this seemed in old time to be a yearly tribute in certainty, whereas now,
though the Rate be certain, yet it is not levied, but by Parliament. See Tax
and Quinsieme.

Fightwite (Sax.) Mulcta ob commissam pugnam in perturbationem pacis. In
exercitu Regis 120 Sol. luebatur Fightwita, i. Forisfactura pugnae. M. S. Codex.

Filazer (from the Fr. Fill, a Thread, Line, or String) Is an Officer in the
Court of Common Pleas (so called, because he Files those Writs, whereon he
makes out Writs or Process) whereof there are fourteen in their several
Divisions and Counties. They make out all Writs and Process upon Original Writs
issuing out of the Chancery, as well Real, as Personal, and mixed, returnable in
that Court. And in Actions merely personal, where the Defendants are returned
summoned, make out Pones or Attachments, which being returned and executed, if
the Defendant appears not, they make out a Distringas, and so Ad infinitum, or
until he does appear: If he be returned nihil, then Process of Capias infinite,
if the Plaintiff will, or after the third Capias, the Plaintiff may proceed to
Utlary in the County where his original is grounded, and have an Exigent with
Proclamation. Also the Filazers make forth all Writs of View in Real Actions,
where the View is prayed, and upon Replevins or Recordares, Writs of Retorno
habendo, Second Deliverance, and Writs of Withernam; in Real Actions, Writs of
Grand and Petit Cape before appearance. They enter all Appearances and Special
Bails, upon any Process made by them. They make the first Scire Facias upon
Special Bails, Writs of Habeas Corpus, Distringas, Nuper Vice-comitem vel
Balivum, and Duces tecum, and all Supersedeas upon Special Bail or Appearance,
etc. Writs of Habeas Corpus cum Causa upon the Sheriffs Return, that the
Defendant is detained with other Actions, Writs of Adjournment of a Term, in
case of Pestilence, War, or Public Disturbance; and (until an Order of that
Court, made 14 Jac. which limited the Filazers to all matters and proceedings
before Appearance, and the Prothonotaries to all after) did enter Declarations,
Imparlances, Judgments, and Pleas, whereunto a Sergeants hand was not
requisite, and made out Writs of Execution, and diverse other Judicial Writs
after Appearance. And in the Kings Bench, of later times, there have been
Filazers, who make Process upon Original Writs returnable in that Court, upon
Actions Contra Pacem: The Filazers of the Common Pleas having been Officers of
that Court before the Statute of 10 Hen. 6. cap. 4. wherein they are mentioned.
F. P.

Filiolus, Is properly a little Son, also a Godson. Sciant -- quod ego Johannes
Lovet Miles Dominus de Elmeley Lovet, Dedi -- Waltero le Blount fratri meo and
Johanni Filio suo, Filiolo meo quindecim solidos annui reditus, etc. Sine dat.
Here Filiolus is used for a Nephew; for Walter Blount married the sister of
this Sir John Lovet; unless John the Son, were also Godson to Sir John.

Filkale. See Sothale and Fictale.

File (Filacium) A Thread or Wier, whereon Writs or other Exhibits in Courts and
Offices are fastened, properly called Filed, for the more safe keeping them.

Finders (Anno 18 Edw. 3. stat. 1. and 14 Rich. 2. cap. 10.) Seem to be all one
with those, which in these days we call Searchers.

Fine (Finis) Has diverse uses or significations; the first and most noble is,
(according to Glanvile, lib. 8. cap. 1.) Amicabilis compositio and finalis
concordia, ex consensu and licentia Domini Regis vel ejus Justiciariorum; or a
Covenant made before Justices, and entered of Record for Conveyance of Lands,
Tenements, or any thing inheritable, being In esse tempore Finis; to the end,
to cut off all Controversies. Et Finis dicitur Finalis Concordia, quia imponit
finem litibus, and est exceptio peremptoria, says Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 5.
cap. 28. number. 7. See the New Book of Entries, verbo, Fines. And 27 Edw. 1.
stat. 1. cap. 1. So that this Fine appears to be a Composition or Concord,
acknowledged and recorded before a Competent Judge, touching some Hereditament,
or thing immovable, that was in controversy between the parties to the same
Concord; and that, for the better credit of the transaction, it is by
imputation made in the presence of the King, because levied in his Court; and
therefore it binds Women-Covert, being parties, and others whom ordinarily the
Law disables to transact, only for this reason, That all presumption of deceit
or evil meaning is excluded, where the King and His Court of Justice are
supposed to be privy to the Act.

Originally the use of this Final Concord was instituted and allowed, in regard
that, by the Law and ancient course of Proceedings, no Plaintiff (giving Real
Security or Sureties, De clamore suo prosequendo, and being to be Fined or
Amerced by the Judges, if he failed therein, which, as appears by the Records
of King Edward the First, were duly Estreated and certified into the Exchequer)
could agree without License of the Court: So as Fines have been anciently
levied in Personal Actions, and for no greater a sum of Money then xi l. But
subtilty of Wit and Reason, has in time wrought other uses of it, viz. To cut
off Intails; and with more certainty to pass the interest or title of any Land
or Tenement, though not controverted, to whom we think good, either for years
or in Fee. In so much as the passing a Fine, in most Cases now, is but Mera
fictio Juris, alluding to the use for which it was invented, and supposing an
Action or Controversy, where in truth none is, and so not only operating a
present Bar, and Conclusion against the parties to the Fine, and their Heirs;
but at five years end, against all others, not expressly excepted (if it be
levied upon good consideration and without Covin) as Womencovert, Persons under
Twenty one years, Prisoners, or such as are out of the Realm, at the time of
its acknowledging. Touching which, see the Statutes Anno 1 Rich. 3. cap. 7. --
4 H. 7. cap. 14. -- 32 Hen. 8. cap. 36. and 31 Eliz. cap. 2.

This Fine has in it five essential Parts, 1. The Original Writ taken out
against the Cognizor. 2. The Kings License giving the parties liberty to
accord, for which he has a Fine, called the Kings Silver, being accounted part
of the Crowns Revenue. 3. The Concord it self, which begins thus, Et est
Concordia talis, etc. 4. The note of the Fine, which is an abstract of the
Original Concord, beginning thus. Sc. Inter R. querentem, and S. and T. uxorem
ejus deforcientes, etc. (where in stead of Deforcientes, anciently Impedientes
was used) 5. The foot of the Fine (Haec est Finalis Concordia facta in Curia
Domini Regis apud Westminster, a die Poschae in Quindecim dies, Anno etc.) includes
all, containing the day, year, and place, and before what Justice the Concord
was made. Coke, vol. 6. Casu ^ey, fol. 38.

This Fine is either single or double; a Single fins is that by which nothing
is granted or rendered back again by the Cognizees to the Cognizors, or any of
them. A Double fine contains a grant, and render back, either of some Rent,
common, or other thing out of the Land, or of the Land it self, to all or some
of the Cognizors for some Estate, limiting thereby many times Remainders to
strangers, not named in the Writ of Covenant; and a Fine is sometimes called a
double fine, when the Lands do lie in several Counties. Again, a Fine is in its
effect, divided into a Fine executed, and a Fine executory; a Fine executed is
such, as of its own force gives a present possession (at least in Law) to the
Conizec, so that he needs no Writ of Habere facias Seizinam, for Execution of
the same; but may enter, of which sort is a Fine Sur cognizance de droit come
ceo que il ad de son done, that is, upon acknowledgment, that the thing
mentioned in the Concord is, Jus ipsius cogniza^i, ut illa quae idem habet de
dono Cognitoris. West, sect. 51. K. The reason is, because this Fine passes by
way of Release of that thing, which the Conizee has already (at least by
supposition) by virtue of a former gift of the Conizor. Coke, lib. 3. Case of
Fines, fol. 89. b. Which is, in very Deed, the surest Fine of all. Fines
Executory, are such as of their own force, do not execute the possession in the
Cognizees, as Fines, Sur cognizance de droit tantum, Fines sur done, Grant,
Release, Confirmation, or Render. For, if such Fines are not levied, or such
render made to those who are in possession at the time of the Fines levied, the
Conizees must needs sue out Writs of Habere facias seisinam, according to their
several Cases, for obtaining their possessions, except at the levying such
Executory fines, the parties to whom the Estate is limited, be in possession of
the Lands passed thereby: For in this Case such Fines do enure by way of
extinguishment of Right, not altering the Estate or Possession of the Cognizee,
but perhaps bettering it. West Symbol. sect. 20.

Touching the form of these Fines, it is to be considered, upon what Writ or
Action the Concord is to be made, and that is most commonly, upon a Writ of
Covenant, and then there must first pass a pair of Indentures between the
Cognizor and Cognizee, whereby the Cognizor Covenants with the Cognizee, to
pass a Fine to him, of such and such things, by a day limited: As these
Indentures are first in this proceeding, so are they said to lead the Fine.
Upon this Covenant, the Writ of Covenant is brought by the Cognizee against the
Cognizo^, who thereupon yields to pass the Fine before the Judge, and so, the
Acknowledgment being Recorded, the Cognizor and his Heirs are presently
concluded, and all strangers (not excepted) after five years passed. If the
Writ, whereon the Fine is grounded, be not a Writ of Covenant, but of Warrantia
Chartae, or a Writ of Right, or of Mesn, or of Customs and Services (for of all
these Fines may also be founded, West, sect. 23.) then this Form is observed;
the Writ is served upon the party that is to acknowledge the Fine, and then he
appearing, does accordingly. See Dyer, fol. 179. number. 46.

Fines are now only levied in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, in
regard of the solemnity thereof, ordained by the Statute of 18 Edw. 1. Before
which time they were sometimes levied in the County Courts, Court Barons, and
in the Exchequer, as may be seen in Mr. Dugdales Origines Juridiciales and
alibi.

This word Fine sometimes signifies a sum of Money, paid for an income to Lands
or Tenements let by Lease, anciently called Gersuma, sometimes an amends,
pecuniary punishment, or recompense upon an offense committed against the King,
and his Laws, or a Lord of a Manor. In which case a Man is said Facere Finem
de transgressione cum Rege, etc. Reg. Jud. fol. 25. a. Of the diversity of
these Fines, see Cromptons Just. of Peace, fol 141. b. 143, 144. and Lamb.
Eiren. lib. 4. cap. 16. But in all these diversities of Uses, it has but one
signification, and that is a Final conclusion or end of differences between
parties. And in this last sense, wherein it is used for the ending and
remission of an Offense, Bracton has it (lib. 2. cap. 15. number. 8.) speaking of
a Common Fine, that the County pays to the King, for false Judgments, or other
Trespasses, which is to be Assessed by the Justices in Eyr before their
departure, by the Oath of Knights, and other good men, upon such as ought to
pay it; with whom agrees the Statute 3 Edw. 1. cap. 18. There is also a Common
fine in Leets, see Kitchen, fol. 13. Vide Common Fine. Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 48.
and Coke on Littl. fol. 126. b.

Fines for Alienation, Are reasonable Fines paid to the King by his Tenants in
Chief, for License to Alien their Lands, according to the Stat. 1 Edw. 3. cap.
12. But see the Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

Fines pro Licentia Concordandi. Anno 21 Hen. 8. cap. 1. See Fine.

Fine force (from the Fr. Fin, i. crafty or subtle, and ferce, i. vis) Seems to
signify an absolute necessity or constraint, not avoidable; and in this sense
it is used, Old Not. Br. fol. 78. And in the Stat. 35 Hen. 8. cap. 12. in
Perkins, Dower, fol. 321. Plowden, fol. 94. Coke, vol. 6. fol. 111. a.

Fine adnullando levato de tenemento quod fuit de antiquo Dominico, Is a Writ
to Justices, for disannulling a Fine levied of Lands holden in Ancient Demesne,
to the prejudice of the Lord. Reg. of Writs, fol. 15. b.

Fine Capiendo pro terris, etc. Is a Writ lying for one, who upon Conviction by
a Jury, having his Lands and Goods taken into the Kings hand, and his body
committed to prison, obtains favor for a sum of Money, etc. to be remitted his
imprisonment, and his Lands and Goods to be re-delivered to him. Reg. of Writs,
fol. 142. a.

Fine levando de tenementis tentis de Rege in Capite, etc. Was a Writ directed
to the justices of the Common. Pleas, whereby to License them to admit of a
Fine for the sale of Land holden in Capite. Reg. of Writs, fol. 167. a.

Fine non capiendo pro pulchre placitando, Is a Writ to inhibit Officers of
Courts to take Fines for fair pleading. Reg. of Writs, fol. 179.

Fine pro redisseisina capienda, etc. Is a Writ lying for the release of one
laid in prison for a Re-disseisin, upon a reasonable Fine. Reg. of Writs, fol.
222.

Finors of Gold and Silver, Are those that purify and part those Metals from
other courser, by Fire and Water. Anno 4 Hen. 7. cap. 2. They are also called
Parters in the same place, and sometimes Departers.

Firdstole. See Fridstole.

Firebare -- Quod sine dilatione levari and reparari fac. signa and Firebares
super montes altiores in quolibet Hundredo: Ita quod tota patria, per illa
signa, quo^iescu^que necesse fuit, praemuniri potest, etc. Ordinatio pro vigil.
observand. a Lynne usque Yermouth, temp. Ed. 2. Perhaps from the Saxon Fyretor,
a Beacon or a High Tower by the Seaside, wherein were continual Lights, either
to direct Sailers in the Night, or give warning of the Enemy.

Firebote (Sax.) Signifies allowance of Wood or Estovers, to maintain competent
Fire for the use of the Tenant. See Haybote.

Firma, see Ferme. Ad firmam noctis was a Custom or Tribute paid toward the
entertainment of the King for one night, according to Domesday. Comes Meriton
T. R. E. (i. tempore Regis Edovardi Conf.) reddebat firmam unius noctis, i.
Provision or Entertainment for one night, or the valne of it. Firma Regis,
anciently, Pro villa Regia, seu Regis Manerio. Spel.

First Fruits or Annates (Primitiae) Are the Profits, after Avoidance, of every
Spiritual Living for one year, given in ancient time to the Pope throughout all
Christendom, but by the Stat. 26 Hen. 8. cap. 3. translated here in England to
the King: For ordering whereof, there was a Court erected 32 Hen. 8. cap. 45.
but dissolved, 1 Mar. Sess. 2. cap. 10. And since that time, though those
Profits are reduced again to the Crown, 1 Eliz. cap. 4. yet was the Court never
restored, but all matters, formerly handled therein, were transferred to the
Exchequer. See Annates.

Fish-garth (Anno 23 Hen. 8. cap. 18.) A Dam or Wear in a River, made for the
taking of Fish; especially in the Rivers Owse and Humber. See Garth.

Fithwite, Rectius Fihtewite, a Sax. Feoht, pugna, and wite, mulcta; mulcta ob
commissam pugnam in perturbationem pacis publicae. Fithwite, i. si pugnaverint
and percusserint se, quamvis sanguinem non extraxerint, Prior habebit inde
amerciamenta. Ex Registro Priorat. de Cokesford.

Fledwite or Flightwite (Sax. Flyht, fuga and wite, mulcta) Signifies, in our
ancient Laws, a Discharge or Freedom from Amerciaments, when one, having been
an outlawed Fugitive, comes to the Peace of our Lord the King, of his own
accord, or with license. Thus Rastal. But Quaere, whether it does not rather
signify a Mulct or Fine set upon a Fugitive?

Fleet (Sax. Fleot, i. A place, where the Water ebbs and flows, a running
Water) A famous Prison in London, so called from the River, on the side whereof
it stands. To this Prison, Men are usually committed for contempt to the King,
and his Laws, or upon absolute command of the King, or some of His Courts, or
lastly for Debt, when Men are unable, or unwilling to satisfy their Creditors.

Flem and Fleth. (Sax. Flema, an Outlaw, and Flet, a House) In Placito de quo
Warranto Abbas de Burgo dicit quod clamat annum and vastum and medium tempus
per haec verba Flem and Fleth. Trin. 7 Edw. 3.

Flemasiace (from the Sax. Flema, a Fugitive, or Outlaw, and slean, to kill or
slay) By virtue of this word were claimed Bona felonum, as appears upon a Quo
Warranto, Temp. Edw. 3. See Keilways Rep. fol. 145. b.

Flemenesfirinthe (Rectius Flymenafyrmthe, A Sax. Flyma, i. Fugitivus and
Fyrmthe, susceptio, admissio. LL. Inae. cap. 29. and 47. LL. etiam Hen. 1. cap.
10, 12.) Signifies the receiving or relieving a Fugitive. -- Cum Sacha and
Socha, Tol and Team, Infangenethof and Flemenesfyrinthe and Gridbreche,
Forstal, Hamsocne, Blodwite, Ordel and Oreste. Carta Edw. Conf. Monasterio de
Waltham. I find this word often in ancient Charters erroneously written: As
Flemeneferd, Flemenefrit, Flemnenefremeth, Flemanisflit, Flemenewurde,
Fremenefenda, and Flemenesfreicthe. All doubtless intended for the same thing.

Flemenesfreme and Flemenesfrenthe, Interpretantur catalla fugitivorum. Mich.
10 H. 4. Hertf. 59. Coram Rege. Rot. 59. See Flemenesfirinthe.

Flemeswite (Sax.) Signifies a Liberty or Charter, whereby to challenge the
Cattle, or Amerciaments of your Man a Fugitive. Rastals Exposition of words.
Fleta writes it two other ways, viz. Flemenesfrevie and Flemenesfreicthe, and
interprets it, Habere catalla fugitivorum, lib. 1. cap. 47. See Flem, and
Flemenesfirinthe.

Fletwite (Sax.) Est mulcta utlagatis and fugitivis indicta, ob veniam and
pacem Regis impetrandam. See Fledwite.

Flidethrift, otherwise called Shovegroate, Is the same game we now call
Shovelboard, and mentioned 33 Hen. 8. cap. 9. This should rather have been
called Slidethrift.

Flitchtwite alias Flitwite, (from the Sax. Flit, Convention or Strife)
Significat mulctam ob contentiones, rixas and jurgia impositam, and cui haec a
Principe conceduntur, potest in Curia sua cognoscere de hujusmodi
transgressionibus, vel mulctas inde provenientes in Curia Regis, a
delinquentibus exigere and sibimet retinere. Thus Spelman. Flitwite, i. Quod
Prior ^oneat Placita in Curia sua de contentionibus and conviciis hominum
suorum and habeat inde Amerciamenta. Ex Reg. Priorat de Cokesford.

Florences (Anno 1 Rich. 3 cap. 8.) A kind of Cloth so called.

Flotages (Fr. Flotage, i. a Floating or Swimming on the top) Are such things,
as by accident float or swim on the top of the Sea, or great Rivers. I have
seen the word used in the Commission of a Water-Bailiff.

Flotson alias Flotzan (from the Sax. fleoten, i. natare) Is a word proper to
the Seas, signifying any Goods lost by Shipwreck, and which lie floating or
swimming on the top of the Water, which with Jetson, Lagon, and Shares, are
given to the Lord Admiral by his Letters Patent. Jetson is any thing cast out
of the Ship, being in danger of Wreck, and beaten to the shore by the Waves, or
cast on it by the Mariners. Coke, vol. 6. fol. 106. a. Lagon, alias Lagan vel
Ligam, Is that which lies in the bottom of the Sea. Coke, ibid. Shares are
Goods due to more by proportion.

Foder (Sax. fodre) Any kind of Meat for Horses or other Cattle. See Forage.
But among the Feudists it is used for a Prerogative that the Prince has, to be
provided of Corn, and other Meat for His Horses by His Subjects, in His Wars,
or other expeditions. Hotoman de verbis feudal: See Fother. -- Nec non redditus
qui dicuntur Hidagium and Foddercorn in perpetuum Abbatibus (de S. Edmundo)
designentur. Mon. Angl. 1 Part. fol. 297. a.

Fogage (Fogagium) Fog or Feg, rank Grass not eaten in Summer. LL. Forestar.
Scot. cap. 16.

Folc-lands (Sax.) Copihold Lands were so called in the time of the Saxons, and
Charter-Lands were called Boc-lands. Kitchen, 174. Fundus sine scripto
possessus (says Master Somner) censum pensitans annuum, and officiorum
servituti obnoxious. Terra Popularis.

Folcmote and Folkesmote (Sax. Folc-gemot, i. Conventus populi) Signifies
(according to Lambert) two kinds of Courts, one now called the County Court,
the other the Sheriffs Turn. The word is still in use among the Londoners, and
signifies Celebrem ex omni Civitate conventum. Stow in his Survey. But Manwood
says, It is the Court holden in London, wherein all the folk and people of the
City did complain of the Major and Aldermen for any misgovernment. Mr. Somner
in his Saxon Dictionary says, It is a general Assembly of the people for
considering and ordering Matters of the Commonwealth. Omnes proceres Regni and
Milites and liberi homines universi totius Regni Britanniae facere debent in
pleno Folcmote fidelitatem Domino Regi, coram Episcopis Regni. In Leg. Edw.
Confess. cap. 35.

Fold-course (Croke, 2 Part. fol. 43.) See Faldage.

Folgheres or Folgeres (from the Sax. folger, i. to follow) Are properly
followers; but Bracton (lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10.) says it signifies, Eos qui
aliis deserviunt. Vide LL. Hen. 1. cap. 9.

Footgeld. See Foutgeld.

Foot of the Fine. See Chirographer.

Forage (Fr. Fourrage) Fodder for Cattle. Cestes. sont, les Covenants feats le
Vendredy prochein devant la Feste de Scinte Jake l'Apostle. 20 Edw. 3. Perentre
Nichol de Stone d'une part and John de Blount d'autre part. -- Et le dit John
trovera au dit Nichol herb and feyn and Forage pour un Hakeney and deux
vaches, etc. Penes Wall. Kirkham-Blount Bar.

Forathe. Liberalis autem homo, i. Pegen. odo crimen suum non sit inter majora,
habeat fidelem hominem qui possit pro eo jurare juramentum, i. Forathe. Si
autem non habet, ipsemet juret, nec perdonetur ei aliquod juramentum.
Constitut. Canuti de Foresta, sect. 12.

Forbarre or Forebar, Is to Bar or deprive for ever. Anno 9 R. 2. cap. 2. and 6
H. 6. cap. 4.

Forbusher of Armor (Forbator) Si quis forbator arma alicujus susceperit, ad
purgandum, etc. LL. Aluredi. M. S. cap. 22.

Force (Fr.) Is most usually applied to the evil part, and signifies unlawful
violence, West defines it to be an offense, by which violence is used to things
or persons. Part 2. Symbol. tit. Indictments, sect. 65. where he also divides
it into Simple and Compound: Simple force is that which is so committed, that
it has no other crime annexed to it; as if one by force do only enter into
another Man's possession, without doing any other unlawful act. Mixed force is
when some violence is committed with such a fact, as of it self only is
criminal: As, if any by force enter into another Man's possession, and kill a
Man, or ravish a Woman, etc. He further divides it into True force, and Force
after a sort, and so proceeds to diverse other Branches, worth the reading, as
forcible Entry, forcible Detaining, unlawful Assembly, Routs, Riots,
Rebellions, etc.

Forcible detaining, or withholding possession, Is a violent act of
resistance, by strong hand of Men weaponed, or other action of fear in the same
place or elsewhere, by which the lawful Entry of Justices, or others, is bard or
hindered. West, pa. 2. Symbol. tit. Indictments, sect. 65. Cromptons Just. of
Peace, fol. 59.

Forcible Entry, (Ingressus manu forti factus) Is a violent actual entry into
House or Land, etc. or taking a distress being weaponed, whether he offer
violence or fear of hurt to any there, or furiously drive any out of
possession. West and Crompton ut supra. It is also used for a Writ grounded
upon the Stat. 8 Hen. 6. cap. 9. whereof read Fitz. Not. Br. at large, fol.
248. New Book of Entries, verbo, Forcible Entry, and Lamberts Eiren. lib. 2.
cap 4.

Foreclosed (Anno 33 Hen. 8. cap. 39.) Barred; shut out, or excluded for ever.
2 Part. Inst. fol. 298.

Foregoers, Were Purveyors, otherwise called, Going before the King in
Progress, to provide for Him. Anno 36 Edw. 3. cap. 5.

Foreign (Fr. Forain, Lat. Forinsecus) Is in our Law joined with diverse
Substantives in Senses, not unworthy the Exposition: As Foreign Matter, that is
matter triable in another County (Pl. Cor. fol. 154.) or matter done in another
County. Kitchen, fol. 126.

Foreign Plea, Is a refusal of the Judge, as incompetent, because the matter in
question is not within his Jurisdiction. Kitchen, f. 75. Anno 4 Hen. 8. cap. 2.
And 22 Ejusdem, cap. 2. and 14.

Foreign Answer, Is such an Answer as is not triable in the County where it is
made. 15 Hen. 6. cap. 5.

Foreign Service, Is that, whereby a Mean Lord holds over of another, without
the compass of his own Fee, (Broke, tit. Tenures, fol. 28, 95, 251. number. 12.
and 28. Kitchen, fol. 209.) or else that which a Tenant performs either to his
own Lord, or to the Lord Paramount out of the Fee. Of which Services, thus
Bracton, (lib. 2. cap. 16. number. 7.) Item sunt quaedam servitia, quae dicuntur
forinseca, quamvis sunt in charta de Feoffamento expressa and nominata; and
quae ideo dici possunt forinseca, quia pertinent ad Dominum Regem, and non ad
Dominum capitalem, nisi cum in propria persona profectus fuerit in servitio,
vel nisi cum pro servitio suo satisfecerit Domino Regi quocunque modo, and
fiunt in certis temporibus, cum casus and necessitas evenerit, and varia habent
nomina and diversa: Quandoque enim nominantur forinseca, large sumpto vocabulo,
quoad servitium Domini Regis, quandoque Scutagium, quandoque servitium Domini
Regis, and ideo forinsecum dici potest, quia sit and capitur foris, sive extra
servitium quod fit Domino capitali. Foreign Service, seems to be Knights-service
or Escuage uncertain. Perkins, Reservation. 650. -- Salvo forinseco servicio.
Mon. Angl. 2 Par. fol. 637. b.

Foreign Attachment, Is an Attachment of Foreiners Goods found within a Liberty,
or a City, for the satisfaction of some Citizen, to whom the Foreiner is
indebted. At Lempster (anciently Leominstre) there is the Borough and the
Foreign; which last, is within the Jurisdiction of the Manor, but not within
the Bailiff of the Boroughs Liberty.

Foreign Opposer or Apposer (Forinsecarum Oppositor) Is an Officer in the
Exchequer, to whom all Sheriffs, after they are apposed of their sums out of
the Pipe Office, do repair to be opposed by him of their Green Wax. He examines
the Sheriffs Estreats with the Record, and apposeth the Sheriff, what he says
to every particular sum therein. Practice of the Exchequer, fol. 87. See 4
Inst. fol. 107.

Forera, Terra transversalis, seu Capitalis, A Head-land, or (as they vulgarly
call it) Hade-land. -- Uno capite abuttante super Foreram Rogeri Attecastel.
Carta de Anno 47 Edw. 3. Penes Tho. Wollascot, Arm.

Forest (Foresta) Signifies a great or vast Wood; Locus silvestris and
saltuosus. Our Lawwriters define it to be Locum, Ubi ferae inhabitant vel
includuntur. Others say it is called Foresta, quasi, Ferarum statio, vel tuba
mansio ferarum. Manwood in his second Part of Forest Laws, cap. 1. defines it
thus. A Forest is a certain Territory of Woody Grounds, and Fruitful Pastures,
privileged for Wild Beasts and Fowls of Forest, Chase, and Warren, to rest in
and abide, in the safe Protection of the King, for His Princely delight; meered
and bounded with unremoveable Marks, Meers and Boundaries, either known by
Matter of Record or Prescription; Replenished with Wild Beasts of Venary or
Chase, and with great Coverts of Vert, for succor of the said Beasts. For
preservation and continuance of which place, with the Vert and Venison, there
are certain particular Laws, Privileges, and Officers, belonging only thereto.

Its properties are these: First, A Forest, as it is truly and strictly taken,
cannot be in the hands of any, but the King; because none has power to grant
Commission to be a Justice in Air of the Forest, but the King. (Yet the Abbot
of Whitby had a Forest by Grant of Henry the Second, and King John, with all
Officers incident thereto. 4 Inst. fol. 305. and 314.) The second property is
the Courts, as the Justice Seat, every three years; the Swainmote thrice every
year, and the Attachment, once every forty days. The third, may be the Officers
belonging to it, for preservation of the Vert and Venison: As first, the
Justices of the Forest, the Warden or Keeper, the Verderers, the Foresters,
Agistors, Regarders, Bailiffs, Bedels, and such like, which see in their
places. See Manwood, p(...) cap. 1. number. 4 and 5. But the most especial Court
of a Forest, is the Swain-mote, which is no less incident to it, then the Court
of Pye-Powders to a Fair. If this fail, then is there nothing of a Forest
remaining, but it is turned into the nature of a Chase. There are reckoned to
be in England Sixty eight Forests. For the ascertaining the Meets and Bounds of
Forests. See Anno 17 Car. 1. cap. 16.

Forestagium, -- Et sint quieti de Theoloneo and Passagio, and de Forestagio,
and Theoloneo aquarum and viarum Forestam meam contingentium. Carta 18 Edw. 1.
m. 10. n. 30. Seems to signify some duty or tribute payable to the Kings
Foresters; as Chiminage, or such like.

Forestal. See Forstal.

Forester, (Forestarius,) Is a Sworn Officer of the Forest, appointed by the
Kings Letters Patent to walk the Forest both early and late, watching both the
Vert and the Venison, attaching and presenting all Trespassers against them,
within their own Bayliwick or Walk; whose Oath you may see in Crompton, fol.
201. And, though these Letters Patent are ordinarily granted, but quam diu se
been gesserint, yet they are granted to some and their heirs, who are hereby
called Foresters, or Fosters in Fee. (Idem fol. 157 and 159. And Manwood, Part.
1. pa. 220.) whom, in Latin, Grompton calls Forastarium Feudi, fol. 175.

Fore-judging or Forjudging, (Forjudicatio,) Signifies a Judgment, whereby a
Man is deprived, or put by the thing in question. Bracton, (lib. 4. Tract. 3.
ca. 5.) has these words, -- Et non permittas quod A, capitalis, Dominus Feudi
illius, habeat custodiam haeredis, etc. quia in Curia nostra forisjudicatur de
custodia, etc. So does Kitchen use it, fol. 29. and Old Not. Br. fol. 44 and
81. And the Stat. 5 Ed. 3. ca. 9. and 21 R. 2. ca. 12. Forjudicatus, with
Authors of other Nations, signifies as much as banished, or as Deportatus in
the ancient Roman-Law, as appears by Vincentius de franchis Descis. 102.

Forjudged the Court, Is, when an Officer of any Court is banished, or expeld
the same, for some offense, or for not appearing to an Action by Bill filed
against him; and, in the later, he is not to be admitted to Officiate, till he
shall appear to the Bill. Anno 2 Hen. 4. ca. 8. -- He shall lose his Office,
and be forjudged the Court, etc. Forjudicare interdum est male judicare, Spel.

Forfang and Forefeng, (A Sax. fore, ante, fangen, prendere,) est captio
obsoniorum, quae in foris aut nundinis ab aliquo fit, priusquam minister Regis
ea ceperit quae Regi fuerint necessaria. Antecaptio. -- Et sint quieti de
Wardwite, and de utlewe and Forvenge and Withfange, etc. Carta Hen. 1. Hosp.
Sancti Barth. Land. An. 1133.

Forfeiture, (Forisfactura,) comes of the French Forfact, i. Scelus; but
signifies with us, rather the effect of transgressing a Penal Law, then the
transgression it self, as forfeiture of Escheats, Anno 25 Edw. 3. ca. 2. Stat.
de Proditionibus. Goods confiscated and goods forfcited differ. Stam. Pl. Cor.
fol. 186. where those seem to be forfeited that have a known owner, who has
committed some offense, whereby he loses his Goods; Confiscate, are those,
that are disavowed by an Offender, as not his own, nor claimed by any other.
But, Forfeiture is rather more general, and Confiscation particular to such as
forfeit only to the Princes Exchequer. Full forfeiture, (plena forisfactura)
otherwise called plenawita, Is a forfeiture of life and member, and all else
that a man has. Manwood, Part. 1. pa. 341.

Forfeiture of Marriage, (Foris factura Maritagii,) Is a Writ which lay against
him, who, holding by Knights-service, and being under age, and unmarried,
refused her, whom the Lord offered him, without his disparagement, and married
another. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 141. Reg. of Writs, fol. 163. b.

Forfeng, forefeng, and Forbenge, Quietantiam prioris prisae designat; In hoc
enim delinquunt Burgenses Londonenses cum prisas suas ante prisas Regis
faciunt. Fleta, lib. 1. ca. 47. See Forfang.

Forger of false Deeds, (from the French, Forger. i. To beat on an Anvil, or
bring into shape,) Signifies either him that fraudulently makes and publishes
false Writings, to the prejudice of any man's right, or else the Writ that lies
against him, who commits this offense. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 96. b. says, That a
Writ of Deceit lies against him, who commits this offense; and, the penalty of
it is declared in the Stat. 5 Eliz. ca. 14.

Forlandum, -- Et de duobus Forlandis xvi denarios, sc. de Forlando Johannis
Wauker, quod jacet ante terram Ecclesiae, viii denarios. Mon. Angl. 2 Part. fo.
332.

Formdon, (Breve de forma donationis,) Is a Writ that lies for him, who has
right to any Lands or Tenements, by virtue of any Intail, growing from the
Stat. of Westminster. 2. ca. 1. There are three kinds of it, viz. Forma Donationis,
or, Formdon in the Descender, Formdon in the Reverter, and Formdon in the
Remainder. Formdon in the Descender lies for the recovery of Lands, etc. given
to one and the heirs of his body, or, to a Man and his Wife, and the heirs of
their two bodies, or to a Man and his Wife, being Cousin to the Donor, in
Frank-Marriage, and afterward alienated by the Donee. For, after his decease
his heir shall have this Writ against the Tenant or Alienee.

Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 211, 217. and 214. makes three sorts of this Formdon in the
Descender: The first is in the manner now expressed; The second for the heir of
a Co-parcener, that aliens and dies; The third he calls Insimul tenuit, which
lies for a Co-parcner, or heir in Gavelkind, before partition, against him to
whom the other Co-parcner or heir has alienated, and is dead. Formdon in the
Reverter lies for the Donor or his heirs, (where Land is entailed to certain
persons, and their Issue, with condition, for want of such issue, to revert to
the Donor and his heirs,) against him to whom the Donee alienateth, after the
issue extinct, to which it was entailed, Formdon in the Remainder, lies, where
a Man gives Lands in Tail, the Remainder to another in Tail, and afterward
the former Tenant in Tail dies without issue of his body, and a stranger
abates, then he in Remainder shall have this Writ, Reg. of Writs, fol. 238.
242. Of this see also the New Book of Entries, verbo, Formdon, and Coke on
Litt. fol. 326. b.

Fornagium, (Fr. Fournage,) -- Et Dominus Rex proinde amittit per an. de
exitibus Fornagii sui x. libras. Pl. coram Rege and ejus Council. in Parl. 18
Ed. 1. in Turr. Land. It signifies the Fee taken by a Lord of his Tenants,
bound to Bake in his common Oven, (as is usual in the North of England,) or for
a permission to use their own; also Chimney-Money, or Harth-silver. See Furnage.

Fornication, (Fornicatio, Anno 1 Hen. 7. ca. 4.) Whoredom, the Act of
Incontinency, in single persons; for, if either party be Married, it is
Adultery; The first offense herein was punished with three Months
Imprisonment, the second was made Felony, by a Rump-Act. Scobels Collection,
Anno 1650, ca. 10.

SUffex. Praeceptum est Vic. quod venire faciat Juratores, qui in Assisa Nov.
Disseisinae dubium fecerunt Sacramentum tangen. quandam Agnetam quam dixerant
esse filiam Simonis de Punde patris praedictae Agnetae, and non dixerint esse
haeredem. Et in eo quod dixerint quod Matilda, quae fuit matter Agnetae, fuit
uxor dicti Simonis, and non dixerunt utrum Patria habebat eam ut uxorem ejus.
Qui Juratores dicunt quod praedictus Simon semper tenuit dictam Matildam ut
uxorem suam, and dicunt quod nunquam dictam Matildam, matrem dictae Agnetae
desponsavit; Sed dicunt quod praedictus Simon aliquo tempore captus fuit per
amicos praedictae Matildae in Camera Fornicando cum ipsi Matilda, per quod
compellebatur unum de tribus facere, uxorem vel ipsam affidare, vel vitam suam
amittere, vel ipsam Matildam retro osculare; ita quod ipse Simon ibidem dedit
fidem suam praedictae Matildae, matri praedictae Agnetae, quod ipsam desponsare
debuit, sed ipsam nunquam alio modo desponsavit, etc. Ideo praedicta Matilda de
Kingsford soror praedictae Simonis recepit seisin. de 1 Messuag. etc. in
Shepley, etc. Adam Gurdon and alii in misericordia. Pasch. 4 Ed. 1. Rot. 7.
Sussex.

Forprise, (Forprisum, from the Fr. For, i. Extra and Prise captio,) An
exception, or reservation; In which sense it is used in the Stat. of Exon, 14
Edw. 1. but there written Horseprise: We still use it in Conveyances and
Leases, wherein Excepted and Forprised is an usual expression.

C'est Indenture fet enter Monsieur John Blount Chevalier le Eysne dune part,
and Dame Johan Fouleshurst d autre part, Tesmoigne, que mesme les parts sont
issint assentuz, accordez, and assurez, que John Blount filts and heir a dict
Monsieur John deuy espousera, and prendera a femme Isabel la file de dite Dame
du si brief and dew temps, que la dite Dame a ces properes custages voidera
ordeigner and feire, issint que le dit Dame pay a dit Monsieur John xx Marks
a temps de l'espousels, and xl. Livers a certain de pay, compris en un
Obligation, le quelle le Dite Dame a fait a dit Monsieur John, etc. Pour quel
payment le dit Monsieur John enfeoffera ou fera enfeoffer les susdits John son
fits, and la dite Isabel de son Manner jouste Utteskesather, appelle Blounts
place, ensemblement ove toutes autres terres, tenements, rentes, services, etc.
Forprise le Park, etc. appelle Blounts Park, etc. A avoir, and tener a dit
John son fits, and Isabel and les heirs que mesmes cely John des Corpse de
mesme cely Isabel engendera, etc. Donnee south les seals, etc. le jour de St.
Luke, L' an de R. le Roy Henry 4 disme. Penes Wall. Kirkham-Blount Baronet.

Foreign, Used for Forreiner. Anno 34 and 35 Hen. 8. ca. 18. See Foreign.

Forschoke, (Derelictum,) Signifies originally as much as forsaken in our
modern language. It is specially used in one of our Statutes, for Land or
Tenements seized by the Lord, for want of Services due from the Tenant, and so
quietly held and possessed beyond the year and day. As if we should say, that
the Tenant, who, seeing his Land or Tenements taken into the Lords hand, and
possessed so long, takes not the course appointed by Law to recover them, does,
in due presumption of Law, disavow or forsake all the right he has to them; And
then such Lands shall be called Forschoke, says the Stat. 10 Edw. 2. ca. unico.

Forses, (Catadupae,) Water falls. Came. Brit. tit. Westmorland.

Forstal, (Forestallamentum,) Is to be quit of Amerciaments and Cattle arrested
within your Land, and the Amerciaments thereof coming, says the Terms of the
Law: But, the Learned Spelman says, it is Viae obstructio, vel itineris
interceptio; with whom agrees Coke on Litt. fol. 161. b. In Domesday it is
written Foristel. -- Dedique eis Forstallum, quod est ante portum ipsorum,
liberum atque quietum, and terram quae jacet ex utraque part ejusdem
Forstalli, etc. Mon. Angl. 2 Part. fol. 112. 60.

Forstalling, (Viarum obstructio, a Sax. far. i. Via, and stel,) Signifies the
buying or bargaining for any Corn, Cattle, or other Merchandise, by the way,
before it comes to any Market or Fair to be sold, or by the way, as it comes
from beyond the Seas, or otherwise, toward any City, Port, Haven, or Creek of
this Realm, to the intent to sell the same again at a more high and dear price.
51 H. 3. Stat. 6. West, Part. 2. Symbol. tit. Inditements, Sect. 64. --
Forstaller, (in Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 153.) Is used for stopping a Deer,
broken out of the Forest, from returning home again, or laying between him and
the Forest, in the way he is to return. Fleta says, Significat obtrusionem viae
vel impedimentum transitus and fugae averiorum, lib. 1. ca. 47. See Regrators
and Engrossers. Who shall be adjudged a Forstaller see in 5 and 6 Edw. 6. ca.
14. Forstal est, si aliquis portaverit Halec vel hujusmodi res ad forum, and
statim alius venerit and emerit ab ipso illas res; ut carius vendat, Prior
habebit emendas ab ipso. Ex Reg. Priorat. de Cokesford. See 3 Part. Inst. fol.
195.

Fortility, (Fortalitium vel Forteletum,) ( -- Within the Towns and Fortilities
of Berwick and Carlisle. Anno 11 Hen. 7. ca. 18.) Signifies a fortified place, a
Bulwark, Castle, or Fortlet.

Fortlet, (Fr.) A place of some strength, a little Fort. Old Not. Br. fol. 45.

Fossa et Furca. See Furca.

Fossatum, (Lat.) A Ditch, or a place fenced with a Ditch or Trench. -- Ex dono
Hen. Regis avi nostri unum Fossatum tam largum, quod naves possint ire and
redire a flumine de Withonia usque ad Tupholme. Carta 20 Hen. 3. m. 9. where it
seems to signify a (cut) River.

Fosse-way, (from Fossus, dug;) Was anciently one of the four grand
Highways of England; so called, because it is conceav'd to be dug, or made
passable by the ancient Romans, or Ditch'd at least on one side, but, now
several inferior Highways are so called. See Watlingstreet.

Foster-land, (Sax.) Land-given, assigned, or allotted to the finding of Food
or Victuals, as in Monasteries for the Monks.

Fother or Fodder (Sax.) Is a Weight (of Lead) containing Eight Pigs, and every
Pig One and twenty Stone and a half, which is about a Tun, or a common Wain or
Cart Load. Speight in his Annotations upon Chaucer. I find also in the Book of
Rates, mention of a Fodder of Lead, which (according to Skene) is about
Sixscore and eight Stone.

Founder (from fundere, to pour) Is he that melts Metal, and makes any thing of
it, by pouring or casting it into a Mold. Anno 17 Rich. 2. cap. 1.

Fourcher (Fr. fourchir, i. Titubare lingua) Signifies a putting off,
prolonging or delay of an Action: And it appears no unpleasant Metaphor; for,
as by stammering we draw out our speech, not delivering that we have to say, in
ordinary time, so by fourching, we prolong a snte that might be ended in a
shorter space. In Westminster. 1. cap. 42. you have these words, Coparceners and
Joyntenants shall no more fourch, but only shall habe one Essoyn, etc. And
Anno 6 Edw. 1. cap. 10. it is used in the same sense. -- The Defendants shall
be put to answer without fourching, etc. Anno 23 Hen. 6. cap. 2 See 2 Part.
Inst. fol. 250.

Foutgeld or Footgeld (Compounded of two German words, fous, i. pes, and
gyldan, i. solvere, q. pedis redemptio) Signifies an Amercement for not cutting
out the Balls of great Dogs Feet in the Forest. See Expeditate. And to be quit
of Footgeld, is a privilege to keep Dogs within the Forest, unlawed, without
punishment or control. Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 197. Manwood, part 1. page 86.
This privilege was allowed in Assis. Forest. de Pickring. 10 Edw. 3.

Fowls of Warren. See Warren.

Frampole Fences, Are such Fences as any Tenant, in the Manor of Writtel in
Essex, has against the Lords Demeans; whereby he has the Wood growing on the
Fence, and as many Trees or Poles, as he can reach from the top of the Ditch
with the Helve of his Ax, toward the repair of his Fence. I have heard the
late Chief Justice Bramston, whilst he was a Practiser and Steward of this
Court, did acknowledge he could not find out the reason why these Fences were
called Frampole. fram in Saxon signifies from, which seems to make out the
etimology; or it may come from the Sax. Fremful, profitable.

Franchise (Fr.) Is sometimes taken for a privilege or exemption from Ordinary
Jurisdiction, and sometimes an immunity from tribute. It is either Personal or
Real, (Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 141.) that is, belonging to a person immediately, or
else by means of this or that place, or Court of Immunity, whereof he is either
Chief, or a Member. In what particular things Franchises commonly consist, see
Britton, cap. 19. Franchise Royal (Anno 15 Rich. 2. cap. 4. and 2 Hon. 5. cap.
7. in Fine) Seems to be that where the Kings Writ runs not, as Chester and
Durham, which are called Seignories Royal, Anno 28 Hen. 6. cap. 4. And formerly
Tyndall and Examshire in Northumberland. 2 Hen. 5. cap. 5. Franchise Royal
(according to another Author) is where the King grants to one and his heirs,
that they shall be quit of Toll, or such like. See Franchise in the New Book of
Entries, and Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 5. See Sac.

Francigena. See Engleceric.

Francling. Qui libere tenet. A Freeholder. Vide Fortescu de LL. Angl. cap. 29.

Frank-almoin (Fr. Franc-ausmone) Is a Tenure or Title of Lands or Tenements
bestowed upon God, that is, given to such people, as devote themselves to the
Service of God, in pure and perpetual Alms; whence the Feoffors or Givers,
cannot demand any terresti-Service, so long as the Lands remain in the hands of
the Feoffees. Grand Custumary of Norm. cap. 32. Of this you may read Bracton at
large, lib. 2. cap. 5. and 10. and Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 211. New Book of
Entries, verbo, Frankalmoin. But Britton (cap. 66. number. 5.) makes another kind
of this Land which is given in Alms, but not free Alms, because the Tenants in
this are tied in certain Services to the Feoffor.

Frank-bank. See Freebench.

Frank-chase (Fr.) Is a liberty of Free chase, whereby all Men, having ground
within that compass, are prohibited to cut down Wood, etc. Without the view of
the Forester, though it be his own Demesne. Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 187.

Frank-fee (Feudum Liberum) Is (by Broke, tit. Demesne, number. 32.) thus
expressed; That which is in the hand of the King or Lord of any Manor, being
Ancient Demesne of the Crown (viz. the Demesns) is called Frank-fee, and that in
the Tenants hands is ancient Demesns only. See Reg. of Writs, fol. 12. a.
which says, that is Frank-fee which a Man holds at the Common Law to him and
his Heirs, and not by such Service as is required in Ancient Demesne, according
to the custom of the Manor. And that the Lands which were said to be in the
hands of King Edward the Confessor, at the making of Domesday Book, is Ancient
Demesne, and all the rest Frank-fee; wherewith Fitzherbert agrees (Not. Br. fol.
161.) So that all the Lands in the Realm by this Rule, are either Ancient
Demesne or Frank-fee. Another defines Frank-fee to be a Tenure in Fee-simple of
Lands, pleadable at the Common Law, and not in Ancient Demesne. Feudum francum
est, pro quo nullum servitium praestatur Domino, says Fachineus, lib. 7. cap.
39.

Frank-ferm (Firma Libera) Is Land or Tenement wherein the nature of Fee is
changed by Feosment out of Knights-service, for certain yearly services; and
whence neither Homage, Wardship, Marriage, nor Relief may be demanded, nor any
other Service not contained in the Feofment. Britton, cap. 66. number. 3. See
Fee-farm.

Frankfold, Is where the Lord has the benefit or folding his Tenants Sheep
within his Manor, for the Manuring his Land. Keil. Rep. fol. 198. a. Quod
vassallis olim and Usufructuariis denegatum, Maneriorum and praediorum Dominis
solum competebat, says Mr. Somner. It is compounded of the Fr. Franc, i. free;
and the Sax. fald, i. a Fold. See Faldage.

Frank-Law (Libera Lex) Is the benefit of the Free and Common Law of the Land.
He that for any offense, as Conspiracy, etc. loses his Franc-Law, is said to
fall into these mischeifs; first, That he may never be empanell'd upon any Jury
or Assise, or otherwise used in testifying any truth. Next, if he have any
thing to do in the Kings Court, he must not approach it in person, but appoint
his Attorney. Thirdly, his Lands, Goods, and Chattels, must be seized into the
Kings hands, and his Lands must be Estreaped, his Trees rooted up, and his Body
committed to prison. Thus Crompton in his Just. of Peace, fol. 156. Who cites
the Book of Assizes, fol. 59. See Conspiracy.

Frank-marriage (Liberum Maritagium) Is a Tenure in Tail-special, growing from
these words in the gift. Sciant, etc. me T. B. de O. dedisse and concessisse,
and presenti Charta mea confirmasse A. B. filio meo and Mariae uxori ejus,
filiae verae C. D. in liberum maritagium unum Messuagium, etc. West, par. 1.
Symbol. lib. 2. sect. 303. The effect of which words is, That they shall have
the Land to them, and the heirs of their Bodies, and shall do Fealty to the
Donor, until the fourth degree. Glanvile, lib. 7. cap. 18. and Bracton, lib. 2.
cap. 7. number. 4. where he divides Maritagium, in liberum, and servitio
obligatum. See Marriage. Fleta gives this reason why the heirs do no service
until the fourth degree, Ne Donatores vel little haercdes per homagii
receptionem, a reversione repellantur. And why, in the fourth descent and
downward, they shall do service to the Donor, Quia in quarto gradu vehementer
praesumitur, quod terra non est pro defectu haeredum Donatoriorum reversura,
lib. 3. cap. 11.

Frank-pledge (from the Fr. Frank, i. Liber and Pleige, i. Fidejussor)
Signifies a Pledge or Surety for Freemen. The ancient custom of England for
preservation of the Public Peace, was, that every freeborn Man, at fourteen
years of age (Religious persons, Clerks, Knights, and their eldest Sons
excepted) should find Surety for his Truth, toward the King and his Subjects,
or else be kept in Prison; whereupon a certain number of Neighbors became
customably bound one for another, to see each Man of their Pledge forth coming
at all times, or to answer the Transgression committed by any gone away. So
that whoever offended, it was forthwith enquired in what Pledge he was, and
then those of that Pledge, either brought him forth within thirty one days to
his answer, or satisfied for his offense. This was called Frank-pledge, and the
circuit thereof Decenna; because it commonly consisted of ten households; and
every particular person thus mutually bound for himself, and his Neighbors, was
called Decennier; because he was of one Decenna or other. This custom was so
kept, that the Sheriffs, at every County Court, did from time to time take the
Oaths of young ones, as they grew to Fourteen years of age, and see, that they
were settled in one Dozein, or another; whereupon this Branch of the Sheriffs
Authority was called Visus Franci-plegii, View of Frank-pledge. See the Statute
for View of Frank-pledge, Anno 18 Edw. 2. See Decennier, Leet, View of
Frank-pledge, and Friborgh. What Articles were wont to be enquired of in this
Court, see in Horns Mirror, lib. 1. cap. De la Veneu des Francs-pleges; and
what those Articles were in ancient times, see in Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 52. See
also 2 Part. Inst. fol. 73. -- And if there be any person within the Ward,
that is not under Franc-pledge, that is to say under love and Law, etc. Out
of an Ancient Charge of the Quest of Wardmore in every Ward in London.

Free-bench (Franc-bank, Francus Bancus, i. Seeds Libera) Signifies that estate
in Copihold Lands which the Wife, being espoused a Virgin, has, after the
death of her Husband, for her Dower, according to the custom of the Manor
(Kitchen, fol. 102.) As at Orleton in the County of Hereford, the relict or a
Cop holdtenant, is admitted to her Free-bench, that is, to all her Husbands
Copihold Lands, during her life, the next Court after her husbands death.
Bracton, lib. 4. tract. 6. cap. 13. number. 2. has these words. Consuetudo est in
partibus illis, quod uxores maritorum defunctorum habeant Francum Bancum suum
de terris Sockmannorum, and tenent nomine dotis. Fitzherbert calls it a Custom,
whereby in certain Cities the Wife shall have her Husbands, whole Lands, etc
for her Dower. Not. Br. fol. 150. See Plowden, Casu Newis, fol. 411.

Of this Free-bench, several Manors have several customs; As it is the custom
of the Manors of East and West Enborn in the County of Berks^ That if a
Customary Tenant dye, the Widow shall have her Free-bench in all his Copihold
Lands, Dum sola and casta fuerit, but if she commit Incontinency, she forfeits
her estate; yet if she will come into the Court riding backward on a Black Ram
with his tail in her hand, and say the words following, the Steward is bound,
by the Custom, to re-admit her to her Free-bench.

Here I am,
Kiding upon a Black ^am,
Like a Whore as I am.
And for my Crinoum Crancum
Have lost my Binkum Bankum.
And for my Tails Game,
Have done this Worldly shame.
Therefore I pray you ^r Steward let me have my Land again.
The like Custom is in the Manor of Tor in Devonshire, and other parts of the
West.

Free-bord, (Francbordus,) -- Et totum hoscum quod vocatur Brendewode, cum
Francbordo duorum pedum and dimid. per circuitum illius bosci -- Mon. Angl. 2
Part. fol. 241. a. In some places more, in some less, is claimed as a
Free-bord, beyond, or without the Fence.

Free-chappel (Libera Capella) Is (in the opinion of some) a Chapel founded
within a Parish for the Service of God, by the Devotion and Liberality of some
good Man, over and above the Mother Church, to which it was free for the
Parishioner to come, or not, and endowed with maintenance by the Founder, and
therefore called Free. Others say, and more probably, that those only are
Free-chappels, which are of the Kings Foundation, and by him exempted from the
Jurisdiction of the Ordinary; but the King may license a Subject to found such
a Chapel, and by his Charter exempt it from the Ordinaries Visitation also.
That it is called free, in respect of its exemption from the Jurisdiction of
the Diocesan, appears by the Register of Writs, fol. 40 and 41. These Chapels
were all given to the King with Chantries also, Anno 1 Edw. 6. ca. 14.
Free-Chappel of St. Martin le Grand. Anno 3 Ed. 4. ca. 4. and 4 Ed. 4. ca. 7.

Freedstoll. See Fridstoll.

Freehold, (Liberum tenementum,) Is that Land or Tenement which a Man holds in
Fee, Fee-tayl, or for term of life. Bracton, lib. 2. ca. 9. And it is of two
sorts; Freehold in Deed, and Freehold in Law: The first is the real Possession
of Land or Tenement in Fee, Fee-tail, or for Life; The other is the right that
a Man has to such Land or Tenement before his entry or seizure. Freehold is
likewise extended to those Offices, which a Man holds either in Fee, or for
life. Britton defines it to this effect, Franktenement is a possession of the
Soil or services issuing out of the Soil, which a Freeman holds in Fee, or at
least for life, though the Soil be charged with free-services, ca. 32. Freehold
is sometimes taken in opposition to Villenage.

Lambert, (in his explication of Saxon words,) Verbo, Terra ex scripto, says,
Land, in the Saxons time, was called, either Bockland, that is, holden by Book
or Writing; or Folckland, held without Writing: The former he reports was held
with far better condition, and by the better sort of Tenants, as Noblemen and
Gentlemen, being such as we now call Freehold: The later was commonly in the
possession of Clownes, being that which we now call, at the will of the Lord.
R^g. Judicial, fol. 68. a. says, That he, who holds Land upon an execution of
a Statute-Merchant, until he be satisfied the Debt, Tenet ut liberum tenementum
sibi and ussignatis suis; and fol. 73, the same of a Tenant per Elegit; where,
I conceive, the meaning is, not that such Tenants are Freeholders, but, as
Freeholders for their time, until they have received profits to the value of
their Debt. Freeholders in the ancient Laws of Scotland, were called Milites,
according to Skene, verbo, Milites.

Frenchman, (Francigena,) Was anciently used for every stranger. Bracton, lib.
3. Tract. 2. ca. 15. See Englecery.

Frendles man, Was the old Saxon word for him whom we call an Outlaw; The
reason was, because he was, upon his exclusion from the Kings Peace and
protection, denied all help of friends after certain days. Nam forisfecit
amicos. Bracton, lib. 3. Tract. 2. ca. 12. number. 1. says thus; Talem vocant
Angli Utlaugb, and alio nomine antiquitus solet nominari friendlesman, and sic
videtur, quod forisfecit amicos; and unde, si quis talem post utlagatariam and
expulsionem scienter paverit, receptaverit, vel scienter communicaverit aliquo
modo, vel occultaverit, eadem paena puniri debet, qua puniretur utlagatus; ita
quod careat omnibus bonis suis and vita, nisi Rex ei parcat de gratia sua.

Frendwite vel Infeng, Significat quietantiam prioris prisae ratione convivii.
Fleta, lib. 1. ca. 47.

Fresh disseisin, (from the Fr. Fraiz. i. Recens, and disseisir. i. Possessione
ejicere,) Signifies that Disseisin, which a man may seek to defeat of himself,
and by his own power, without the help of the King or Judges, and which is not
above fifteen days old. Britton. ca. 5. Of this you may read Bracton, lib. 4.
ca. 5. at large, concluding, that it is arbitrary.

Fresh fine, Is that, which was levied within a year past. Westminster. 2. ca. 45.
Anno 13 Edw. 1.

Fresh force, (Frisca fortia,) Is a force done within forty days, Fitz. Not.
Br. fol. 7. For, if a man be Disseis'd of any Lands or Tenements within any
City or Borough, or deforced from them after the death of his Ancestor, to whom
he is heir, or after the death of his Tenant for Life, or in Tail, he may,
within forty days after his title accrued, have his remedy by an Assise or
Bill of Fresh force. See Old. Not. Br. fol. 4. a.

Fresh suit, (Recens insecutio,) Is such a present and active following an
Offender, as never ceases, from the time of the Offense committed or
discovered, until he be apprehended: And, the benefit of the pursuit of a
Felon, is, That the party pursuing shall have his Goods restored him, whereas
otherwise they are the Kings; of this see Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 3. ca. 10 and
12. where you shall find what suit is to be accounted fresh, and what not. The
same Author, (lib. 1. ca. 27.) says, that fresh suit may continue for seven
years. See Cokes Reports, lib. 3. Rigeways Case. Fresh suit is either within
the view or without. For Manwood says, That upon fresh suit within the view,
trespassers in the Forest may be attached by the Officers pursuing them, though
without the limits of the Forest, pa. 2. ca. 19. number. 4.

Friar, or Friar, (Lat. Frater. Fr. Friar. i. A Brother) an Order of Religious
persons, of which these are reckoned the principal Branches, Anno 4 H. 4. ca.
17. viz. Minors, Grey-Friers, or Franciscans; Augustins; Dominicans, or
Blackfriars; and White-Friers, or Carmelites, from which the rest descend. See
Zecchius de Repub. Eccles. p. 380, and Linwood, tit. de relig. Domibus, c. 1.
verbo, Sancti Augustini.

Friburgh, alias Frithborg, (from the Sax. frith. i. Pax. and borge. i.
Fidejussor,) Is the same with Francpledge, the one being in use in the Saxons
time, the other since the Conquest; wherefore, for the understanding this read
Frankpledge, and the Laws of King Edward, set out by Lambert, fol. 232. in
these words; Praeterea est quaedam summa and maxima securitas, per quam omnes
statu firmissimo sustinentur, viz. ut unusquisque stabiliat se sub
fidejussionis securitate, quam Angli vocant, (Freoborghes,) soli tamen
Eboracenses dicunt eandem (Tienmannatale) quod sonat latin december hominum
numerum, etc. Bracton mentions Fridburgum, lib. 3. Tract. 2. ca. 10. in these
words, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Comites and Barons and omnes qui habent Soc
and Sak Tol and Team, and hujusmodi libertates, milites suos and proprios
servientes, Armigeros, etc. Dapiferos, and pincernas, camerarios, coquos,
pistores, sub suo Fridburgo habere debent. Item and isti suos armigeros and
alios sibi servientes; quod si cui forisfecerint, ipsi Domini sui habeant eos
ad rectum, and si non habuerint, solvant pro eis forisfacturam. Et sic
observandum erit de omnibus aliis qui sunt de alicujus manupastis. Where we
learn the reason, why Great Men were not combined in any ordinary Dozein;
because they were a sufficient assurance for themselves, and for their menial
servants, no less then the ten were one for another in ordinary Dozeins. See
Skone verbo Freiborgh. Fleta writes it Frithborgh, and uses it for the
principal man, or at least for one of the Dozein, lib. 1. ca. 47. See Hoveden
part poster. Annal. in Hen. 2. fol. 345. But Spelman makes a difference
between Friborg and Frithborg, saying, The first signifies libera securitas, or
fidejussio; the other pacis securitas.

Fridstoll et Frithflow, (from the Sax. frith, pax; stol, seeds, cathedra,
stow, locus) A Seat, Chair, or place of Peace. In the Charter of Immunities
granted to the Church of St. Peter in York, confirmed Anno 5 Hen. 7. Fridstol,
is expounded Cathedra quictudinis and pacis: Of these there were many others in
England, but, the most famous at Beverley, which had this Inscription, Haec
seeds lapidea Freedstoll dicitur, i. Pacis Cathedra, ad quam reus fugiendo
perveniens, omnimodam habet securitatem. Camd.

Friar observant, (Frater observans,) Is a branch of the Franciscans, which are
Minores tam observantes quam conventuales and Capuchini. These we find spoken
of An. 25 Hen. 8. ca. 12. who are called Observants, because they are not
combined together in any Cloister, Covent, or Corporation, as the Conventuals
are; but, only by themselves to observe the Rules of their Order, and more
strictly then the Conventuals do; and, upon a singularity of zeal, separate
themselves from them, living in certain places of their own choosing; of whom
you may read Hospinian de Orig. and progress. Monachatus. ca. 38. fol. 878.

Friperer, (Fr. Fripier. i. Interpolator,) One that furbushes and scowers up
old Apparel to sell again. It is used for a bastardly kind of Broaker. Anno 1
Jac. ca. 21.

Frithbrech, (Sax.) Pacis violatio. LL. Ethelredi. ca. 6. See Frythe.

Frithburgh. See Friburgh.

Frithmote -- Per Frithmote Jo. Stanley Ar. clamat capere annuatim de villa de
Olton, quae est infra Feodum and Manerium de Aldford infra Forestam de la Mara
x. sol. quos Comites Cestriae ante confectionem Cartae praedictae solebant
capere. Pl. in Itin. apud Cestriam. 14 Hen. 7.

Frithsocne et Frithsoke, (frith. i. Pax. and socne, Libertas,) Tuendae pacis
jurisdictio; or, (according to Fleta) Libertas habendi franci plegii; or,
immunitatis locus.

Froborg, or Freoburgh, (from the Sax. freo, i. Free; and borge. i.
Fidejussor.) See Friburgh and Franc-pledge.

Frodmortel, rectius Freomortel, (from the Sax. freo, Free, and Morth doed,
Murder) An Immunity or Freedom granted for Murder or Manslaughter.

Carta Adelstani Regis, Sancto Wilfrido de Rippon concessa.
Wit all that es and es began
Yat ik King Adelstan
As given als frelith as I may
And to ye Capitel of Seint Wilfrai
Of my free Devotion
Yair pees at Rippon
On ilke side the Makes it a Sanctuary.
Kyrke a mile
For all ilk deeds and ylke agyle
And within yair Kyrke yate
At ye stan yat Seeds pacis.
Grithstole hate.
Within ye Kyrke door and ya quare
Pair have pees for les and mare.
Ilkan of yis stedes sal have pees
Of Frodmortel and il deeds
Yat yair don is, Tol, Tem,
With Fire and water, Ordael.
Iron and with Water deem,
And yat ye Land of Seint Wilfrai
Of alkyn Free from Tax and Tribute.
geld fre sal be ay.
At nai nan at langes me to
In yair Frithsoke, or place of Immunity.
Herpsac sal have at do
And for ik will at yai be save
I will at yai alkyn freedom have:
And in all things be als free
As heart may think, or eygh may see
At te power of a King
Masts make free any thing. Ex Monast. Angl. 1 pa. fol. 172. b.

And my seal have I sat yerto
For I will at no Man it undo.
Frumgyld (Sax.) Prima capitis aestimationis pensio vel solutio. The first
payment made to the Kindred of a slain person, in recompense of his Murder. LL.
Aedmundi, cap. ult.

Frum-stol (Sax.) Seeds primaria, the chief Seat or Mansion House; by some
called the Fome-stal. LL. Inae Regis, cap. 38.

Frussura (from the Fr. Froissure) A breaking down or demolishing -- Dedi eis
nonam garbam tam in Frussuris, quae de novo fiunt, quam in etc. Mon. Angl. 2
Par. fol. 394. b.

Frustrum terrae, A small piece of Land. Residuum quiddam praeter acras
numeratas vel campum mensuratum. Cum in Domesday Frustrum terrae accipiatur pro
ampla portione seorsum a campo, villa, Manerio jacenti. Domesday, tit. Hantisc.
Rex. Abedestone. In Insula habet Rex unum Frustrum terrae unde exemit 61.
Vomeres. lego Frustum. Spelm.

Fryth. Sir Edward Coke (on Littl. fol. 5. b.) expounds it, a Plain between two
Woods, a Lawnd. Chaucer uses it for a Wood. Camden (in his Britan.) for an Arm
of the Sea, or great River, -- Makes his issue into the Estuary or Frith of
Thames. Smith (in his Englands Improvement) makes it signify all Hedg-wood,
except Thorns. How to reconcile these, I know not; but am sure the Saxon Frith,
signifies Peace.

Frythborgh, from the Sax. Frith, i. Pax, and borge, fidejussor. -- Et sint
quieti de Frythborgh, and de Blodewite, Fithwyte, and Ferdwyte, etc. Record.
Pasch. 6 Hen. 4. Rot. 24. It might here signify a Freedom from giving security
of the Peace.

Fuage or Focage (a foco) In the Reign of Edward the Third, the Black Prince of
Wales, having Aquitain granted him, laid an Imposition of Fuage or Focage upon
the Subjects of that Dukedom, viz. A shilling for every Fire, called
Herth-Silver. Rot. Parl. 25 Edw. 3.

Fuer (Fr. fuir, Lat. fugere) Though it be a Verb, yet it is used
substantively, and is twofold, Fuer en feit, (in facto) when a Man does
apparently and corporally fly; and Fuer en ley (in lege) when, being called in
the County, he appears not until he be outlawed, which is flighs in the
interpretation of Law. Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 3. cap. 22.

Fugacia, Signifies a Chase, and is all one with Chasea. Charta Matildis
Imperatricis Miloni de Glouc.

Fugitives Goods (Bona fugitivorum) Are the proper Goods of him that flies upon
Felony, which, after the flight lawfully found, do belong to the King, or Lord
of the Manor. Coke, vol. 6. fol. 109. b. See Waif.

Fumage (Fr.) Fumagium) Dung, or a Manuring with Dung. -- Et sint quieti de
Fumagio and Maremio cariando, etc. Carta R. 2. Priorat. de Hertland. Pat. 5 Ed.
4. par. 3. m. 13.

Fumathoes or Fumadoes (14 Car. 2. cap. 31.) Our Pilchards, garbaged, salted,
hanged in the smoke, and pressed, are so called in Italy and Spain, whither
they are carried in great numbers.

Furca (Seucatefurcia, and fossa, i. Gallows and Pit. In ancient Privileges it
signified a Jurisdiction of punishing Felons, that is, Men with Hanging; Women
with Drowning: Of which last, take this notable example out of the Records of
Rochester Church, in the time of Gilbert, Bishop there, who flourished under
Richard the First. Anno 1200.

Item duo mulieres venerunt in villam de Suffliete, quae furatae fuerunt multos
pannos in villa de Croindone, and secuti sunt eas homines ejusdem villae de
Croindone, quorum pannos furtiv^ asportaverunt usque in villam de Suffliete,
and ibi captae fuerunt and incarceratae, and habuerunt judicium suum in Curia
de Suffliete, ad portandum calidum ferrum, quarum una fuit salva, and altera
damnata, unde submersa fuit in Bikepole. Et hoc totum contigit tempore Gilberti
Domini Episcopi, and in quolibet judicio fuerunt Coronarii Domini Regis. Et
Paulus de Stanes fuit tunc Cacherellus de Hundredo de Acstane. Et per illud
tempus Robertus de Hecham Monachus fuit custos de Manerio de Suffliete, and ad
mulieres judicandas fuit Dominus Henricus de Cobeham, and alii plures homines,
discreti homines de Patria. Fossa is taken away, but Furca remains, says Sir
Edward Coke in his 3 Inst. fol. 58.

Furlong (Sax. Furlang) Is a quantity of Ground, containing for the most part,
forty Perches, or Poles in length, and every Pole sixteen foot and a half,
eight of which Furlongs make a Mile. Anno 35 Edw. 1. cap. 6. It is otherwise,
the eighth part of an Acre; yet I find in an old Book, Printed in Henry the
Eighth's time, That Six hundred Foot, by fivefcore to the Hundred, make a
Furlong. See Acre. In the former signification, the Romans call it Stadium, in
the later Jugerum.

Furlong, is sometimes used for a piece of Land of more or less Acres. Omnibus
Christi Fidel. -- Johannes Blount de Eye Arm. -- Dedit Thomae Croft and
Francisco Lovel Arm. unum Forlongum terrae arabilis continen. per aestimationem
quatuor Acras, etc. Dat. 20 Jan. 3 Eliz.

Furnage (Furnagium, Fr. Fournage) Est tributum quod Domino furni a
sectatoribus penditur ob furni usum. Multis enim in locis tenentur vasalli ad
coquendum panes suos in furno Domini. Est etiam lucrum seu emolumentum quod
pistori conceditur in pistionis sumptus and mercedem. Et tunc potest pistor de
quolibet quarterio frumenti lucrare 4 Den. and furfur, and duos panes ad
furnagium. Assisa panis and Cervisiae. Anno 51 Hen. 3. See Fornagium.

Furr (from the Fr. fourer, i. pelliculare, to line with Skins) The Stat. 24
Hen. 8. cap. 13. mentions diverse kinds of it; as Sables, which is a rich Fur
of color between Black and Brown, being the Skin of a Beast called a Sable, of
bigness between a Polecat, and an ordinary Cat, and of fashion like a Polecat,
bred in Russia, but most and best in Tartaria. Lucerns, which is the Skin of a
Beast so called, being near the bigness of a Woolf, of color between Red and
Brown, and mingled with Black-spots, bred in Muscovia and Russia, and is a very
rich Fur. Genets, that is the Skin of a Beast so called, of bigness between a
Cat, and a Weezle, mailed like a Cat, and of that nature, bred in Spain;
whereof, there are two kinds, Black and Gray, and the Black the more precious,
having black spots upon it hardly to be seen. Foins is of fashion like the
Sable, bred in France, for the most part; the top of the Fur is Black, and the
Ground whitish. Martern, is a Beast very like the Sable, the Skin something
courser, the best are in Ireland. Miniver, is nothing but the Bellies of
Squirrels, as some say; others say it is a little Vermin, like a Weezle, Milk
white, and comes from Muscovy. Fitch, is that which we otherwise call the
Polecat. Shanks are the Skin of the Shank or Leg, of a kind of Kid, which
bears the Fur, we call Budge. Calaber, is a little Beast in bigness near a
Squirrel, of color Gray, and bred most in High Germany.

Fustic, A kind of Wood, which Dyers use, and is brought from Barbados,
Jamaica, etc. Mentioned 12 Car. 2. cap. 18.

G.
GAbel (Gabella, Gablum. Sax. gafol alias gafel, Fr. Gabelle, i. Vectigal) has
the same signification among our old Writers, as Gabelle has in France; for
Camden (in his Britan, page 213.) speaking of Wallingford, says, Continebat 276
hagas, i. Domos reddentes novem libras de Gablo. And page 228. of Oxford, thus,
Haec urbs reddebat pro Telonio and Gablo and aliis consuctudinibus per annum
Regi quidem viginti libras and sex sextarios mellis; comiti vero Algaro december
libras. Gabella (as Cassanaeus defines it, de Consuetud. Burgund. page 119) est
vectigal quod solvitur pro bonis mobilibus, id est, pro his quae vehuntur. --
Distinguishing it from Tributum, quia tributum est proprie, quod fisco vel
principi solvitur pro rebus immobilibus.

Gafold-gyld (Sax.) The payment or rendering of Tribute or Custom. Also Usury.

Gafol-land alias Gafulland (Sax.) Terra censualis) Land liable to Tribute or
Tax,; rented Land, or Land letten for Rent. Sax. Dict.

Gage (Fr.) Lat. vadium) Signifies a Pawn or Pledge. Glanvile, lib. 10. cap. 6.
thus, Quandoque res mobiles ponuntur in vadium, quandoque res immobiles -- And
a little after, -- Invadiatur res quandoque ad terminum, quandoque sinc
termino. Item quandoque invadiatur res aliqua in mortuo vadio, quandoque non --
Though the word Gage be retained, as it is a Substantive, yet as it is a Verb,
use has turned the G. into W. So as it is oftener written Wage; as to Wage
Deliverance, i. To give security, that a thing shall be delivered: For, if he
that distrained, being sued, have not delivered the Cattle that were
distrained, then he shall not only avow the Distress, but Gager Deliverance,
i. Put in surety, that he will deliver them. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 74. D. and 67
F. yet in some Cases he shall not be tied to make this security, as if the
Cattle died in Pound. Kitchen, fol. 145. or if he Claim a Propriety in the
Cattle sued for. To Wage Law, see Law. See Mortgage.

Gager Deliverance. See Gage.

Gager del Ley. See Wage, and Wager of Law.

Gagers. See Gawgeors. This word is mentioned in Anno 12 Car. 2. cap. 4.

Gainage (Lat. Wainagium, i. Actus plaustri, vel plaustri apparatus. Fr.
Gaignage, i. The Gain or Crop of Tilled or Planted Grounds) Signifies the
Draught-Oxen, Horses, Wain, Plough, and Furniture for carrying on the work of
Tillage, by the baser sort of Soke-men and Villains; and sometimes the Land it
self, or the profit raised by cultivating it. Bracton, lib. 1. cap. 9.
(speaking of Lords and Servants) says -- Ut si eos destruant, quod salvum non
possit eis esse Wainagium suum -- And again, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 1. --
Villanus non amerciabitur, nisi salvo Wainagio suo. For, anciently, as it
appears both by Mag. Char. cap. 14. and other Books, The Villain, when amerced,
had his Wainage free, to the end, the Plough might not stand still: And the Law
for the same reason, does still allow a like Privilege to the Husbandman, that
his Draught-Horses and Oxen are not, in many Cases, distrainable. This in Magna
Charta, cap. 14. is called Wainage. I find in old Not. Br. fol. 117. -- The
Writ was abated for that the Oxgang is always of a thing that lies in Gainor.
This word was only used of Arable Land, because they that had it in
occupation, had nothing of it, but the profit, and fruit raised of it by their
own labor, toward their sustenance, nor any other Title, but at the Lords
Will. Gainor again in the same Book, fol. 12. is used for a Sokeman, that has
such Land in his occupation. In the 32 Chapter of the Grand Custumary --
Geigneurs are ruricolae qui terras elecmozynatas possident. And Britton uses
Gainer, to Plough or Till, fol. 65. a. and 42. b. West, pa. 2. Symb. tit.
Recoveries, sect. 3. says a Praecipe quod reddat lies not for such and such
things -- For they are not in Demesne, but in gain, etc. Lastly, in the Statute
of Distresses in the Exchequer, Anno 51. Hen. 3. I find these words, No man of
Religion, nor other, shall be distrained by his Beasts that gain the Land. See
Wainage.

Gainery, (Fr. Gaignerie) Tillage or Tilling, or the profit raised of Tillage,
or of the Beasts used therein. I have seen an old Lease that demised Omnes
terras: prat. and pastur. in M. vulgo vocat. le Gainerie, etc.

Gainure (Westminster. 1. cap. 6. and 17.) Tillage. See Gainerie.

Galege (Galicae) From the Fr. Galloches, which signified of old a certain
Shoo, worn by the Gauls in foul weather, as at present the signification with
us, does not much differ. It is mentioned Anno 4 Edw. 4. cap. 7. And 14 and 15
Hen. 8. cap. 9.

Gallihalpens, Was a kind of Coin, which with Suskins and Doitkins was
prohibited by the Stat. 3 Hen. 5. cap. 1.

Gang-week. See Rogation week.

Gaol, From the Fr. Geole, i. Caveola. A Cage for Birds; and thence
Metaphorically used for a Prison: So Geolier, whom we call Gayler or Jailer.

Garb (Garba) Fr. Garb alias Gerbi, i. fascis) Signifies a bundle or sheaf of
Corn. Charta de Foresta, cap. 7. And Garba sagittarum is a Sheaf of Arrows.
Skene, verbo, Garba. De omni annona decima garba Deo debita est. LL. Edovardi
Conf. cap. 8.

Garbles (Anno 21 Jac. cap. 19.) Signify the Dust, Soil, or Uncleanness, that
is severed from good Spice, Drugs, etc.

Garbling of Bow-staves, Anno 1 Rich. 3. cap. 11. Is the sorting or culling out
the good from the bad; As garbling of Spice, Drugs, etc. (1 Jac. cap. 19.) is
nothing but to purify it from the dross and dust that is mixed with it; and to
sever the good from the bad: It may come from the Italian Garbo, that is
Fineries or Neatness. See 4 Inst. fol. 264.

Garbler of Spices (Anno 21 Jac. cap. 9.) Is an Officer of Antiquity in the
City of London, who may enter into any Shop, Warehouse, etc. to view and search
Drugs, Spices, etc. And to garble, and make clean the same.

Garderobe. See Wardrobe, and a Inst. fol. 255.

Guard (Fr. Guard, Lat. Custodia) Signifies a custody or care of defense; but
has diverse Applications; sometimes to those that attend upon the safety of the
Prince, called the Lifeguard, and Yeomen of the Guard; sometimes to such as have
the education and guardianship of Infants or Idiots; sometimes to a Writ
touching Wardship; of which there were three sorts, one called Droit de guard,
the second Ejectment de guard, the third Ravishment de guard. Fitz. Not. Br. fol.
139, 140. See Ward and Guardian.

Guardian or Guardian (Fr. Gardien, Sax. ^ardung, Lat. Custos) Signifies
generally him that has the charge or custody of any person or thing; but most
notoriously him that has the education or protection of such people as are not
of sufficient discretion to guide themselves, and their own affairs, as
Children and Idiots, being indeed as largely extended, as both Tutor and
Curator among the Civilians. For whereas Tutor, is he that has the Government
of a Youth, until he come to fourteen years of age; and Curator, he that has
the disposition, and ordering of his substance afterward, until he attain to
twenty five years, or that has the charge of a Frantic person, during his
Lunacy; we use for both these a Guardian only, of which, we have three sorts
in England; one ordained by the Father in his last Will, another appointed by
the Judge afterward: The third cast upon the Minor by the Law and Custom of the
Land.

But the Ancient Law in this Case is, in a great measure, altered by the
Statute of 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. which ordains that, Where any person has, or
shall have any Child or Children under the age of Twenty one years, and not
married at the time of his death, it shall be lawful for the Father of such
Child or Children, whether born at the time of the decease of the Father, or
at that time in ventre sa mere, or whether such Father be within the age of
Twenty one years, or of full age, by Deed executed in his life time, or by his
last Will and Testament in writing, in the presence of two or more credible
Witnesses, to dispose of the Custody and Tuition of such Child or Children,
for, and during the time, be, or they shall remain under age, or any lesser
time, to any Person, or Persons in Possession or Remainder, other then Popish
Recusants; and such disposition shall be good against all Persons claiming such
Child as Guardian in Soccage, or otherwise, etc. And in case the Father
appoint no Guardian to his Child, the Ordinary may appoint one to order his
Movables and Chattels, until the age of fourteen years, and then he may choose
his Guardian: And for his Lands, the next of Kin, on that side by which the
Land descends not, shall be Guardian, as heretofore, in case of a Tenure in
Soccage.

Guardian, or Guardian of the Spiritualties, (Custos Spiritualium vel
spiritualitatis,) Is he, to whom the Spiritual jurisdiction of any Diocese is
committed, during the vacancy of the Sea, Anno 25 Hen. 8. ca. 21. And, I take
it, the Guardian of the Spiritualties may be either Guardian in Law, ot Jure
Magistratus, as the Archbishop is of any Diocese within his Province; or
Guardian by Delegation, as he whom the Archbishop, or Vicar General does for
the time depute, Anno 13 Eliz. ca. 12.

Guardian of the Peace, (Custos pacis.) See Conservator of the Peace.

Guardian of the Cinque Ports, (Gardianus quinque portuum,) Is a Magistrate that
has the Jurisdiction of those Havens, which are commonly called the
Cinque Ports; that is, the five Havens: who there has all that jurisdiction the
Admiral of England has in places not exempt. Camden, in his Britan. pa. 238.
says; The Romans, after they had settled themselves and their Empire here in
England, appointed a Magistrate or Governor over those East-parts, where our
Cinque Ports lie, whom they termed Comitem littoris Saxonici per Britanniam,
having another that bore the same title on the opposite part of the Sea; whose
Office was, to strengthen the Seacoast with Munition against the outrages and
Robberies of the Barbarians; and believes, this Warden of the Cinqueports was
first erected among us, in imitation of that Roman Policy. See Cinque Ports.

Gardein de L'estemery, (Anno 17 Car. 1. ca. 15.) Warden of the Stanneries.

Gare, (Anno 31 Ed. 3. ca. 8.) Is a course Wool, full of staring hairs, such as
grows about the Pesil, or Shanks of the Sheep.

Gariofilli, Rectius Gariophylli, The Spice called Cloves. -- Et salvo
haeredibus meis post decessum meum uno clavo Gariofil. in praedicto Festo
Sancti Mich. pro omni servicio saeculari, etc. Carta Hugonis de Wygeton
Priorat. Leominstr. Anno 1283.

Garnish, as, to garnish the Heir. i. To warn the heir, Anno 27 Eliz. ca. 3.

Garnishee, Is taken for the party in whose hands Money is attached within the
liberties of the City of London; so used in the Sheriff of London's Court;
because he has had garnishment, or warning not to pay the Money, but to appear
and answer to the Plantiff-creditors Suit.

Garnishment, (Fr. Garnement,) Signifies a warning given to one for his
appearance; and that for the better furnishing the Cause and Court. For
example, one is sued for the detinue of certain Charters, and says, They were
delivered to him, not only by the Plaintiff, but by J. S. also, and therefore
prays, that J. S. may be warned to plead with the Plaintiff, whether the
conditions are performed or no; and, in this petition he is said to pray
Garnishment. New Book of Entries, fol. 211. col. 3. which may be interpreted a
warning to J. S. to provide himself of a defense, or else a furnishing the
Court with all parties to the action, whereby it may thoroughly determine the
Cause. Britton (cap. 28.) says, Contracts are some naked and sans garnement,
and some furnished, or (to use the literal signification of his word)
apparelled, etc. Howbeit Garnishment is generally used for a warning; As in
Kitchen, fol. 6. Garnisher le Court, is, to warn the Court; and, reasonable
garnishment in the same place, is reasonable warning. And in the Stat. 27 Eliz.
ca. 3. -- Upon a Garnishment or two Nichils returned, etc.

Garranty. See Warranty.

Garter, (Fr. Jartier. i. Periscelis, fascia poplitaria,) Signifies, both in
diverse Statutes and otherwise, one special (...)r, being the Ensign of a great
and noble Society of Knights, called Knights of the Garter. This high Order (as
appears by Camd. pa. 211.) was instituted by that famous King Edward the Third,
upon good success in a Skirmish, wherein the Kings Garter, (the time or
occasion not mentioned,) was used as a token. Pol. Virgil casts in a suspicion
of another original; but, his grounds, by his own confession, grew from the
vulgar opinion, however, it runs thus; The said King, after he had obtained
diverse great Victories, King John of France, King James of Scotland, being both
prisoners in the Tower of London at one time, King Henry of Castile, the
Bastard, expulsed, and Don Pedro restored by the Prince of Wales, did, upon no
weightier occasion, first institute this Order in Anno 1350, viz. He dancing
with the Queen, and other Ladies of the Court, took up a Garter that happened to
fall from one of them, whereat some of the Lords smiling, the King said, That
ere long he would make that Garter to be of high reputation, and shortly after
instituted this Order of the Blew Garter, which every Companion of the Order is
bound to wear daily, richly adorned with Gold and Precious Stones, and having
these words wrought upon it, HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENCE; which is thus
interpreted, Evil be to him, that evil thinks; or rather thus, Shame take him
that thinks evil.

Sir John Fern, in his Glory of Generosity, fol. 120. agrees with Camden, and
sets down the victories, whence this Order was occasioned; whatsoever cause of
beginning it had, the Order is inferior to none in the World, in Honor or
Antiquity, consisting of 26 Martial and Heroical Nobles, whereof the King of
England is the Chief, and the rest are either Nobles of the Realm, or Princes
of other Countries, friends and confederates with this Nation; the Honor being
such, as Emperors, and Kings of other Nations have desired, and thankfully
accepted, it being long before the order of St. Michael in France, the Golden
Fleece in Burgundy, or the Anunciada in Savoy. The Ceremonies of the Chapter,
proceeding to Election, the Investitures and Robes, the Installation, Vow, with
such other observations see in Segars Honor militar and civil, lib. 2. ca. 9.
fol. 65. See Knights of the Garter, and Seldens Titles of Honor, fol. 792.

Garter also signifies the Principal king at Arms among our English Heralds,
attending upon the Knights thereof, created by King Henry the Fifth, and
mentioned in the Statute 14 Car. 2. ca. 33. See Herald.

Garth, In the North of England signifies a Backside, or a little Close or
Homestead; also a Dam or Wear in a River, where Fish are caught, called a
Fish-garth. It seems to be an ancient British word; For, Gardd in that language
signifies a Garden, the dd being liquefy'd in the pronunciation like th.

Garthman, Anno 17 Rich. 2. ca. 9. It is ordained, that no Fisher, nor
Garthman, shall use any Nets or Engines to destroy the fry of fish, etc. Whereby
it seems to signify one that keeps or owns an open Wear, where Fish are
caught. It may happily be derived from the Scottish word Gart, which signifies
forced or compelled, because the Fish are forced by the Wear to pass in at a
loop, where they are caught.

Gavel, (Sax. gafel,) Tribute, Toll, Custom; yearly Rent, Payment or Revenue;
Of which we had of old several kinds paid by Tenants to their Landlords; As
Gavel-Corn, Gavel-malt, Oate-gavel, Gavel-fodder; As you may read in Mr. Fabian
Philip's Book, Entitled, Mistaken Recompense, pa. 39 and 40.

Gavelet, Is a special and ancient kind of Cessavit used in Kent, where the
Custom of Gavelkind continues; whereby the Tenant shall forfeit his Lands and
Tenements to the Lord; if he withdraw from him his due Rents and Services;
after this manner. -- The Lord must seek, by the award of his Court, from three
weeks to three weeks, to fin I some distress upon the Tenement, until the
fourth Court, always with Witnesses; and, if in that time he can find none,
then at the fourth Court let it be awarded, that he take the Tenement into his
hand, in name of a Distress, and keep it a Year and a day without Manuring;
within which time, if the Tenant pay his Arrears, and make reasonable amends
for the withholding, let him have and enjoy his Tenement as before; and, if he
come not before the year and day be past, let the Lord go to the next
County Court with his Witness of what past at his own Court, and pronounce
there this Process to have further Witnesses; and then, by the award of his own
Court, he shall enter and Manure the Tenement as his own: And, if the Tenant
will afterward re-have it, and hold it as he did before, let him make
agreement with the Lord, according to this old saying, Neghesith selde and
neghesith geld, and v l. for his Were, er he become healder. i.

Has he not since any thing given, nor any thing paid,

Then let him pay 5 l. for his Were, ere he become healder again.



Other Copies have the first part thus written, and expounded. Nigondsith yield
and nigonsith geld.
Let him 9 times pay, and 9 times re-pay.


Of this see 10 Hen. 3. Fitz. tit. Cessavit 60, and the Stat. of Gavelet, 10
Edw. 2. which gives this Law to Lords of Rents in London. And see Westminster. 2. ca.
21. which gives Cessavit.

Gavelkind, (from the Sax gafel. i. Census, tributum, and cynd, Natura, Genus.)
But Doctor Powel in his Additaments to the Cambrian History, and from him
Tailor in his History of Gavelkind, fol. 26. would have it derived from the
British word, Gavel, importing a Hold, or Tenure; however, it signifies a
Tenure, or Custom, whereby the Lands of the Father are equally divided at his
death among all his Sons; or, the Land of the Brother among all the Brethren,
if he have no Issue of his own. Teutonicis priscis patrios succedit in agros
Mascula stirps omnis, ne foret ulla potens.


This Custom is still of force in Kent, Urchenfeild in Herefordshire, and
elsewhere, though with some difference. But, by the Stat. 34 and 35 Hen. 8. ca.
26. All Gavelkind Lands in Wales are made descendable to the Heir, according to
the course of the Common Law. Camden, in his Brit. says thus -- Cantiani ea
lege Gulielmo Normanno se dediderunt, ut patrias consuetudines illaesas
retinerent, illamque inprimis quam Gavelkind nominat. Haec a terrae, quae eo
nomine censentur, liberis masculis ex aequis portionibus dividuntur, vel
faeminis, si masculi non fuerint. Adding further, Hanc haereditatem, cum
quintum decimum annum attigerint, adeunt, and sine Domini consensu cuilibet,
vel dando, vel vendendo alienare licet. Et filii parentibus, furti damnatis, in
id genus fundi succedunt, etc. It appears by 18 Hen. 6. ca. 1. That in those
days, there were not above 30 or 40 persons in all Kent, that held by any
other Tenure: which was afterward altered, upon the petition of diverse Kentish
Gentlemen, in much of the Land of that County, by Stat. 31 Hen. 8. ca. 3. See
Lamberts Perambulation of Kent, and Sumners learned Discourse on this Subject.
-- Dedi totam terram, quam vendidit mihi Michael de Turnham, sicut suum liberum
Gavilikinde and Stoikikinde, ad fundandum ibi Domum Religionis, etc. Mon. Angl.
2 Par. fol. 640. a.

Gavelsester, (Sax.) Sextarius vectigalis; Cervisiae scilicet sextarius Manerii
vel praedii Domino ab usufructuariis cervisiam coquentibus, census vel
vectigalis nomine, pendendus,) A certain Measure of Rent-Ale. Among the
Articles to be charged on the Stewards and Bailiffs of the Church of
Canterburies Manors in Kent, (according to which they were to be accountable,)
this of old was one; De Gavel-sester cujuslibet bracini braciati infra
libertatem Maneriorum, viz. unam lagenam and dimidiam Cervisiae. It elsewhere
occurs under the name of Tol-sester, thus; De Tolsester Cervisiae, hoc est de
quolibet bracino per unum annum lagenam de Cervisia. And, is undoubtedly the
same; in lieu whereof the Abbot of Abington was wont of Custom to receive that
Penny mentioned by Seldom in his learned Dissertation annexed to Fleta, ca. 8.
number. 3. and there, (by some mistake happily of the Printer,) written
Colcester-peny, for Tol-sester-penny. Nor differs it, (I think) from what in
the Glossary, at the end of Hen. 1. Laws, is called Oale-gavel. Sax. Dict. and
see Tolsester.

Gawgeor, or Gager, (from the Fr. Gauchir. i. In gyrum torquere,) Signifies an
Officer of the Kings, appointed to examine all Tuns, Pipes, Hogsheads, Barrels,
and Tercians of Wine, Oil, Honey, Butter, and to give them a Mark of
allowance, before they are sold in any place: And, because this Mark is a
Circle made with an Iron Instrument for that purpose, it seems thence to take
name. Of this Officer and Office we have many Statutes, the first is, Anno 27
Ed. 3. commonly called the Statute of Provision, or Purveyors, ca. 8. 23 Hen.
6. ca 16. etc. and the last, is 12 Car. 2. ca. 4.

Gawge-peny, Seems to be the Gaugeors Fee; by Anno 23 Hen. 6. ca. 16.

Geld, (Geldum) Mulcta, compensatio delicti and precium rei. Hence in our
ancient Laws Wergild was used for the value or price of a Man slain; and
Orfgild, of a Beast. Also Money, or Tribute. -- Et sint quieti de Geldis and
Danegeldis and Horngeldis and Fotgeldis, and de Blodwita and Fitwita, and
Flitwita, and Leirwita, and Heingwita, and Fremenefeuda, and Werdpeni, and
Averpeni, and Hundredpeni, and Tolingpeni -- Carta Ric. 2. Priorat. de Hertland
in Devon. Pat. 5 Ed. 4. part. 3. M. 13. See Gild.

Geldable. See Gildable.

Gemote, (Sax.) Conventus) Omnis homo pacem habeat eundo ad Gemotum and rediens
de Gemoto, nisi probatus fur fuerit. LL. Ed. Conf. ca. 35. See Mote.

General Issue. See Issue.

Geneath, (Sax. Rectius, geneat) Villanus, villicus, firmarius. L. Inae. MS.
ca. 19. Regis Geneath. i. Villanus.

Generosa, Is a good addition; And, if a Gentlewoman be named Spinster in any
Original Writ, Appeal or Indictment, she may abate and quash the same. 2 Inst.
fol. 668.

Gentleman, (Generosus, nobilis) from the Fr. Gentil. i. Honestus vel honesto
loco natus, and the Saxon Mon, as if you would say, a Man well-born, or a
Gente, or Genere; the Italian calls them Gentilhuomini; under this Title are
comprised all that are above Yeomen; so that Noblemen are truly Gentlemen; But,
by the course and custom of England, Nobility is either Major or Minor; the
greater contains all Titles and degrees from Baronets upward, the lesser all
from Barons downward. Smith de Repub. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 20. and 21. The reason
of the name, grows from this, that they observe Gentilitatem suam, that is, the
race and propagation of their Blood, by bearing Arms, which the common sort,
neither does, nor may do. Tully in his Topics speaks thus of this subject,
Gentiles sunt, qui inter se eodem sunt nomine ab ingenuis oriundi, quorum
majorum nemo servitutem servivit, qui capite non sunt diminuti. Gentilis homo
for a Gentleman, was adjudged a good addition. Hill. 27 Edw. 3. The addition of
Knight is ancient, but of Esquire or Gentleman, rare, before 1 Hen. 5. cap. 5.
See 2 Part. Inst. fol. 595. and 667.

Gersuma (Sax. gaersuma, i. Sumptus, praemium) In ancient Charters it is used
for a Fine or Income. As, Sciatis me A. pro tot libris, quas B. mihi dedit in
Gersumam, dedisse, concessisse, etc. And -- Gersumam capere de Nativa vestra
impregnata sinc licentiae vestra, quod dicitu Childwit. In Matthew. Paris it is
written Gersoma. Datis Abbati tribus marcis auri in Gersoma, i. e. Pro Fine,
and in Scotland Gressume.

Gestu and fama, Is a Writ now out of use, Lamb. Eiren. lib. 4. cap. 14. page
532.

Gethbrech (Rectius Grithbreche) Si pacem quis fregerit ante mediocres
Forestae, quod dicunt Gethbrech, emendet Regi december solidis. Constitut. Canuti
de Foresta cap. 18. See Grithbreche.

Gigmills were used for the perching and burling of Woollen-Cloth, and
prohibited Anno 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 22. They were a kind of Fulling Mills.

Gild (Anno 18 Car 2. cap. 1.) Signifies chiefly a Fraternity or Company,
combined together with Orders and Laws made among themselves by the Princes
license, and they had their Annual Feasts and Neighborly Meetings: But as to
the direct time, when these Gilds had their origin in England, there is nothing
of certainty to be found, since they were in use long before any formal
Licenses were granted to them, for such Meetings. Edward the Third, in the
Fourteenth of His Reign, granted License to the Men of Coventry to erect a
Merchants Gild, and a Fraternity of Brethren and Sisters, with a Master or
Warden; and that they might make Chantries, bestow Alms, do other Works of
Piety, and constitute Ordinances touching the same, etc. So Henry the Fourth,
in the Fourth year of His Reign, granted License to Found a Gild of the Holy
Cross at Stratford upon Avon. See Mr. Dugdales Antiquities of Warwickshire,
fol. 119. and 522. Gild or Geld (according to Camden) signifies also a Tribute
or Tax, and the Statutes of 27 Edw. 3. stat. 2. cap. 13. and 11 Hen. 7. cap. 9.
use Gildable in the same sense with Taxable. Whence Gild in the first
signification does proceed, because they support their common charge by a
mutual Contribution. Gild (according to Crompton in his Jurisdictions, fol.
191.) Signifies an Amercement, as Foot-geld; and fol. 197. he interprets it to
be a prestation within the Forest, in these words, To be quit of all manner of
Gilds, is to be discharged of all manner of Prestations, to be made for
gathering Sheaves of Corn, Lamb, and Wool, to the use of Foresters. The word
is also mentioned in the Stat. 15 Hen. 6. cap. 6. and 15 Car. 2. cap. 7.

Gildale (from the Sax. gild, i. solutio and oele, ale) A compotation, where
every one paid his share. See Sothale.

Gildable or Geldable, (Geldabilis) That is liable to pay Tax or Tribute.
Camden dividing Suffolk into three parts, calls the first Gildable. It is
mentioned Anno 27 Hen. 8. cap. 26. But I find Gildable expounded in an old MS.
to be that Land or Lordship, which is Sub districtione Curiae Vice-com. See 2
Part. Inst. fol. 701. Inquisitio capta apud Atherston, etc. 5 Hen. 5. per
Sacram. Will. Peirs and aliqui dicunt quod Johannes Chestershire, qui tenet
unum tenementum and duo crofta cum pertin. in le Geldable de Johanne Lile per
quod servitium ignorant, erexit crucem S. Johannis Hierosol. super Domum suam,
ad habendum privilegium and libertat. Templar. de Balshale, eo quod teneret
praedict. tenementum sub Cruce in praejudicium Dom. Regis and contra formam
Statuti inde edit, etc. MS. penes Gul. Dugdale Ar. Jur. dicunt quod Prior de
Sempringham tenet tres Carucatas terrae in S. and non sunt Geldabiles. Ex Rot.
Hundr. in Turr. Land. de Anno 3 Edw. 1. Linc.

Gild-hall (i. Gildae aula) The chief Hall of the City of London so called.
Gildarum nomine continentur non solum minores fraternitates and sodalitia, sed
ipsae etiam Civitatum Communitates, says the Learned Spelman. See Gild.

Gildhalda Teutonicorum, Was used for the fraternity of Easterling Merchants in
London, called the Stilyard. Anno 22 Hen. 8. cap. 8.

Gild-merchant (Gilda Mercatoria) Was a certain Privilege or Liberty, granted
to Merchants, whereby they were enabled (among other things) to hold certain
Pleas of Land within their own Precincts.

Giltwite. See Gyltwite.

Gisarms rectius Guisarmes (An. 13 Edw. 1. Stat. 3. cap. 6.) A kind of
Hand-Ax, according to Skene. Fleta writes it Sisarms, lib. 1. cap. 14. Est
armorum genus longo manubrio and porrecto cuspide. Spel.

Gleab-land (Gleba) Church-land, Dos vel a terra ad Ecclesiam pertinens. Charta
Elredi Regis Magnae Britanniae Monast. de Croiland, apud Ingulphum: Inprimis
totam Insulam Croilandiae pro Gleba Ecclesiae, and pro situ seperali ejusdem
Monasterii -- Dono. Lindwood says, Gleba est terra in qua consistit Dos
Ecclesiae. Mentioned in the Statute of 14 Car. 2. cap. 25. We most commonly
take it for Land belonging to a Parish Church, besides the Tithe. Skene says,
The four Acres of Land, quhilk is given to the Ministers of the Evangel in
Scotland, is called ane Gleeb, the quhilk should be free fra payment of any
teinds.

Go, Is sometimes used in a special signification, as to go without day; and to
go to God, is as much as to be dismissed the Court. Broke, tit. Failer de
Records, number. 1. And Kitchen, fol. 193.

Goaling of Uagabonds, i. Sending them to the Goal. Anno 35 Eliz. cap. 7.

God-bote (Sax.) Mulcta ex delictis in Deum admissis obveniens. A Fine or
Amerciament for crimes and offenses against God; an Ecclesiastical or Church
Fine.

Good-behavior. See Good abearing.

Goldwith vel Goldwich. In the Records of the Tower, there is mention of
Consuetudo Vocata Goldwith vel Goldwich; but no Explication of it. Ideo quare.

Good abearing (Bonus gestus) Is by a special signification, an exact carriage
or behavior of a Subject toward the King, and his Liege People, whereunto some
Men, upon their misbehavior or loose demeanure, are sometimes bound: For as
Lambert, in his Eiren. lib. 2. cap. 2. says, He that is bound to this, is more
strictly bound, then to the Peace; because, where the Peace is not broken
without an afray, battery, or such like, this surety De bono gestu, may be
forfeited by the number of a Man's company, or by his or their Weapons or Arms,
whereof see more in that Learned Writer, and in Crompt. Just. of Peace, fol.
120. and 127.

Good Country (Bona Patria) Is an Assize or Jury of Contrymen or good
Neighbors. Skene, verbo, Bona Patria.

Goole (Fr Goulet) (Anno 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. 11. A breach in a Bank or
Sea-wal; or a passage worn by the Flux and Reflux of the Sea.

Gorce (from the Fr. Gort, i. a Wear.) Locus in fluvio coarctatus, piscium
capiendorum gratia; a Wear. It is accorded, That all such Gorces, Mills, Wears,
Stanks, Stakes, and Kiddles, which be levied and set up in the time of King
Edward, the Kings Grandfather, and after, whereby the Kings Ships and Boats be
disturbed, that they cannot pass in such River, as they were wont, shall be out
and utterly pulled down, without being renewed. Anno 25 Edw. 3. cap. 4. Sir
Edward Coke (on Littl. fol. 5. b.) seems to derive it from Gurges, a deep Pit
of Water, and calls it a Gors or Gulf. But quaere, if not a mistake.

Got (Anno 23 Hen. 8. cap. 5.) A Ditch, Sluice, or Gutter; perhaps from the
Sax. geotan, Fundere.

Graduats (Graduati) Are such Scholars as have taken degrees in any
University. Anno 1 Hen. 6. cap. 3.

Graffer (Fr. Greffier, i. Scriba) Signifies a Notary or Scrivener; and is used
in the Stat. 5 Hen. 8. cap. 1.

Graile (Gradale, seu Graduale) A Gradual or Book containing some of the
Offices of the Roman Church. Gradale (inquit Lindwodus) sic dictum a gradalibus
in tali libro contentis. Provincial. Angl. lib. 3. The word is mentioned in
Plowden, fol. 542. And 37 Hen. 6. fol. 32. It is sometimes taken for a
Mass Book, or part of it, instituted by Pope Celestine, Anno 430. according to
Cotgrave.

Grand Assize. See Assize, and Magna Assisa.

Grand Cape. See Cape and Attachment.

Grand days, Are one in every Term, solemnly kept in the Inns of Court and
Chancery, viz. Candlemas-day in Hillary Term; Ascension-day in Easter Term; S.
John Baptist-day in Trinity Term; and All Saints in Michaelmas Term; and these
are Dies non juridici, no days in Court.

Grand Distress (Districtio Magna) Is so called, not for the quantity, for it
is very short, but for the quality, for the extent is very great; for thereby
the Sheriff is commanded, Quod distringat tenentem, ita quod ipse, nec aliquis
per ipsum ad ea manum apponat, donec habuerit aliud praeceptum, and quod de
exitibus eorundem nobis respondeat, and quod habeat corpus ejus, etc. This Writ
lies in two Cases, Either when the Tenant or Defendant is attached, and so
returned, and appears not, but makes default, then a Grand Distress is to be
awarded; or when the Tenant or Defendant has once appeared, and after makes
default, then this Writ lies by the Common Law, in lieu of a Petit Cape. 2
Part. Inst. fol. 254. Anno 52 Hen. 3. cap. 9. Westminster. 1. cap. 44.

Grand Sergeanty. See Chivalry and Sergeanty.

Grange (Grangia) Is a House or Farm, not only where are necessary places for
all manner of Husbandry; as Stables for Horses, Stalls for Cattle, etc. But
where are Barns and Granaries for Corn, Haylofts, etc. And by the Grant of a
Grange, which is often in Conveyances, such places will pass. Provinc. Angl.
lib. 2. tit. de Judiciis, ca. Item omnis.

Grant (Concessio) Signifies a Gift in writing of such a thing, as cannot aptly
be passed or conveyed by word only: As Rent, Reversions, Services, Advowsons
in Gross, Tithes, etc. or made by such persons as cannot give, but by Deed, as
the King, and all Bodies Politic; which differences are often in speech
neglected, and then it is taken generally for every gift whatsoever, made of
any thing by any person, and he that grants it, is called the Grantor, and he
to whom it is made, the Grantee. West, part 1. Symbol. lib. 2. Sect. 334. And a
thing is said to Lie in Grant, which cannot be assigned without Deed. Coke,
lib. 3. Lincoln-Colledge Case.

Great Men, Are most commonly understood to be the Temporal Lords of the Higher
House of Parliament: As Anno 43 Edw. 3. cap. 2. and 8 Rich. 2. in Proaem. And
sometimes of the Members of the House of Commons, as Anno 2 Rich. 2. stat. 2.

Greathbreach or Greachbreach, Is mistaken by Saxton in his Description of
England, cap. 11. And by Rastal, for Grith-breche, which Vide.

Gree (Fr. Gre, i, Will, allowance, or liking) Signifies agreement,
contentment, or good-liking: As to make gree to the parties, is to satisfy
them for an offense done. Anno 1 Rich. 2. cap. 15. And in 25 Edw. 3. cap. 19.
It is said, That Judgment shall be put in suspense, till Gree be made to the
King of his Debt, where it signifies satisfaction. See Agreement.

Green-cloth. See Counting House.

Greenhew (from Green, and the Sax. hewn, i. viridis) Is all one with Vert.
Manwood, part. 2. of his Forest Laws, cap. 6. number. 5. See Vert.

Green Silver (Viride Argentum) It is an ancient Custom within the Manor of
Writtel in Com. Essex, that what ever Tenant has his fore door opening to
Greenbury, pays a halfpenny yearly to the Lord of the Manor, by the name of
Green-silver.

Green Wax seems to be used for Estreats delivered to the Sheriffs, out of the
Exchequer, under the Seal of that Court (made in Green Wax) to be levied in the
Counties. Anno 42 Edw. 3. cap. 9. and 7 Hen. 4. cap. 3. See Foreign Apposer.

Gressume. See Gersuma.

Greve (Sax. Gerefa) Is a word of Power and Authority signifying as much as
Comes or Vice-comes; and hence our Shyreeve, Portgreve, etc. See Hoveden, Part
poster. annal. fol. 346. where he says, Greve dicitur, ideo quod jure debeat
Grith, i. Pacem ex illis facere, qui Patriae inferunt vae, i. miseriam vel
malum. From whence, but with less power and dignity, is derived the word Reve,
Bailiff, or under Officer of the Lord of a Manor. See Shyreve and Portgreve.

Grils (Anno 22 Edw. 4. cap. 2.) A kind of small Fish.

Grithbreche (Sax. grith-bryce, i. Pacis fractio seu violatio) Breach of the
Peace. In causis Regiis Grithbreche 100 Sol. -- Emendabit. LL. Hen. 1. cap. 36.
and Carta Will. Conq. Eccles. Sancti Pauli, in Hist. ejusdem, fol. 190.
Grithbreche, i. Quod Prior tenebit Placita de illis qui frangunt pacem Regis
vel libertatis ipsius Prioris. Ex Reg. Priorat de Cokesford.

Grithstole (Sax.) Seeds Pacis. A Sanctuary. See Frodmortel.

Grocers, by the Stat. 37 Edw. 3. cap. 5. Were Merchants that engrossed all
Merchandise vendible. Now it is a particular Trade, well known.

Gross boys (Fr. Gros bois, i. Great Wood) Signifies specially such Wood as
has been or is, either by the Common Law or Custom of the Country, Timber. 2
Part Instit. fol. 642.

Grossome, Signifies a Fine, and is a corruption from, or a Law-French word for
the Saxon Gersuma. For thus Plowden, fol. 271. Et le dit I. K. grt per m le
Indenture a payer en le fine de le dit term de 10 ans al dit W. N. dize Mill
de titles, ou le value de eux en argent, en nosme de Grossome. And in fol. 285.
it is written Gressame. -- Absque aliquo le Gressame, vel fine pro praemissis
solvend. See Gersuma.

Growm (Anno 43 Edw. 3. cap. 10. Seems to be an Engine to stretch Woollen-cloth,
soon after it is woven.

Growth-halfpeny, A halfpenny so called, and paid in some places for Tithe of
every fat Beast, Ox, and other unfruitful Cattle. Claytons Rep. page 92.

Gruarii (of whom you shall read in Forest Records) derived from the Fr.
Gruyer, signifies generally the principal Officers of the Forest.

Guest-takers or Gist-takers. See Agistors.

Guadage or Guidage (Guadagium and Guidagium) Est quod datur alicui, ut tuto
conducatur per terram alterius: That which is given for safe conduct through
unknown ways, or a strange Territory. Sir Edw. Coke calls this an old legal
word, 2 Inst. fol. 526.

Gule of August (Gula Augusti) Westminster. 2. cap. 30. 27 Edw. 3. Stat. 3. Fitzh.
Not. Br. fol. 62. Plow. Casu Mines, fol. 316. Is the very day of S. Peter ad
Vincula, which is celebrated on the first day of August, and called the Gule of
August, from the Latin Gula, i. a Throat; the reason is set down in Durands
Rationale, (lib. 7. cap. 19.) who says, That one Quirinus, a Tribune, having a
Daughter that had a disease in her Throat, went to Alexander, then Pope of
Rome, the Sixth from S. Peter, and desired of him to borrow, or see the Chains,
that S. Peter was chained with under Nero, which being obtained, the said
Daughter kissing the Chains, was cured of her disease, and Quirinus with his
Family was baptized. Tunc dictus Alexander Papa hoc Festum in Calendis Augusti
celebrandum instituit, and in honorem Beati Petri Ecclesiam in Urbe fabricavit,
ubi vincula ipsa reposuit, and Ad Vincula nominavit, and Calendis Augusti
dedicavit. In qua Festivitate populus illic ipsa vincula hodie osculatur. So
that this day, being before called only the Calends of August, was upon this
occasion termed indifferently, either S. Peter's day, Ad Vincula, from the
Instrument that wrought the miracle; or the Gule of August, from that part of
the Virgin, whereon the miracle was wrought. Averagium aestivale fieri debet
inter Hokeday, and Gulam Augusti. Rentale Manerii regalis de Wy.

Gultwit (according to Saxton in his description of England, cap. 11.) Is an
amends for Trespass. But I find no such word either in Spelmans Gloss. Sax.
Dict. or Ancient Record. Therefore, doubtless, mistaken for Gylewite, which
Vide.

Gust (Hospes) is used by Bracton for a Stranger or Guest that lodges with us
the second night. Lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10. In the Laws of S. Edward,
published by Lambert, number. 27. it is written Gest. Of this see more in Uncouth.

Gwabr-merched, Is a British word, signifying a Payment or Fine made to the
Lords of some Manors, upon the Marriage of their Tenants Daughters; or
otherwise upon their committing Incontinency. See Marchet and Lairwite.

OMnibus -- Jacobus Baskervile Miles, Dominus Manerii de Yrsley (Com. Heref.)
salutem. Noveritis me praefatum Jacobum remisisse Johanni ap John Haered. and
assign. suis totum jus, titulum, etc. quod habeo de and in quibusdam Serviciis
aut reditibus exeunt. de tenemento quod praedictus Johannes tenet de me in
praedicto Manerio, quae servitia aut reditus sequntur, viz. Moch-meswryd,
otherwise called Mastswine. Gwarthegan Claimai, otherwise called Cowyeld.
Gwabr-Merched, otherwise called Lairwite. Arian-Yihen, otherwise called
Ox-Silver. Gwasanaethen, otherwise called Work-Silver. And Deiliad-Moor,
otherwise called Tenant in Moor. Ita quod nec ego praedict. Jac. nec haeredes
mei aliquod jus, etc. in praedictis serviciis in futur. habere poterimus, etc.
Dat. 16 Oct. 4 Edw. 6. Penes Joh. Stead Genesis

Gwalstow (Gwalstowum, a Sax. gwal, i. Patibulum, and stow, locus.) Locus
patibuli seu occidendorum. Omnia Gwalstowa, id est, occidendorum loca,
totaliter Regis sunt in soca sua. LL. Hen. 1. cap. 11.

Gyltwite -- Habeatque ipse Episcopus (sc. Oswaldus Ep. Weorgeceastre) omnesque
sui successores ibi ad jus Ecclesiasticum, debita transgressionum and paenam
delictorum, quae nos dicimus Ofersegenesse and gyltwite, and omnia quaecunque
Rex in suis Hundredis habet. Ex ipso Autographo Eadgari Regis Dat. Anno 964.
Penes serenissimam Majestatem CAROLI 2 Regis. A compensation or amends for
Trespass or Fraud; Mulcta pro Transgressione.

H.
HAbeas Corpus, Is a Writ, which a Man, indicted or a Trespass before Justices
of Peace, or in a Court of any Franchise, and imprisoned for it, may have out
of the Kings Bench, thereby to remove himself thither at his own costs, and to
answer the cause there. Fitzh. Not. Br. fol. 250. And the order in this case
is; first, to procure a Certiorari out of the Chancery directed to the said
Justices for removing the Indictment into the Kings Bench, and upon that, to
procure this Writ to the Sheriff, for the causing of his body to be brought at
a day, Reg. Jud. fol. 81. where you shall find diverse cases wherein this Writ
is allowed.

Habeas Corpora, Is a Writ that lies for the bringing in a Jury, or so many of
them as refuse to come upon the Venire facias, for the trial of a Cause brought
to issue. Old Not. Br. fol. 157. See great diversity of this Writ in the Table
of the Reg. Judic. and the New Book of Entries, verbo, Habeas Corpora.

Habendum, Is a word of course in a Conveyance, in every of which, are two
principal parts, the Premises, and the Habendum. The Office of the first is,
to express the name of the Grantor, the Grantee, and the thing granted. The
Habendum is to limit the estate, so that the general implication of the estate,
(which by construction of Law, passes in the Premises) is by the Habendum
controlled and qualified. As in a Lease to two persons, the Habendum to one for
life, the Remainder to the other for life, alters the general implication of
the Joyntenancy in the Freehold, which should pass by the Premises, if the
Habendum were not. Coke, vol. 2. Bucklers Case, fol. 55. See Use.

Habere facias Seisinam, Is a Writ Judicial, which lies, where a Man has
recovered Lands in the Kings Court, directed to the Sheriff, and commanding him
to give him Seisin of the Land recovered. Old Not. Br. fol. 154. whereof see
great diversity in the Table of the Reg. Judic. This Writ is issuing sometimes
out of the Records of a Fine executory, directed to the Sheriff of the County,
where the Land lies, and commanding him to give to the Cognizee, or his Heirs,
Seisin of the Land, whereof the Fine is levied; which Writ lies within the
year after the Fine, or Judgment upon a Scire Facias, and may be made in diverse
Forms. West, part 2. Symb. tit. Fines, sect. 136. There is also a Writ, called
Habere facias seisinam, ubi Rex habuit annum, diem and vastum; which is for the
delivery of Lands to the Lord of the Fee, after the King has taken his due of
his Lands, who was convict of Felony. Reg. of Writs, fol. 165.

Habere facias visum, Is a Writ, that lies in diverse cases, as in Dower,
Formedon, etc. Where a View is to be taken of the Lands or Tenements in
question. See Fitz. Not. Br. in Indice, verbo (View.) Bracton, lib. 5. tract.
3. cap. 8. and Lib. 5. part 2. cap. 11. See View.

Haberjects or Haubergets (Haubergettae) A kind of Cloth. Una sit latitudo
pannorum tinctorum, russatorum, and Haubergettarum, scil. Duae ulnae infra
listas. Mag. Charta, cap. 26.

Habillements of War (Anno 31 Eliz. cap. 4.) Armor, Harness, Utensils, or
Provisions for War; without which, Men have not ability to maintain War. 3
Part. Instit. fol. 79.

Hables, Is the Plural of the French Hable, signifying a Seaport or Haven. The
word is used 27 Hen. 6. cap. 3.

Hadbote (Sax) Was a recompense or satisfaction for the violation of Holy
Orders, or violence offered to persons in Holy Orders. Sax. Dict.

Hade of Land (Hada terrae) -- S^rsum reddidit in manus Domini duas acras
terrae, continens december Seliones and duas Hadas, Anglice, Ten Ridges, and two
Hades, jacen^ int. terr. -- Manner. de Orleton, Anno 16 Jac.

Haerede deliberando ali^, qui habet custodiam terrae, Was a Writ directed to
the Sheriff, willing him to command one that had the body of him, who was Ward
to another, to deliver him to him, whose Ward he was, by reason of his Land.
Reg. of Writs, fol. 161. b.

Haerede abducto, Is a Writ that lay for the Lord, who having by right the
Wardship of his Tenant under age, could not come by his body, being conveyed
away by another. Old Not. Br. fol. 93. See Ravishment de Guard, and Haerede
rapto, in Reg. of Writs, fol. 163.

Haeretico comburendo, Is a Writ that lay against him, that was an Heretic,
viz. Who, having been once convict of Heresy by his Bishop, and having abjured
it, fell afterward into it again, or into some other; and was thereupon
committed to the Secular power. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 269. This Writ lies not at
this day, according to Sir Edward Coke, in his 12 Rep. fol. 93.

Hafne Courts, Hafne is a Danish word, and signifies with us a Haven or
Seaport. Letters Patent of Richard, Duke of Gloucester, Admiral of England, 14
Aug. Anno 5 Edw. 4. have these words. -- Ulterius dicunt quod dicti Abbas and
Conventus and praedecessores sui habent and habere consueverunt per idem tempus
in praedictis villis (Bancaster and Ringstead) cum Hulmo quasdam Curias Portus,
vocatas Hafne Courts, tenendas ibidem ad placitum Abbatis, etc. Haven or
Port-Courts 4 Inst. fol. 147.

Haga (Sax. Haeg, i. Domus, a House.) In Domesday, tit. Sussex. Terra Rogerii,
number. 11. Radulfus tenet unam Hagam de xii Denar. Willielmus quinque Hagas de
quinque Sol, etc. An ancient anonymous Author expounds Haga to be Domus cum
Shopa. -- Cum novem praefatae Civitatis habitaculis, quae patria lingua Hagan
appellari solent. Charta Ethelredi Regis, in Auctario Matthew. Paris. fol. 240.
Coke on Littl. fol. 56. b. See Haw.

Hagbut. See Haque and Haquebut.

Haia, A Hedge, and sometimes taken for a Park or Enclosure. Vallatum fuit and
inclausatum fossato Haia and palatio. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 40. number. 3. Hence
Haiement for a Hedg-fence. Rot. Inq. 36 Edw. 3. in Scac. de Foresta.

^aiebote (from the Fr. Hay, i. sepes, and the Sax. Bote, i. compensatio) Is
used for a permission or liberty to take Thorns and Freeth, to make or repair
Hedges.

Halsfange. See Pillory and Healfang.

Half-mark (Dimidia Merkae) Is a Noble. Fitzherbert (in Not. Br. fol. 5.) says,
That in case a Writ of Right be brought, and the Seisin of the Demandant, or
his Ancestor alleged, the Seisin is not traversable by the Defendant, but he
may tender the Half-mark for the enquiry of this Seisin; which is in plainer
terms, that the Defendant shall not be admitted to deny, that the Demandant or
his Ancestor was seized of the Land in question, and to prove his denial, but
that he shall be admitted to tender Half a Mark in Money, to have an Enquiry
made, whether the Deinandant, etc. were so seized, or not. And in this
signification we read the same words in the Old English, Not. Br. fol. 26. b.
See also Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 31.

Half-seal, Is used in the Chancery for the sealing of Commissions to
Delegates, appointed upon any Appeal in Ecclesiastical or Marine Causes. Anno 8
Eliz. cap. 5.

Half-tong. See Medietas Linguae.

Halimote alias Healgemot, (from the Sax. Hease, i. aula, and gemot, i.
conventus) Is that we now call a Court Baron; and the etymology is the Meeting
of the Tenants of one Hall or Manor. Omnis causa terminetur vel Hundredo, vel
Comitatu vel Halimot, socum habentium, vel Dominorum Curia. LL. Hen. 1. cap.
10. The name is still retained at Luston, and other places in Herefordshire.

Hereford Palatium
Ad Halimot ibidem tent. 11. die Oct. Anno Regni Regis Hen. 6. 24. Venit
Johannes Garneston and Juliana Uxor ejus in plena Curia, etc.

It is sometimes taken for a Convention of Citizens in their Public Hall,
which was also called Folkmot and Halmot. As in London every Company has a
Hall, wherein they keep their Courts. 4 Inst. fol. 249. Also a Holy or
Ecclesiastical Court.

Hall (Halla, Sax. Healle) Was anciently taken for a Mansion House or
Habitation. Domesday, tit. Chent. Terra Hugonis de Mountfort. In Newcerct
Hundred ipse Hugo tenet unam terram quam Azor Rot tenuit de R. E. (Rege
Edovardo) sine Halla, i. sine domo.

Hallage (Fr.) Is a Fee or Toll due for Clothes brought for sale to
Blackwel-Hall in London. Coke, vol. 6. fol. 62. b. Also the Toll that is due to
the Lord of a Fair or Market, for such Commodities as are vended in the Common
Hall of the place.

Hallam-shire (Anno 21 Jac. cap. 31.) Was a part of Yorkshire, where the Town
of Sheffield stands.

Halsfang. See Healfang.

Ham (Sax.) A House or Habitation; also a Village or Town. Hence our many Towns
end with it, as Nottingham, Buckingham, Walsingham, etc.

Hambles, Is the Plural of the French Hable, signifying a Port or Haven of the
Sea. Mentioned 27 Hen 6. cap. 3.

Hameling or Hambling of Dogs, Is all one with Expeditating. Manwood (Part. 1.
fol. 212. and part. 2. cap. 16. number. 5.) says, This is the ancient term that
Foresters used for that matter. See Expeditate.

Hamel, Hamlet, Hampsel, Are Diminutives of Ham; and signify a little Village,
or rather part of a Village; of which three, the word Hamlet is now only used,
though Kitchen uses both Hamel and Hampsel. The Learned Spelman upon these
words, showing the difference betwixt Villam integram, villam dimidiam and
Hamletam, says thus. -- Hamletam vero, quae medietatem friborgi non obtinuit,
hoc est ubi quinque Capitales plegii non deprehensi sint. The Statute of Exon,
14 Edw. 1. mentions this word thus -- Lez nosmes de toutes les villes and
Hamlets que sont en son Wapentake, etc. In an ancient MS. I find it expounded,
the seat of a Freeholder.

Hamfare (Sax.) Insultus factus in domo. See Gloss. in x. Scriptores.

Hamsoken (Sax. Hamsocn) The Liberty, Privilege, or Freedom of a Man's own
House, or home; also a Franchise or Privilege so called, granted to the Lords
of Manors, whereby they hold Pleas, and take Cognizance of the breach of that
immunity. Sax Dict. Significat quietantiam misericordiae intrationis in alienam
Domum vi and injuste. Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 47. Concedo libertatem and
potestatem, jura, consuetudines and omnes forisfacturas omnium terrarum suarum,
i. Burgheritha, and Hundred-Setena, Athas, and Ordelas, and Infangtheofas,
Hamsorne, and Fridebrice, and Forstel, and Toll, and Team, in omni Regno meo,
etc Char. Donationis ab Edmundo Rege Eccles. Sanctae Mariae Glaston. Our
ancient Records express Burglary under this word Hamsocne. See Homesoken.

Handborow (Sax. Borg-hand, i. a Surety) Est quasi vas aut fide jussor
manuensis, hoc est, minor seu inferior; nam Headborow vas est capitalis vel
superior. Spelman.

Hand in, and hand out (Anno 17 Edw. 4. cap. 2.) Is the name of an unlawful
game, how disused.

Handful, Is four inches by the Standard. Anno 33 Hen. 8. cap. 5.

Handy-warp, A kind of Cloth made at Coksal, Bocking, and Braintree in Essex,
and mentioned in the Statute of 4 and 5 Phil. and Ma. cap. 5.

Hanifare. See Hinefare.

Hankwit alias Hangwite (from the Sax. Hangian, i. suspendere, and pite,
mulcta) Is (according to Kastal) a Liberty granted to a Man, whereby he is quit
of a Felon or Theif, hanged without judgment, or escaped out of custody. We
read it interpreted Mulcta pro homine injuste suspenso. And elsewhere, Mulcta
pro latrone praeter juris exigentiam suspenso vel elapso. Q. Whether it may not
also signify, a liberty whereby a Lord challenges the forfeiture due for him,
who hangs himself within the Lords Fee? See Bloudwit.

Hanper or Hanaper of the Chancery (Anno 10 Rich. 2. cap. 1.) Seems to
signify, as Fiscus originally does in Latin. See Clerk of the Hanaper.

Hanse (an old Gothish word) Signifies a Society of Merchants, combined
together for the good usage, and safe passage of merchandise from Kingdom to
Kingdom. This Society was, and in part, yet is endued with many large
Privileges of Princes respectively within their Territories. It had four
Principal Seats or Staples, where the Almain or Dutch Merchants being the
Erectors of this Society, had an especial House, one of which was here in
London called Guildhalda Teutonicorum, vulgarly, the Steelyard. See Ortelius
Index, verbo, Ansiatici. -- Et quod habeant Gildam Mercatoriam cum Hansa, etc.
Carta Hen. 7. Ball. and Burgens. Mountgomer.

Hap, (Fr. Happer, to catch or snatch) Signifies the same with us, as to hap
the possession of a Deed Poll, Littleton, fo. 8. To hap the rent; As, if
partition be made between two Parceners, and more Land be allowed to one then
the other, and she that has most of the Land, charges her Land to the other,
and she happeth the rent, she shall maintain Assise without specialty. Terms
Ley.

Haque, Is a hand-Gun of about three quarters of a yard long. Anno 33 H. 8. ca.
6. and 2 and 3 Ed 6. ca. 14. There is also the halfhaque, or demi-haque.

Haquebut, (Fr.) A kind of Gun or Caliver, otherwise called an Arquebuse. Anno
2 and 3 Ed. 6. ca. 14. and 4 and 5 Ph. and Ma. ca. 2.

Haratium -- Et decimas de dominio suo, de pratis, de bladis, parcis, Haratiis,
molendinis and de vivariis. Mon. Ang. 1. par. fo. 339. Probably from hara, a
Swinesty, it might signify the breed or stock of Swine.

Hariot, alias Heriot, (Heriotum) Sir Edward Coke on Litt. fo. 185. b. says,
This, (as he takes it) in the Saxon Tongue, is called Heregeat, that is, the
Lords Beast; for here, (says he) is Lord, and geat is Beast; from which I crave
liberty to dissent: For, Here in Sax. signifies an Army; and the Saxon
Heregeat, (from whence we derive our Heriot) Signified Provision for War, or a
Tribute given to the Lord of a Manor, for his better preparation toward War:
Erat enim Hereotum militaris supellectilis praestatio, quam obeunte vassallo,
Dominus reportavit in sui ipsius munitionem, says Spelman. And, by the Laws of
Canutus, it appears, that at the death of the great Men of this Nation, so many
Horses and Arms were to be paid, as they were in their respective lifetimes,
obliged to keep for the Kings Service. It is now taken for the best Beast a
Tenant has at the hour of his Death, due to the Lord by Custom, be it Horse,
Ox, etc. and in some Manors, the best piece of Plate, Jewel, or the best good.
Heriot is of two sorts; First, Hariot Custom, where Hariots have been paid time
out of mind by Custom, after the death of Tenant for life. 2. Hariot Service,
when a Tenant holds by such service to pay Heriot at the time of his death. For
this the Lord shall distrain, and for the other he shall seize, and not
distrain. If the Lord purchase part of the Tenancy, Hariot Service is
extinguished, but not so of Hariot Custom. Cokes 8 Rep. Talbots Case. See
Farley.

Heart, Is a Stag of five years old complete; And, if the King or Queen hunt
him, and he escape, then is he called a Hart-Royal; And, if by such hunting, he
be chased out of the Forest, Proclamation is commonly made in the places
adjacent, that in regard of the pastime the beast has afforded the King or
Queen, none shall hurt him or hinder him from returning to the Forest, then is
he a Hart-Royal Proclaimed. Manwood, Part 2. ca. 4. number. 5.

Harth-penny, and Harth-st^ver. See Chimney-Money, and Peter Pence.

Haubergets. See Haberjects.

Haw, (from the Sax. Haga) A small quantity of Land, so called in Kent; as a
Hemphaw, or Beanhaw, lying near the House, and enclosed for that use. Sax.
dict. But, I have seen an ancient MS that says, Hawes vocantur mansiones sive
domus. And Sir Edw. Coke (on Litt. fo. 5 b.) Says, in an ancient Plea
concerning Feversham in Kent, Haws are interpreted to signify Mansiones.

Haward. See Hayward.

Hawberk, or Haubert, quasi Hautberg, (Fr. Haubert. i. Lorica,) He that holds
Land in France by finding a Coat, or Shirt of Mayle, when he shall be called,
is said to have Hauberticum feudum, fief de Haubert -- Hauberk, or Haubergion,
with our Ancestors did signify as in France, a Coat or Shirt of Mayle, and it
seems to be so used Anno 13 Edw. 1. Stat. 3. ca. 6.

Hawkers, Those deceitful Fellows, who went from place to place buying and
selling Brass, Pewter, and other Merchandise, which ought to be uttered in open
Market, were of old so called. The word is mentioned Anno 25 Hen. 8. ca. 6. and
33 ejusdem, ca. 4. We now call those Hawkers, who go up and down London Streets
crying News-books, and selling them by retail; and, the Women who sell them by
wholesale from the Press, are called Mercury Women. The Appellation of Hawkers
seems to grow from their uncertain wandering, like those who with Hawks, seek
their Game where they can find it.

Haya, (Gal. Hay, Sax. Hege,) A Hedge; also a piece of Ground enclosed with a
hedge.

Hayward, (from the Fr. Hay, i. Sepes, and Guard, i. Custodia) Signifies one
that keeps the common herd of the Town; and, the reason may be, because one
part of his Office is to look that they neither break nor crop the hedges of
enclosed Grounds. He is a sworn Officer in the Lords Court, the form of whose
Oath you may see in Kitchen, fo. 46.

Hazarders, Are those that play at the Game at Dice, called Hazard; Hazardor
communis ludens ad falsos talos adjudicatur quod per sex dies in diversis locis
ponatur super collistrigium. Int. Plac. Trin. 2. Hen. 4. Sussex 10.

Headborow, (from the Sax. Head. i. Sublimatus. and Borge, fide jussor)
Signifies him that is chief of the Frankpledge, and that had the principal
government of them within his own pledge. And, as he was called Headborow, so
was he also called Burrowhead, Bursholder, Thirdborow, Tithingman, Chiefpledge,
or Borowelder, according to the diversity of speech in several places. Of this
see Lambert in his explication, etc. verbo, Centuria; Smyth de Rep. Angl. lib.
2. ca. 22. The same Officer is now called a Constable. See Constable.

Head-pence, Was an exaction of 40 l. and more, heretofore collected by the
Sheriff of Northumberland of the Inhabitants of that County, twice in seven
years; that is, every third and fourth years, without any account made to the
King; which was therefore by the Stat. 23 Hen. 6. cap. 7. Clearly put out for
ever. See Common Fine.

Head-silver. See Common Fine.

Healfang or Halsfang, Is compounded of two Saxon words Hals, i. Collum, and
fang, Captus; paena scilicet, qua alicui collum stringatur. See Pillory.

Hearth-money. See Chimney-money.

Heck, Is the name of an Engine to take Fish in the River Owse by York. Anno 23
Hen. 8. cap. 18.

Heda, A Haven or Port. Domesday.

Heir (Haeres) Is he that succeeds, by right of Blood, in any Man's Lands or
Tenements in Fee; for nothing passes Jure Haereditatis, but Fee. By the Common
Law a Man cannot be Heir to Goods or Chattels, for Haeres dicitur ab
Haereditate. Every Heir, having Land by descent, is bound by the binding Acts
of his Ancestors, if he be named, Qui sentit commodum, sentire debet and onus.
Coke on Littl. fol. 7, 8.

Last Heir. See Last.

Heire-lome (from the Sax. Heier, i. haeres, and leome, i. membrum) Omne
utensile robustius quod ab aedibus non facile revellitur, ideoque ex more
quorundam locorum ad haeredem transit, tanquam membrum haereditatis. Spelm. It
comprehends diverse implements of Household, as Tables, Presses, Cupboards,
Bedsteads, Furnaces, Wainscot, and such like, which (in some Countries, having
belonged to a House certain descents, and never inventoried, after the decease
of the owner, as Chattels) accrue by Custom, not by Common Laws to the Heir
with the House it self. Consuetudo Hundredi de Stretford in Com. Oxon. est,
quod haeredes tenementorum infra Hundredum praedict existen. post mortem
antecessorum suorum habebunt, etc. Principalium, Anglice an Heir-loome, viz. De
quodam genere catallorum, utensilium, etc. optimum plaustrum, optimam carucam,
optimum ciphum, etc. Coke on Littl. fol. 18. b.

Hebber-man, A Fisherman below Londonbridge, who fishes for Whitings, Smelts,
etc. commonly at Ebbing-water, and therefore so called. Mentioned in Art. for
the Thames-Jury, Printed 1632.

Hebbing-wears (Mentioned in 23 Hen. 8. cap. 5.) Are Wears or Engines made or
laid at Ebbing-water, for taking Fish. Quaere.

Heisa, servitium. Inter Placita de temp. Jo. Regis, Northampton 50.

Henchman, Qui equo innilitur bellicoso, From the German Hengst, a War-horse:
With us it signifies one that runs on foot, attending upon a Person of Honor or
Worship. Anno 3 Edw. 4. cap. 5. and 24 Hen. 8. cap. 13. It is written Henrman,
Anno 6 Hen. 8. cap. 1.

Henghen (Sax. Hengen) A Prison, Goal, or House of Correction. Si quis amicis
destitutus, vel alienigena, ad tantum laborem veniat, ut amicum non habeat, in
prima accusatione ponatur in Hengen, and ibi sustineat donec ad Dei judicium
vadat. LL. Hen. 1. cap. 65.

Hengwite, Significat quietantiam misericordiae de latrone suspenso absque
consideratione. Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 47. See Hankwit.

Herald, Heralt, or Harold (Ital. Heraldo, Fr. Herault, Vel quasi Herus altus)
Signifies an Officer at Arms, whose Function is to denounce War, to proclaim
Peace, and to be employed by the King in Martial Messages. Thus described by
Polidore, lib. 19. Habent insuper Apparitores ministros, quos Heraldos dicunt,
quorum praefectus Armorum Rex vocitatur, hii belli and pacis nuncii: Ducibus,
Comitisque a Rege factis, insignia aptant ac eorum funera curant. They are
Judges and Examiners of Gentlemen's Arms, and Conservers of Genealogies; they
Martial the Solemnities at the Coronation, and Funerals of Princes, Manage
Combats, and such like. The three chief are called Kings at Arms, of which,
Garter is the Principal, instituted and created by Henry the Fifth (Stows
Annal. page 584.) whose office is to attend the Knights of the Garter at their
Solemnities, and to Marshal the Funerals of the Nobility; yet I find in
Plowden, Casu Reneger and Fogossa, that Edward the Fourth granted the Office of
King of Heralds to one Garter, Cum feudis and proficuis ab antiquo, etc. fol.
12. b. The next is Clarentius, ordained by Edward the Fourth, who, attaining
the Dukedom of Clarence, by the death of George his Brother, whom he beheaded
for aspiring the Crown, made the Herald, which properly belonged to that
Dukedom, a King at Arms, and called him Clarentius. His proper office is, to
martial and dispose the Funerals of all the lesser Nobility, as Knights and
Esquires, through the Realm on the South Side Trent. The third is Norroy,
quasi, North-Roy, whose office is the same on the North-side Trent, as
Clarentius on the South, as is intimated by his name, signifying the Northern
King, or King at Arms, of the North parts. Besides these, there are six other
properly called Heralds, according to their original, as they were created to
attend certain great Lords, etc. in Martial Expeditions, viz. York, Lancaster,
Somerset, Richmond, Chester, Windsor. Lastly, there are four other called
Marshals or Pursuivants at Arms, who commonly succeed in the place of such
Heralds as die, or are preferred, and those are Blew-mantle, Rouge-cross,
Rougedragon, and Percullis. These Heralds are by some Authors called Nuncii
Sacri, and by the Ancient Romans, Feciales, who were Priests. Kings at Arms are
mentioned in the Statute of 14 Car. 2. cap. 33. Of these see more in Sir Hen.
Spelmans learned Glossarium.

Herbage (Fr.) Lat. Herbagium) Signifies the Pasture or Fruit of the Earth,
provided by nature, for the Bit or Mouth of the Cattle: And it is commonly used
for a Liberty that a Man has to feed his Cattle in another Man's Ground, as in
the Forest. Cromp. Jur. fol. 197. Occurrit frequens (says Spelman) pro jure
depascendi alienum solum, ut in Forestis.

OMnibus -- Hugo de Logiis -- salutem. Sciatis me dedisse -- Thomae de
Erdyngton totam terram meam de Alfledemore cum pertin. Reddendo inde annuatim
sex sagittas barbatas ad festum S. Mich. Salvo mihi and Marg. uxori meae, quod
nos in praedicta terra habebimus Liberum Herbagium ad custum nostrum, nobis and
omnibus hominibus nostris de familia nostra transeuntibus, etc. Sine Dat. Penes
Will. Dugdale Arm.

Herbenger, (from the Fr. Herberger, i. Hospitio accipere) Signifies with us an
Officer of the Kings Court, who allots the Noblemen, and those of the Household
their Lodgings. Kitchen (fol. 176.) uses it for an Innkeeper.

Herciebant (a Gal. Hercer, to Harrow) -- Arabant and Herciebant ad Curiam
Domini, i. They did Plough and Harrow at the Manor of the Lord. 4 Inst. fol.
270.

Hereditaments (Haereditamenta) Signify all such immovable things, be they
corporeal, or incorporeal, as a Man may have to himself and his Heirs, by way
of inheritance (see 32 Hen. 8. cap. 2.) or, not being otherwise bequeathed, do
naturally, and of course descend to the next Heir, and fall not within the
reach of an Executor or Administrator, as Chattels do. It is a word of great
extent, and much used in Conveyances; for by the Grant of Hereditaments, Isles,
Seigniories, Manors, Houses, and Lands of all sorts, Charters, Rents,
Services, Advowsons, Commons, and whatsoever may be inherited, will pass. Coke
on Littl. fol. 6. Haereditamentum est omne quod jure haereditario ad haeredem
transeat.

Herefare (Sax.) Profectio militaris and expeditio. See Subsidy.

Heregeat. See Hariot.

Heregeld (Sax.) Pecunia seu tributum alendo exercitui collatum. See Subsidy.

Heriot. See Hariot.

Herestita or Heressia, Signifies a Soldier hired, and departing without
License; from the Saxon Here, exercitus; and slitan, scindere, dissolvere; not
from Sliten, to depart, as in 4 Inst. fol. 128.

Hermitage (Heremitagium) The Habitation of a Hermit, a solitary place.
Vulgariter autem locus iste a laicis Heremitagium nuncupatur, propter
solitudinem; non quod Heremita aliquis aliquo tempore ibidem solebat
conversari. Mon. Angl. 2 par. fol. 339. b.

Hermitorium, Is by some Authors confounded with Hermitage; but I have seen it
distinguished, to signify the Chapel, or place of Prayer, belonging to an
Hermitage; for I find in an old Charter. -- Capellam sive Hermitorium.

Herpsac. See Frodmortel.

Hesta or Hestha. Hestam intelligo pro Capo seu Gallo castrato, vel pullo
quodam gallinaceo: A Gal. Hestoudeau, a Cockerel or Caponet. Spel. See Rusca.

Hest-corne. -- In redeundo vero Rex Athelstanus, post peractam victoriam,
declinavit per Ebor. versus Beverlacum, ac nonnullas possessiones redimendo,
Cullellum per(...)eum ibi depositum, dedit Deo and glorioso Confessori Johanni
praedicto, ac septem Presbyteris ibidem Deo servientibus -- Quasdam avenas,
vulgariter dictas Hestcorne, percipiendas de Dominiis and Ecclestis in illis
partibus, quas Ministri dictae Ecclesiae, usque in praeseus percipiunt pacifice
and quiet. Mon. Angl. 2 par. fol. 367. b.

Hexam, Was anciently a County of it self, and a Franchise, where the Kings
Writ went not; but by the Statute of 14 Eliz. cap. 13. Hexam and Hexamshire
shall be within the County of Northumberland. See 4 Inst. fol. 222. It was also
of old a Bishopric by the name of Episcopatus Hagustaldensis. See Mon. Angl. 2
par. fol. 91.

Hide of Land (Sax. Hyde-Lands ab Hyoen, tegere) Tanta fundi portio quanta
unico per annum coli poterat aratro. A Plough-Land. In an old Law Manuscript it
is said to be 120 Acres. Bid calls it Familiam, and says it is as much as will
maintain a Family. Others say, it is four Yardland. Cromp. in his Jurisd fol.
222. says, A Hide of Land contains One hundred Acres, and eight Hides make a
Knights Fee. Hida autem Anglice vocatur terra unius aratri culturae sufficiens.
Hen. Hunting. Hist. lib. 6. But Sir Edward Coke holds, That a Knights Fee, a
Hide or Plough-Land, a Yard-Land, or Oxgang of Land, do not contain any certain
number of Acres. On Littl. fol. 69. The distribution of England by Hides of
Land, is very ancient; for there is mention of them in the Laws of King Ina,
cap. 14. Henricus 1. Maritandae filiae suae gratia Imperatori, cepit ab
unaquaque hida Angliae tres sol. Spel. And see Came. Brit. fol. 158.

Hide-lands. (Sax. Hydelandes) Terrae ad Hydamseu tectum pertinentes.

Hide and gain, Did anciently signify Arable Land. Coke on Littl. fol. 85. b.
For of old to gain the Land, was as much as to Till, or are it. See Gainage.

Hidage (Hidagium) Was an extraordinary Tax, payable anciently for every Hide
of sand. Bracton, lib. 2. ca. 6. writes thus of it. Sunt etiam quaedam communes
praestationes, quae servitia non dicuntur, nec de consuetudine veniunt, nisi
cum necessitas intervenerit, vel cum Rex venerit; sicut sunt Hidagia, Coragia,
and Carvagia, and alia plura de necessitate, and ex consensu communi totius
regni introaucta, and quae ad Dominum feudi non pertinent, etc. King Etheldred
in the year of Christ 994. when the Danes landed at Sandwich, taxed all his
Land by Hides; every 310 Hides of Land found one Ship furnished, and every 8
Hides found one Jack, and one Saddle for defense of the Realm. Willielmus
Conquestor de unaquaque Hida per Angliam sex solidos accepit. Floren. Wigorn.
in An. 1084. Sometimes Hidage was taken for the being quit of that Tax; which
was also called Hyde-gyld.

Hidel, (Anno 1 Hen. 7. ca. 6.) Seems to signify a place of protection, or a
Sanctuary.

Hiis testibus. Antiquity did add these words in the continent of the Deed,
after the In cujus rei testimonium, written with the same hand with the Deed,
which Witnesses were called, the Deed read, and then their names entered; And
this clause of Hiis testibus in Subjects Deeds continued until and in the Reign
of Hen. 8. but now is wholly omitted. Coke on Litt. fol. 6.

Hine, (Sax.) A Servant, or one of the Family; but, it is now taken in a more
restrictive sense, for a Servant at Husbandry; and, the Master ^ine, he that
oversees the rest. Anno 12 R. 2. ca. 4.

Hinefare, or Heinfare (from the Sax. Hine, a Servant, and Fare, a going or
passage) the going or departure of a Servant from his Master. -- Siquis occidit
hominem Regis and facit Hein faram, Dat. Regi xx s. etc. Domesday, tit.
Arcanfeld.

Hinegeld, Significat quietantiam transgres. sionis illatae in servum
transgredientem. MS. Arth. Trevor. Ar.

Hirciscunda, The division of an inheritance among Heirs. Goldm. dict. Actio
Hirciscundae. See Action mixed.

Hird. i. Domestica vel intrinseca familia. Inter Plac. Trin. 12 Ed. 2. Ebor.
48. MS.

Hithe. See Hyth.

Hoastmen, (Anno 21 Jac. ca. 3.) Are an ancient Gild or fraternity at Newcastle
upon Tine, who deal in Seacoal.

Hoblers, or Hobilers (Hobelarii) Erant milites gregarii levi armatura and
mediocri equo, ad omnem mutum agili, sub Edouardo 3 in Gallia merentes. Dicti
(ut reor) vel ab istiusmodi equo, an Hobby appellato, vel potius a Gal.
hobille, tunica. Tabulae classes describentes in exercitu ejusdem Edvardi
Caletem obsident. Anno 1350, sic habent. Sub Comite Kildariae, Banerets 1.
Knights 1. Esquires 38. Hobilers 27, etc. These were light-horsemen, or
(according to Cowel) certain Tenants, who, by their Tenure were bound to
maintain a little light Nag, for certifying any invasion; or such like peril
toward the Seaside, as Portsmouth, etc. of which you may read 18 Ed. 3. Stat.
1. ca. 7. and 25 ejusdem. Stat. 5. ca. 8. and Came. Britan. fol. 272. Duravit
vocabulum usque at atatem, Hen. 8. says Spelman. Gentz darmes and Hobelours,
see Pryns Animad. on 4 Inst. fol. 307.

Hock tuesday-money, Was a Tribute paid the Landlord, for giving his Tenants
and Bondmen leave to celebrate that day (which was the second Tuesday after
Easter week) whereon the English did Master the domineering Danes. Mr. Fab.
Philips Mistaken Recompense, fo. 39.

Hockettor, or Hocqueteur, Is an old French word for a knight of the Post; a
decayed man, a basket-carrier. 3 Part Inst. fol. 17^. Que null enquerelant neu
respoignant ne soit surpris neu cheson per Hockettours, parent que la verite ne
soit ensue. Stat. Ragman.

Hogenhine, (rectius, Third night awn hine. i. Third night own servant) Is he
that comes guest-wise to an Inn or House, and lies there the third night,
after which he is accounted of that Family; and, if he offend the Kings Peace,
his Host was to be answerable for him. See Thirdnight-awn-hine.

Hokeday, Otherwise called Hock-tuesday, was the second Tuesday after
Easter-week. -- Et ad festum S. Mich. cum tenere voluerit. -- Senescallus
Curiam de la Hele, habebit de Celerario quinque albos panes and Costrellos suos
plenos Cervisiae, and ad idem Festum pro Curia de Kinnersdone de privilegiis
tenendis, habebit totidem, and ad le Hokeday totidem. Mon. Angl. 2 Par. fo.
550. b. See Hocktuesday Money.

Hogshead, Is a Measure of Wine, Oil, etc. containing half a Pipe, the fourth
part of a Tun, or 63 Gallons. Anno 1 R. 3. ca. 13.

Holm, (Sax. Hulmus,) insula amnica, A River Island, according to Bid;
sometimes found in ancient. Deeds and Records. Coke on Litt. fol. 5. -- Cum
duobus holmis in campis de we done. Mon. Angl. 2. p. fo. 292. b. where it seems
to have a different signification.

Homage, (Fr.) Is derived from Homo, and is called Homage, because when the
Tenant does this service, he says, I become your Man; It is also called
Manhood, as the Manhood of his Tenant and the Homage of his Tenant is all one.
Coke on Litt. fo. 64. In the Original Grants of Lands and Tenements by way of
Fee, the Lord did not only tie his Tenants to certain Services, but also took
a submission with Promise and Oath to be true and loyal to him, as their Lord
and Benefactor. This submission is called Homage, the form whereof you have in
17 Edw. 2. Stat. 2. in these words. When a freeman shall do Homage to his Lord,
of whom he holds in chief, he shall hold his hands together between the hands
of his Lord, and shall say thus, I become your man from this day forth for
life, for member and for worldly honor, and shall owe you my faith, for the
Land I hold of you, saving the Faith that I owe unto our Sovereign Lord the
King, and to mine other Lords. And in this manner the Lord of the Fee, for
which Homage is due, takes Homage of every Tenant, as he comes to the Land or
Fee. Glanv. lib. 9. ca. 1. except women, who perform not Homage, but by their
Husbands (yet Fitz. in his Not. Br. fol. 157. says the contrary) because
Homage specially relates to service in War. He says also, That Consecrated
Bishops do no Homage, but only fealty; the reason may be all one; yet the
Archbishop of Canterbury does Homage on his knees to our Kings at their
Coronation; and, I have read, that the Bishop of the Isle of Man is Homager to
the Earl of Derby. Fulbec reconciles this, fol. 20. in these words; By our Law
a Religious Man may do Homage, but may not say to his Lord, Ego devenio homo
vester, because he has professed himself to be only Gods Man; but, he may say,
I do unto you homage, and to you shall be faithful and loyal. See Britton, ca.
68.

Homage is either new with the Fee, or ancestrel. Homage is also used for the
Jury in a Court Baron, because it commonly consists of such as owe Homage to
the Lord of the Fee. This Homage is used in other Countries as well as ours,
and was wont to be called Hominium. See Hotoman de verbis feud. verbo Homo.

Homage auncestrel, Is, where a Tenant holds his Land of his Lord by Homage,
and the same Tenant and his Ancestors, (whose heir he is) have holden the same
Land of the same Lord and his Ancestors, whose heir the Lord is, time out of
memory of man, by Homage, and have done them Homage; such service draws to it
warrantry from the Lord, etc. Thus Littleton. In this example here put (says
Sir Edward Coke) There must be a double prescription, both in the blood of the
Lord and of the Tenant; and therefore, I think there is little or no land at
all at this day holden by Homage ancestrel: Yet, I have been credibly informed,
that in the Manor of Whitney, in Herefordshire, whose Lord is of the same
name, and the family has been seated and continued there for many ages; is one
West a Tenant, who can perfectly prescribe to hold his Land of Tho. Whitney Esquire
the present Lord thereof, by Homage ancestrel.

Homager, (from the Fr. Hommage,) One that does, or is bound to do Homage to
another. As the Bishop of the Isle of Man is said to be Homager to the Earl of
Derby. See Homage.

Homagio respectuando, Was a Writ to the Escheator, commanding him to deliver
seisin of lands to the heir, that is of full age, notwithstanding his Homage
not don. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 269.

Homesoken, Rectius Hamsoken, and Hamsoca, (from the Sax. Ham. i. Domus,
Habitatio, and socne, Libertas, Immunitas) Is by Bracton, lib. 3. Tract. 2. ca.
23.) thus defined, Homesoken dicitur invasio domus contra pacem domini Regis.
It appears by Rastal, that in ancient times some men had an immunity to do
this. Si quis Hamsocam violaverit, jure Anglorum Regi emendet 5 libr. LL.
Canuti. cap. 39. Hamsoken est quod Prior tenebit Placita in Curia sua de his
qui ingrediuntur domum vel Curiam alicujus ad litigandum vel furandum vel
quicquid asportandum, vel aliquod aliud faciendum, contra voluntatem illius qui
debet domum vel Curiam. Ex Reg. Priorat. de Cokesford. See Hamsoken.

Homicide, (Homicidium) Is the slaying of a Man, and it is divided into
voluntary and casual. Voluntary homicide is that, which is deliberated and
committed of a set purpose to kill; casual is that which is done by chance,
without any intention to kill. Homicide voluntary is either with precedent
malice, or without; the former is Murder, and is the Felonious killing, through
malice prepensed, of any person living in this Realm under the Kings
protection. West. par. 2. Symb. tit. Inditements, Sect. 37. usque ad 51. where
you may see diverse subdivisions of this matter. See also Glanvil, lib. 14. ca.
3. and Coke on Litt. lib. 3. ca. 8. See Murder, Manslaughter and Chancemedley.

Homine eligendo ad custodiendam peciam sigilli pro mercatoribus aediti, Is a
writ directed to a Corporation, for the choice of a new Man to keep one part of
the Seal, appointed for Statutes-Merchant, when the other is dead, according to
the Statute of Acton Burnel. Reg. of Writs, fol. 178. a.

Homine replegiando, Is a Writ for the Bailing a man out of Prison. In what
cases it lies, see Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 66. And Reg. of Writs, fol. 77.

Homine capto in Withernamium, Is a Writ to take him that has taken any Bondsman
or Woman, and led him or her out of the County, so that he or she cannot be
replevied according to Law, Reg. of Writs, fol. 79. a. See Withernam.

Hond-habend, (from the Sax. Hond, Hand, and Habens, having) Signifies a
circumstance of manifest Theft, when one is deprehended with the thing stolen in
his hand. Bract. lib. 3. Tract. 2. ca. 8. 32 and 35. who also uses handberend
in the same sense, sc. latro manifestus.

Hond-peny. -- Et sint quieti de chevagio, Hond-peny, Buckstall and Tristris
and de omnibus misericordiis, etc. Privileg. de Semplingham. Quaere.

Honor, Is, besides the general signification, used especially for the more
noble sort of Seigniories, whereof other inferior Lordships or Manors depend,
by performance of some Customs or Services to those who are Lords of them.
(Though anciently Honor and Baronia signified the same thing.) Uti Manerium
plurimis gaudet (interdum feodis, sed plerumque) tenementis, consuetudinibus,
serviciis, etc. Ita Honor plurima complectitur Maneria, plurima feoda
militaria, plurima Regalia, etc. dictur etiam olim est Beneficium seu Feodum
Regale, tentusque semper a Rege in Capite. Spel. The manner of creating these
Honors by Act of Parliament, may in part be gathered out of the Statutes 33
Hen. 8. ca. 37, 38. and 34 ejusdem, ca. 5. where Ampthil, Grafton and Hampton
Court, are made Honors. And by 37 Hen. 8. ca. 18. the King is empowred by
letters-patent, to erect four several Honors, viz. Westminster, Kingston upon
Hull, St. Osyths and Donnington, and as many other Honors as he will. In
reading several approved Authors and Records I have observed these following to
be likewise Honors, viz. The Honors of Aquila, Clare, Lancaster, Tickhil,
Wallingford, Nottingham, Boloine, Westgreenwich; Bedford, Barkhamstead,
Plimpton, Cre^ecure, Haganet, East-greenwich, Windsor, Bealieu, Peverel,
Ramesey, Skipton, Wyrmsgay, Clinn, Raleigh, Montgomery, Wigmore, Huntingdon,
Eye, Baynards Castle, Gloucester, Arundel, Heveningham, Cockermouth,
Bullingbroke, Folkingham, Leicester, Hinkley, Whithurch, Hertford, Newelme,
Chester, Lovetot, Pickering, Mardstone, Tuttebury, Warwick, Breghnok, or
Brecnok, Bre^mber, Halton. And, in a Charter of 15 Hen. 3. I find mention of
the Honors of Kaermardin and Cardigan.

Sciatis communiter, me -- accepisse in manu mea and defensione totum Honorem
Ecclesiae de Rameseie, etc. Charta Gulielmi I. Abbati Rames. Sect. 174. See
Came. Britan. fol. 315, 407, 594, and 690, etc. Bakers Chro. fol. 117. Inquis.
10 Edw. 2. Cokes 4 Inst. fol. 224. Mag. Charta, cap. 31. Reg. Orig. fol. 1.
Cromp. Juris. fol. 115. Broke, tit. Tenure, number. 26, etc. This word is used in
the same signification in other Nations.

Honor Courts, Are Courts held within the Honors aforesaid, mentioned 33 Hen.
8. cap. 37. And 37 Ejusdem. cap. 18.

Honorary Services, (Anno 12 Car. 2. cap. 29.) Are such as are incident to the
Tenure of Grand Serjeanty, and annexed commonly to some Honor or Grand
Seigniory.

Hontfongenethef. -- Cum omnibus aliis libertatibus, tantummodo Hontfongenethef
mihi retento. Carta Will. Comitis Marescalsi. In Mon. Angl. 1 Par. fol. 724.
This should have been written Hondfangenethef, and signifies a Theif, taken
with Hondha-bend, i. Having the thing stolen in his hand.

Hornebeam-Pollengers, Are Trees so called, that have usually been lopped, and
are above twenty years growth, and therefore not tythable. Plowden, Casu, Soby,
fol. 470.

Horngeld (from the Sax. Hofn, cornu and gel^, soltitio) Signifies a Tax within
the Forest, to be paid for horned Beasts. Cromp. Juris. fol. 197. And to be
free of it, is a privilege granted by the King to such as he thinks good;
Quietum esse de omni collectione in Foresta de bestiis cornutis asses. 4 Inst
fol. 306. -- Et sint quieti de omnibus geldis, and Danegeldis, and Vodgeldis,
and Senegeldis, and Horngeldis, etc. Diploma. Hen. 3. Canonicis and Monialibus
de Semplingham. See Subsidy.

Horse de son Fee (Fr. i. out of his Fee) Is an Exception to avoid an Action
brought for Rent, issuing out of certain Land, by him that pretends to be the
Lord, or for some Customs and Services: For if, the Defendant can prove the
Land to be without the compass of his Fee, the Action falls. See District and
Broke, hoctitulo.

Hospitalers (Hospitalarii) Were a certain order of Religious Knights, so
called, because they built an Hospital at Jerusalem, wherein Pilgrims were
received: To these Pope Clement the Fifth transferred the Templers, which
Order, by a Council held at Vienne, he suppressed, for their many and great
misdemeanors. These Hospitalers were otherwise called Knights of S. John of
Jerusalem, and are now those we call the Knights of S. John of Malta. Cassan.
Gloria mundi, part. 9. Consid. 5. This Constitution was also obeyed in Edward
the Second's time here in England, and confirmed by Parliament. Walsinghams
Hist. Edw. 2. These are mentioned 13 Edw. 1. cap. 43. and 9 Hen. 3. cap. 37.
They had many privileges granted them by the Popes, as immunity from payment
of Tithes, etc. Their Lands and Goods were put into the Kings dispose by Stat.
32 Hen. 8. cap. 24. See Mon. Angl. 2 part. fol. 489.

Hotchpot (Fr. Hochepot) A confused mingle-mangle of diverse things jumbled or
put together; so also of Lands of several Tenures. As, a Man seized of thirty
Acres of Land in Fee, has issue two daughters, and gives with one of them ten
Acres in Franc-marriage, and dies seized of the other twenty: Now, if she, that
is thus married, will have any part of the twenty Acres, she must put her Lands
given in Franc-marriage, in Hotchpot, that is, she must refuse to take the sole
profits of the ten Acres, but suffer them to be mingled with the other twenty
Acres; to the end, an equal division may be made of the whole thirty, between
her and her sister; and thus, for her ten Acres, she shall have fifteen,
otherwise her sister will have the twenty Acres of which the Father died
seized. Littleton, fol. 55. Coke on Littl. lib. 3. cap. 12. Britton, fol. 119.

Housabold and Hoybold -- Et similiter concessionem quam idem Willielmus de
Lancastre fecit eisdem (Abbati and Canonicis de Cokersand) and eorum tenentibus
villae de Gairstang, tam qui essent, quam qui fuerunt de Housabold and Hoybold
cum omnibus aliis libertatibus eidem Villae pertin. Mon. Angl. 2 par. fol. 633.
a. Quaere.

House-bote (Compounded of House and Bote, i. Compensatio) Signifies Estovers,
or an allowance of Timber, out of the Lords Wood, for the repair or upholding a
House or Tenement. Housebote (says Coke on Littl. fol. 41. b.) is twofold, viz.
Estoverium aedificandi and ardendi.

House-robbing or House-breaking (Sax. Hous-bryc) Is the robbing a Man in some
part of his House, or his Booth or Stall in any Fair or Market, and the owner
or his Wife, Children or Servants being within the same: This was Felony by 23
Hen. 8. cap. 1. and 3 Edw. 6. cap. 9. but now it is Felony, though none be
within the House, by 39 Eliz. cap. 15. See Burglary, and West, part. 2. Symb.
tit. Indictments, sect. 67.

Hudegeld, Significat quietantiam transgression is illatae in servum
transgredientem. Supposed to be mistaken by Fleta or mis-printed for Hinegeld.

Hue and Cry (Hutesium and Clamor, from the Fr. Huer and Crier, both signifying
to shout, and cry out aloud) Signifies a pursuit of one who has committed
Felony by the Highway; for if the party robbed, or any in the company of one
murdered or robbed, come to the Constable of the next Town, and will him to
raise Hue and Cry, or to pursue the Offender, describing the party, and
showing, as near as he can, which way he is gone, the Constable ought forthwith
to call upon the Parish for aid in seeking the Felon; and if he be not found
there, then to give the next Constable warning, and he the next, until the
Offender be apprehended, or at least thus pursued to the Seaside. Of this read
Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 5. Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. 2. cap. 20. And
the Statutes 13 Edw. 1. of Winchester, ca. 3. -- 28 Ed. 3. cap. 11. and 27
Eliz. cap. 13.

The Normans had such a pursuit with a Cry after Offenders, as this is, which
they called Haro, of which you may read the Grand Customary, ca. 54. Hue is
used alone, Anno 4 Ed. 1. Stat. 2. In ancient Records this is called Hutesium
and Clamor. See Cokes 2 Part Instit. fol. 172.

Mandatum est Gulielmo de Haverhul Thesaurario Regis, quod Civitatem London
capiat in manum Regis, eo quod Cives ejusdem Civitatis non Levaverunt Hutesium
and Clamorem pro morte Magistri Guidonis de Aretio and aliorum interfectorum,
secundum legem and consuetudinem regni. Rot. Claus. 30 H. 3. m. 5.

Huers. See Conders.

Huissiers. See Usher.

Hulm. See Holm.

Hundred, (Hundredum, Centuria,) Is a part of a Shire so called; either because
at first there were an hundred Towns and Villages in each Hundred, or because
they did find the King 100 able Men for his Wars. These were first ordained by
King Alfred, the 29th King of the West- Saxons: Aluredus Rex, (says Lambert,
verbo, Centuria) ubi cum Guthruno daco foedus inierat, prudentissimum illud
olim a Jethrone Moisi datum secutus consilium, Angliam primus in Satrapias,
Centurias and decurias, partitus est. Satrapiam, Shyre, a Scyrian, (quod
partiri significat) nominavit; Centuriam, Hundred, and Decuriam, Toothing sive
Tienmantale, i. Decemvirale Collegium appellavit; atque iisdem nominibus vel
hodie vocantur, etc. This dividing Counties into Hundreds, for better
Government, King Alfred brought from Germany; For there Centa or Centena is a
jurisdiction over a hundred Towns. This is the original of Hundreds, which
still retain the name, but their Jurisdiction is devolved to the County Court,
some few excepted, which have been by privilege annexed to the Crown, or
granted to some great Subject, and so remain still in the nature of a
Franchise. This has been ever since the Stat. 14 Edw. 3. Stat. 1. c. 9. whereby
these Hundred Courts, formerly Farmed out by the Sheriff to other Men, were
all, or the most part reduced to the County Court, and so remain at present.
So, that where you read now of any Hundred Courts, you must know they are
several Franchises, wherein the Sheriff has not to do by his ordinary
Authority, except they of the Hundred refuse to do their Office. See West, Part
1. Symbol. lib. 2. Sect. 288. -- ad Hundredum post Pascha, and ad proximum
Hundredum post Festum St. Mich. -- Mon. Angl. 2 p. fol. 293. a. The word
Hundredum is sometimes used for an immunity or privilege, whereby a Man is
quit of Hundred-peny, or Customs due to the Hundreder. See Turn.

Hundreders, (Hundredarii) Are Mon impanneld, or fit to be empannel'd, of a
Jury, upon any Controversy, dwelling within the Hundred, where the Land in
question lies. Cromp. Jur. fol. 217. Anno 35 Hen. 8. ca. 6. It also signifies
him that has the jurisdiction of a Hundred, and holds the Hundred Court. An. 13
Ed. 1. ca. 38. -- 9 Edw. 2. Stat. 2. and 2 Edw. 3. ca. 4. and it is sometimes
used for the Bailiff of an Hundred. Horns Mirror, lib. 1. ca. del Office del
Coroner.

Hundred-lagh, (from Hundred, and the Sax. Laga. i. Lex.) Signifies the Hundred
Court, from which all the Officers of the Kings Forest were freed, by the
Charter of Canutus, ca. 9. Manwood, Part 1. pa. 2. See Warscot.

Hundred-penny, -- Est autem pecunia quam subsidit causa vicecomes olim
exigebat ex singulis decuriis sui Comitatus, quas Tethingas, Saxones
appellabant; Sic ex Hundredis, Hundred-penny. Spel. Pence of the Hundred, Came.
Brit. fol. 223.

Hundred-setena -- Et habeant Socam and Sacam on Strond and on Streme, on wode
and on field, Grithbrice, Hundred-setena, Adas and Ordelas, etc. Carta Edgari
Regis Monast. Glaston. Anno 12 regni. Mon. Angl. 1. p. fo. 16. b. Saeta, or
Setena, in composition signifies Dwellers, or Inhabitants. -- Debent habere
constitutionem Hundredi, quod Angli dicunt Hundred-setene, Text. Roff.

Hurst, (Sax. Hyrst,) A Wood, or Plump of Trees.

Huscarle, (Sax.) A Domestic Servant, or one of the Family. The word is often
found in Domesday, where we find the Town of Dorchester paid to the use of
Houscarles one Mark of silver. See Karles.

Hus and Hant. Quidam H. P. captus per querimoniam Mercatorum Flandriae and
imprisonatus offert Domino Regi Hus and Hant in plegio ad standum recto, and ad
respondendum praedictis mercatoribus and omnibus aliis, qui versus eum loqui
voluerint. Et diversi veniunt qui manucapiunt quod dictus H. P. per Hus and
Hant veniet ad summonitionem Regis vel concilii sui in Curia Regis apud
Shepweye and quod stabit ibi recto, etc. Placita Curiae Regis Anno 27 Hen. 3.
rot. 9. Quaere, an non sit commune plegium, sicut Jo. Do. and Ric. To. see 4
Inst. fol. 72.

Huseans, (Fr. Houseau,) A kind of Boot, or somewhat made of course cloth, and
worn over the Stocking, in stead of a Boot, a Buskin. It is mentioned in the
Stat. 4. Edw. 4. ca. 7.

Husfastne, (from the Sax. Hus i. Domus, and Fast, Fixus, quasi domui fixus,)
Is he that holds House and Land. Et in franco plegio esso debet omnis qui
terram tenet and domum, qui dicuntur Husfastne, and etiam alii qui illis
deserviunt, qui dicuntur Folgheres, etc. Bracton, lib. 3. Tract. 2. ca. 10.
Some Authors corruptly write it. Hurderefest and Hurdesfest, rectius
Heordfeste, which see in Gloss. in december Scriptor.

Husseling people. In a Petition from the Borough of Leominster to King Edward
the Sixth, the Petitioners set forth, that in their Town, there were to the
number of 2000 Husseling people, etc. that is, 2000 Communicants; For, Husel in
Saxon signifies the Holy Eucharist.

Hustings, (Hustingum, from the Sax. Hus, Domus and thing, causa, quasi Domus
causarum) antiquissima and celeberrima Londoniarum Civitatis Curia suprema, the
principal and highest Court in London. 11 Hen. 7. ca. 21. and 9 Ed. 1. ca.
unico. Of the great antiquity of this Court, we find this Honorable mention in
the Laws of King Edward the Confessor, -- Debet etiam in London, quae est Caput
regni and legum, semper Curia Domini Regis singulis Septimanis Die Lunae
Hustingis sedere and teneri; Fundata enim erat olim and aedificata ad instar
and ad modum and in memoriam veteris magnae Troiae. and usque in hodiernum diem
leges, and jura and dignitates, libertates, regiasque consuetudines antiquae
magnae Trojae in se continet -- and Consuetudines suas una semper
inviolabilitate conservat. See Tailors Hist. of Gavelkind, p. 55. This Court is
held before the Mayor and Aldermen of London. Error or Attaint lies there of a
Judgment or false Verdict in the Sheriffs Court, as appears by Fitz. Not. Br.
fol. 23. Other Cities and Towns also have had a Court of the same name, as
Winchester, Lincoln, York, Sheppey, etc. where the Barons or Citizens have a
Record of such things as are determinable before them. Fleta, lib. 2. ca. 55.
Stat. 10 Edw. 2. ca. unico. See 4 Inst. fol. 247. and Gloss. in december
Scriptores, on this word.

Hyde of Land. See Hide.

Hyde-gyld, (Sax. Hyd-gyld) A price or ransom paid to save ones skin, (from
beating.) Also the same with Hidage..

Hyth, (Sax.) A Port, or (little) Haven, to imbark, or land Wares at, as
Queen-hyth, Lamb-hythe, etc. New Book of Entries, fo. 3. -- de tota medietate
Hithae suae apud Hengestesey, cum libero introitu and exitu, etc. Mon. Angl. 2
Par. fo. 142. n. 40.

I.
JAck, (olim Wambasium) erat tunica, quod non ferro solido, sed tunicis plurimo
lino intextis muniebatur; a kind of defensive Coat worn by Horsemen in War,
which some by tenure were bound to find, upon any invasion. See Hidage.

Jactivus, and Jectivus, (Lat.) He that loses by default. Placitum suum
neglexerit and Jactivus exinde remansit. Formul. Solen. 159.

Jamaica, Is one of the American Islands, lying on the South of Cuba; Its
length from East to West about 50 Leagues, and breadth 20, the middle of it
under the 18th degree of Northern Latitude. It was taken from the Spaniard by
the English, in the year 1655, and is mentioned in the Stat. 15 Gar. 2. ca. 5.

Jamaica-wood, (mentioned 15 Car. 2. ca. 5.) Is a kind of speckled or
fine-grain'd Wood, of which Cabinets are made; called in Jamaica, Granadillo;
The tree is low and small, seldom bigger then a man's leg.

Jampnum, Furze, or Gorse, and Gorstyground. 1 Part Croke, fo. 179. A word much
used in Fines; and seems to be taken from the Fr. Jaulne. i. Yellow; because
the blossoms of Furze, or Gorse are so. Yet Sir Edw. Coke on Litt. pa. 5.
says, Jampna signifies a waterish place. quaere.

Jarr, (Span. Jarro. i. An Earthen Pot) with us it is taken for an Earthen pot,
or Vessel of Oil, containing twenty Gallons.

Jarrock, (Anno 1 Rich. 3. ca. 8.) Is a kind of Cork so called, with which this
Statute prohibits Dyers to Dye Cloth.

Identitate nominis, Is a Writ that lies for him, who is taken upon a Capias or
Exigent, and committed to prison, for another man of the same name; whereof see
the form and further use in Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 267. and Reg. of Writs, fol.
194. Idemptitate nominis maintainable by Executors, etc. Anno 9 Hen. 6. ca. 4.

Ides, (Idus,) Eight days in every Month, so called: In March, May, July and
October, these eight days begin at the eighth day of the Month, and continue
to the fifteenth; in other Months they begin at the sixth day, and continue to
the thirteenth: Note, that the last day only is called Ides, and the first of
these days the eighth Ides, the second the seventh Ides, that is, the eighth
or seventh day before the Ides, and so of the rest. Therefore when we speak of
the Ides of such a Month in general, it is to be understood of the 15th or
13th day of that Month. See Calends.

Idiot, Is a Greek word, properly signifying a private man, who has no public
Office; Among the Latins it is taken for illiteratus, imperitus, and in our Law
for non compos mentis, vulgarly, a natural fool. The words of the Statute, (17
Ed. 2. ca. 9.) are Rex habebit custodiam terrarum fatuorum naturalium --
Whereby it appears he must be a natural fool, that is, a Fool a Nativitate;
For, if he were once wise, and became a Fool by chance, or misfortune, the King
shall not have the custody of him. Stam. Praerog. ca. 9. Fitz. Not. Br. fol.
232. If one have so much understanding as to measure a yard of Cloth, number 20
pence, or rightly name the days in the week, or beget a Child, he shall not be
accounted an Idiot, or Natural Fool, by the Laws of the Realm. See Cokes 4 Rep.
Beverlys Case.

Idiota inquirenda vel examinanda, Is a Writ directed to the Escheator or
Sheriff of any County (where the King has notice of an Idiot, naturally born
so weak of understanding, that he cannot manage his inheritance) to call before
him the party suspected of Idiocy and examine him, and to enquire by the oaths
of Twelve Men, whether he be sufficiently witted to dispose of his own Lands
with discretion or not, and to certify accordingly into Chancery; For the King
has by his Prerogative the Protection of his Subjects, and the Government of
their Lands and Substance; who are naturally defective in their discretion.
Stat. 17 Edw. 2. cap. 9. Reg. of Writs, fol. 267.

Jeman, Sometimes used for Yeoman. Sciant -- quod ego Johannes Smith de
Bromyard in Com. Heref. Jeman dedi -- Ricardo Wiggemore Arm. omnia terr. and
Tenementa, etc. Dat. 10 Jan. Anno 9 Hen. 6.

Jeofaile, Is a corruption from the Fr. I'ay faille, i. Ego lapsus sum, and
signifies an oversight in Pleading, or other Law proceedings And by the Stat.
32 Hen. 8. cap. 30. it is enacted, That if the Jury have once passed upon the
Issue, though afterward there be found a Jeofail in the Pleading, yet judgment
shall be given, according to the Verdict. See Broke, tit. Repleader. A Jeofail
is, when the parties to a Suit, have proceeded to Issue, and this Pleading or
Issue is so badly pleaded or joined, or the proceedings so defective, that it
will be Error, if they proceed. Then some of the said parties might by their
Council show it to the Court, which occasioned many delays in Suits, for
redress whereof, the foresaid Statute with others in Queen Elizabeth, and King
James Raigns were made, and yet the fault not much amended.

Jetsen, Jetzon, and Jotson (from the Fr. jetter, i. ejicere) Is any thing cast
out of a Ship, being in danger of Wreck, and driven to the shore by the Waves.
See Flotson.

Jews (Judaei) See Judaism. Anciently we had a Court of the Justices assigned
for the Government of the Jews. See 4 Instit. fol. 254. Rex -- Vic. Wigorn.
salutem. Praecipimus tibi, quod clamari and observari facias per totam Balivam
tuam, quod omnes Judaei deferant in supeperiori indumento suo ubicunque
ambulaverint vel equitaverint, infra villam vel extra, quasi duas tabulas albas
in pectore factas de lineo panno vel de pergameno; ita quod per hujusmodi
signum manifest possint Judaei a Christianis discerni. T. Comite apud Oxon. 30
Martii. Claus. 2 Hen. 3. p. 1. m. 10. in Dorso.

Ignitegium. See Curfeu.

Ignoramus (i We are ignorant) Is properly written on the Bill of Indictments
by the Grand Enquest, empanelled in the Inquisition of Causes Criminal and
Public, when they mislike their Evidence, as defective or too weak to make
good the Presentment. The effect of which word so written is, that all farther
enquiry, upon that party, for that fault, is thereby stopped, and he delivered
without farther Answer: It has a resemblance with that custom of the ancient
Romans, where the Judges, when they absolved a person accused, wrote A. upon a
little Table, provided for that purpose. i. Absolvimus. If they judged him
guilty, they wrote C. i. Condemnamus. If they found the Causes difficult, and
doubtful, they wrote N. L. i. Non Liquet.

Ikenild-street, (Stratum Icenorum) Is one of the four famous ways which the
Romans made in England, taking name Ab Icenis, who were the Inhabitants of
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgshires. Came. Brit. fol. 343. See Watlingstreet,
and LL. Edovardi Confess. cap. 12.

Illeviable, That ought not, or may not be levied. As, nihil is a word set upon
a debt Illeviable.

Imbargo (Span) A stop or stay, commonly upon Ships by public Authority. Anno
18 Car. 2. cap. 5.

Imbezle or Imbesil. To steal, pilfer, or purloyn. Mentioned Anno 14 Car. 2.
cap. 31.

Imbracery. See Embracery.

Imparlance (interlocutio or interloquela) Is a Motion or Petition made in
Court by the the Tenant or Defendant, upon the count of the Demandant or
Declaration of the Plaintiff; whereby he craves respight or a further day to
put in his Answer. See Broke, tit. Continuance. Imparlance is general or
special: Special is with this clause, Salvis omnibus advantagiis, tam ad
jurisdictionem Curiae, quam Breve and Narrationem. Kitchen, fol. 200. General,
is that which is made at large, without inserting that, or the like cause. See
Emparlance.

Imparsonee, As Parson imparsonee (persona impersonata) is he that is inducted,
and in possession or a Benefice. Dyer, (fol. 40. number. 72.) Says a Dean and
Chapter are Persons impersonees of a Benefice appropriate to them.

Impeachment of Waste, (Impetitio vasti) From the Fr. Empeschement, i.
Impediment) Signifies a restraint from committing waste upon Lands or
Tenements. See Waste.

Impediens -- Haec est finalis concordia facta in Curia Domini Regis apud
Westminster. in Octabis Sancti Hillaris, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Filii Regis
Johannis Septimo, Coram Thoma de Multon, etc. Inter Willielmum de Mohun
querentem and Will. Brewere impedientem de Manerio de Clynton, etc. Et unde
Placitum de Escambio faciendo summonit. fuit inter eos in eadem Curia, etc.
Where Impedientem seems to be used for Defendentem or Deforcientem.

Impetration (Impetratio) An obtaining by Request and Prayer. It is used in our
Statutes for the pre-obtaining of Benefices and Church Offices in England, from
the Court of Rome, which did belong to the gift and disposition of our Lord the
King, and other Lay Patrons of this Realm. The penalty whereof was the same
with Provisors. 25 Edw. 3. See 38 Edw. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 1.

Impierment (Anno 23 Hen. 8. cap. 9.) Signifies as much as Impairing or
Prejudicing: For the words of the Statute are -- To the great impierment and
diminution of their good names.

Implements (from impleo, to fill up) Are such things, as tend to the necessary
use of any Trade, or Furniture of a House.

Implead (from the Fr. Plaider) To sue, arrest, or prosecute by course of Law.

Impost (Fr.) Tribute, Tallage, or Custom; but more particularly it is that Tax
which the King receives for such merchandises as are imported into any Haven,
from other Nations. 31 Eliz. cap. 5. And it may be distinguished from Custom,
which is rather that profit which the King raises from Wares exported; but they
are sometimes confounded.

Imprimery (Fr.) a Print, Impression; also, the Art of Printing, or a
Printing House. Anno 14 Car. 2. cap. 33.

Impropriation (of which, there are in England 3845.) See Appropriation.

Improbement. See Approve.

In alto and imo. The same with Alto and basso.

Inborh and Out-borh. (Sax.) Vide Camd. Britan. in Ottadinis: Ubi Patricium
Comitem Dunbarrensem, aevo Hen. tertii, Inborow and Out-borow inter Angliam and
Scotiam appellat, i. (si fas sit a doctissimi viri sententia recedere)
fidejussorem omnium ex uno in alterum regnum iter facientium, sive inter
utraque regna viatorum. Simile babes in S. C. de Monticulis Walliae, inter LL.
Saxonicas, cap. 6. Sax. Dict.

In casu consimili. Is a Writ. See Casu consimili.

In casu proviso, Is another. See Casu proviso.

Inchanter (Incantator) Is he, or she, Qui carminibus vel cantiunculis daemonem
adjurat. They were anciently called Carmina, because in those days, their
Charms were in Verse. 3 Part. Inst. fol. 44.

Incident (incidens) Signifies a thing appertaining to, or following another,
that is more worthy or principal. As a Court Baron is so incident to a Manor,
and a Court of Picpowders to a Fair, that they cannot be severed by Grant.
Kitchen, fol. 36. See Coke on Littl. fol. 151. b.

Incroche. Admirals and their Deputies do Incroche to themselves diverse
Jurisdictions, etc. Anno 15 Rich. 2. cap. 3. See Encrochments.

Incumbent (from incumbo, i. to endeavor earnestly) Is a Clerk who is resident
on his Benefice with Cure. Coke on Littl. fol. 119. b. And is so called,
because he does or ought to bend all his study to the discharge of the Cure. 10
Hen. 6. 7. And 1 and 2 Phil. and Ma. cap. 17.

Inderimable (Indecimabilis) That is not tythable, or ought not (by Law) to pay
Tithe. 2 Part. Inst. fol. 490.

Indenture (Indentura) Is a writing comprising some Contract, Conveyance, or
Covenant, between two or more, and being indented in the top answerable to
another part, which has the same Contents, it thence takes name; and differs
from a Deed Poll, which is a single Deed unindented. Coke on Littl. fol. 229.
The Civilians define an Indenture to be Scriptura inter creditorem and
debitorem indentata, etc.

Indefeisible, That cannot be defeated, undone, or made void: As, A good and
indefeisible estate, etc.

Indefensus, One that is impleaded, and refuses to Answer. MS. de temp. E. 3.

Indicavit, Is a Writ or Prohibition that lies for a Patron of a Church, whose
Clerk is Defendant in Court Christian, in an Action of Tithes, commenced by
another Clerk, and extending to the fourth Part of the Church, or of the Tithes
belonging to it: For in this Case, the Suit belongs to the Kings Court, by the
Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 5. Wherefore the Patron of the Defendant, being like
to be prejudiced in his Church and Advowzen, if the Plaintiff obtain in the
Court Christian, has this means to remove it to the Kings Court. Reg. of
Writs, fol. 35. b. and Britton, cap. 109.

Indictor, He that indicteth another Man for any orfence. Stat. 1 Edw. 3. cap.
11. And Indictee, he that is so indicted. Anno 21 Jac. cap. 8.

Indictment. See Enditement.

Indivisum, Is used for that which two hold in Common without Partition.
Kitchen, fol. 241. in these words, He holds pro indiviso, etc.

Indorsed (Indorsatus) Signifies any thing written on the backside of a Deed,
as a Condition endorsed on the backside of an Obligation; the Sealed and
delivered, etc. on the back of an Indenture, is called the Indorsement.

Induction (Inductio) A leading into. It is most commonly taken for the giving
an Incumbent Livery and Seisin (as it were) of his Church, by leading him into
it, and delivering him the Keys of it, by the Commissary or Bishops Deputy, and
by his ringing one of the Bells. See 3 Part. Crokes Rep. fol. 258.

In esse (Anno 21 Jac. cap. 2.) In being Philosophers contra-distinguish things
in Esse, from things in Posse, or in Potentia. As, a Child before he is born,
or even conceived, is a thing in Posse, or which may be: After he is born, he
is said to be in Esse, or Actual being.

Infangthef, Infang-theof, or Infangenetheof, (from the Sax. fangan, capere)
Signifies in the old Saxon Latronem infra captum, i. taken within the Manor or
Liberty of any Man, having jurisdiction, granted by the King, to try such Theif
within his Fee. Anno 1 and 2 Phi. and Ma. cap. 15. A Charter of Henry the First
to Sir Benedict Rames, and S. Ivo, the Archbishop, has these words -- Cum saka
and seca and cum Tol, and Theme, and cum infra capto fure -- In the Laws of S.
Edward the Confess. cap. 26. Thus, Qui habet Sacam and Socam, Thol and Theme,
and Infangthef, justitia cognoscentis latronis sua est, de homine suo, si
captus fuerit super terram suam, etc. Infangthef, i. Quod latrones capti in
Dominio vel feodo Prioris, and de latrocinio convicti in Curia Domini Prioris
judicentur and ad furcas ejus suspendentur. Ex Reg. Priorat. de Cokesford. See
Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 35. who says, (inter al.) Et dicitur
Infangethef latro captus in terra alscujus, de hominibus suis propriis,
seisitus latrocinio. Utfangthefe vero dicitur latro extraneuae, veniens aliunde
de terra aliena, and qui captus fuit in terra ipsius qui tales habet
libertates, etc. See also Sir Hen. Spelmans learned Glossarium.

In forma pauperis, Is when any Man, who has just cause of Sure in Chancery,
and will make Affidavit, that he is not worth Five pounds, his debts being
paid, then upon a Petition to the Master of the Rolls, he shall be admitted to
sue In forma pauperis, and shall have Council, and Clerks assigned him, without
paying Fees, and the like by the Judges of other Courts.

Information for the King (Informatio pro Rege) Is that which, for a common
person we call a Declaration, and is not always preferred directly by the King
of his Attorney; but also by some other person, who prosecutes, as well for the
King, as for himself, upon the breach of some Penal Law or Statute, wherein a
penalty is given to the party that will sue for the same, and may either be by
Action of Debt or Information.

Informatus non sum, or Non sum informatus, Is a Formal Answer made of course
by an Attorney, who is not instructed to say any thing material, in defense of
his Clients cause, by which he is deemed to leave it undefended, and so
Judgment passes against his Client. See the New Book of Entries, verbo, Non
sum informatus.

Informer (Informator) Is one who informs or prosecutes in the Exchequer, Kings
Bench, or Common Pleas, Assizes, or Sessions, against those that offend or
break any Laws, or Penal Statutes: And are sometimes called Promotors; by the
Civilians, Delatores.

Ingressu, Is a Writ of Entry, whereby a Man seeks Entry into Lands or
Tenements, and lies in diverse Cases, wherein it has as many diversities of
Forms. See Entry. This Writ is also called in particular Praecipe quod reddat,
because those are formal words in all Writs of Entry.

De Ingressu sine assensu Capituli, etc. (Reg. of Writs, fol. 230.) Is a Writ
given by the Common Law to the Successor of him, who alienated Sine assensu
capituli, etc. And is so called from those words contained in the Writ. Coke on
Littl. fol. 325. b.

Ingrossator magni Rotuli. See Clerk of the Pipe.

In gross, Is that which belongs to the person of the Lord, and not to any
Manor, Lands, etc. As Villain in gross. Advowzen in gross, etc. Coke on
Littl. fol. 120. b.

Engrossing of a Fine, Is making the Indentures by the Chirographer, and the
delivery of them to the party to whom the Cognizance is made. Fitz. Not. Br.
fol. 147. A.

Ingrosser (Ingrossator) Is one that buys Corn growing, or dead victuals to
sell again, except Barley for Malt, Oats for Oat-meal, or Victuals to Retail;
Badging by License and buying of Oils, Spices and Victuals, other then Fish or
Salt. Anno 5 Edw. 6. cap. 14. --; Eliz. cap. 14. -- 13 Eliz. cap. 25. These are
the words of Wests Symbol. par. 2. tit. Indictments, sect. 64. But this
definition rather belongs to unlawful engrossing, then to the word in general.
See Forestaller, and 3 Part. Inst. fol. 195.

Ingrosser, Is also a Clerk that writes Records or Instruments of Law in Skins
of Parchment; as in Henry the Sixth's time, He, who is now called Clerk of the
Pipe, was called Ingrossator Magni Rotuli, and the Comptroller of the Pipe was
called Duplex Ingrossator. Spelm.

Inheritance (Haereditas) Is a perpetuity in Lands or Tenements to a Man and
his Heirs: For Littleton, lib. 1. cap. 1. says this word is not only
understood, where a Man has inheritance of Lands and Tenements by descent of
heritage; but also every Fee-simple or Fee-tail that a Man has by his purchase
may be called Inheritance, because his Heirs may inherit him. Several
Inheritance is that which two or more hold severally, as if two Men have Land
given to them, and the Heirs of their two Bodies, these have Joint Estate
during their lives, but their Heirs have several inheritance. Kitchen, fol.
155. A Man may have an inheritance. in title of Nobility, three manner of ways.
1. By Creation. 2. By Descent. And 3. by Prescription.

Inhibition (Inhibitio) Is a Writ to forbid a Judge from farther proceeding in
the Cause depending before him. See Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 39. where he confounds
Inhibition and Prohibition. But Inhibition is most commonly a Writ issuing out
of a higher Court Christian to an inferior, upon an Appeal. Anno 24 Hen. 8.
cap. 12. and 15 Car. 2. cap. 9. And Prohibition, out of the Kings Court, to a
Court Christian, or an Inferior Temporal Court.

Injunction (Injunctio) Is a Writ grounded upon an interlocutory order of the
Chancery; sometimes to give possession to the Plaintiff, for want of appearance
in the Defendant; sometimes to the Kings Ordinary Court, and sometimes to the
Court Christian, to stay proceeding in a Cause, upon suggestion made, that the
rigor of the Law, if it take place, is against Equity and Conscience in that
case. See West, Par. 2. Symbol. tit. Proceedings in Chancery. sect. 25.

Inlagh or Inlaughe (Inlagatus) Signifies him that is (sub lege) in some
Frank-pledge, not outlawed, of whom, thus Bracton, tract. 2. lib. 3. cap. 11.
Faemina utlagari non potest, quia ipsa non est sub lege, i. Inlaughe, anglico^,
scil. in Franco plegio, sive decenna, sicut masculi 12 annorum vel amplius.

Inlagary or Inlagation (Inlagatio) Is a restitution of one outlawed, to the
Protection of the Law, or to the benefit or liberty of a Subject. From the Sax.
In-lagian, i. Inlagare. -- Et ex eo seipsum legis patrocinii adeo capacem.
reddat, ut ad compensationem admittatur. LL. Canuti Reg. page 1. cap. 2.

Inland (Inlandum) Terra dominicalis, pars Manerii Dominica, terra interior;
For that which was let out to Tenants was called Utland. In the Testament of
Brithericus, in Itinerar Kantii; thus, to wulsege that Inland] to aelfege that
Utland, i. Lego terras Dominicales Wulfego, Tenementales Aelfego. Thus
Englished by Lambert, To Wulfee (I give) the Inland or Demeans, and to Elfey
the Outland or Tenancy. -- Ex dono Will. de Eston. 50 Acras de Inlanda sua. Rot.
Cart. 16 Hen. 3. m 6. This word is often found in Domesday.

Inleased (Fr. Enlasse) Entangled or ensnared. The word is found in the
Champions Oath. 2 Part. Cokes Inst. fol. 247.

Inmates, Are those that are admitted to dwell for their Money jointly with
another Man, though in several Rooms of his Mansionhouse, passing in and out by
one door, and not being able to maintain themselves; which are inquirable in a
Leet. Kitchen, fol. 45. where you may find who are properly Inmates in
Intendment of Law.

Innes of Court (Hospitii Curiae) Are so called, because the Students therein,
do there not only study the Laws, but use such other exercises, as may make
them more serviceable to the Kings Court. Fortescu, cap. 49. Of these there are
four well known, viz. The Inner Temple, Middle Temple, Lincolns Inn, and Greys
Inn. These, with the Two Serjants Inns, and Eight Inns of Chancery, do
altogether (to use Sir Edward Cokes words) make the most famous University, for
Profession of Law only, or of any one Humane Science in the World. Of which,
see Mr. Dugdales Origines Juridiciales at large.

Innotescimus, Letters Patent so called, which are always of a Charter of
Feofment or some other Instrument, not of Record; and so called from the words
in the Conclusion, Innotescimus per presents. An Innotescimus and Vidimus are
all one. See Pages Case, 5 Rep.

Innuendo (from innuo, to beck or nod with the Head, to signify) a word used
in Writs, Declarations, and Pleadings, and the Office of it is only to declare
and ascertain the person or thing, which was named or left doubtful before; as
to say, he (Innuendo, the Plaintiff) is a Theif, when as there was mention
before of another person. Innuendo may not enlarge the sense of the words, nor
make a supply, or alter the Case where the words are defective. Huttons Rep.
fol. 44.

Inpeny and Outpeny. In the Register of the Monastery of Cokesford, page 25.
Thus, -- De Inpeny and Outpeny consuetudo talis est in villa de East Rudham de
omnibus terris quae infra Burgagium tenentur; viz. Quod ipse, qui vendiderit
vel dederit dictam tenuram alicui, dabit pro exitu suo de eadem tenura unum
denarium, pro ingressu suo. Et si predicti Denarii a retro fuerint, Ballivus
domini distringet pro eisdem denariis in eadem tenura. -- These words and
Custom, are also mentioned in the Rolls of a Court there held, about the Feast
of the Epiphany, Anno 12 Rich. 3. Spelm.

Inquirendo, Is an Authority given to any person to enquire into something for
the Kings advantage; in what case it lies. See Reg. of Writs, fol. 72, 85, 124,
265.

Inquisition (Inquisitio) Is a manner of proceeding by way of search or
examination, in matters criminal, by the great Enquest before Justices in Air.
It is also used in the Kings behalf in Temporal Causes and Profits, in which
sense it is confounded with Office. Stanf. Praerog. fol. 51.

Inquifitors (Inquisitores) Are Sheriffs, Coroners, Super visum Corporis, or
the like, who have power to enquire in certain Cases. Stat. of Marlbridge, cap.
18. Britton, fol. 4. And in Westminster. 1. Enquirors or Inquisitors are included
under the name of Ministri. 2 Part. Inst. fol. 211.

Inrolment (Irrotulatio) The Registring, Recording, or Entering any lawful Act
in the Rolls of the Chancery, Exchequer, Kings Bench, or Common Pleas, in the
Hustings of London, or by the Clerk of the Peace in any County: As a Statute or
Recognizance acknowledged, or a Deed of Purchase enrolled. Anno 27 H. 8. cap.
16. See West, par 2. Symb. tit. Fines, sect. 133.

Insidiatores viarum (Way-layers) Are Woods, which by the Stat. 4 Hen. 4. cap.
2. Are not to be put in Indictments, Arraignments, Appeals, etc.

Insimul tenuit, Is one Species of the Writ of Partition. See Formdon.

Insinuation (Anno 21 Hen. 8. cap. 5.) A creeping into a Man's Mind or Favor,
covertly. Insinuation of a Will, is (among the Civilians) the first Production
of it, or the leaving it Penes Registarium, in order to its Probat.

Inspeximus. Letters Patent so called, and is the same with Exemplification,
which begins thus. Rex -- Omnibus -- Inspeximus irrotulamentum quarund.
literarum Patent' etc. It is called Inspeximus, because it begins, after the
Kings title, with this word Inspeximus. See Pages Case, 5 Rep.

Instalment (Anno 20 Car. 2. cap. 2.) A Settlement, Establishment, or sure
placing in; sometimes it is confounded with Abatement.

Institution (Institutio) Is when the Bishop says to a Clerk, who is presented
to a Church-Living, Instituo te Rectorem talis Ecclesiae, cum cura animarum,
and accipe curam tuam and meam. Every Rectory consists of a Spiritualty, and a
Temporalty; as to the Spiritualty, viz. Cura animarum, he is a complete Parson
by Institution; but as to the Temporalties, as Gleabland, etc. he has no
Frank-tenant therein, till Induction. Cokes 4 Rep. Digbies Case. The first
beginning of Institutions to Benefices, was in a National Synod held at
Westminster by John de Crema, the Popes Legate, Anno 1124. which see in Seldens
Hist. of Tithes, page 375.

In super (Anno 21 Jac. cap. 2.) Is used by Auditors in their Accounts in the
Exchequer; when they say so much remains in super such an Accoantant, that is,
so much is charged upon him, in his account.

Intakers, Were a kind of Thieves in Redesdale, and the furthest parts of the
North of England, mentioned 9 Hen. 5. ca. 8. So called, because they, dwelling
in that liberty, did take in, and receive such booties of Cattle and other
things, as their Accomplices the Outparters brought in to them, from the borders
of Scotland. See Outparters.

Intendment of Law, (Fr. Entendement, intellectus,) the Understanding,
Judgment, Intention or true meaning of the Law. Regularly Judges ought to judge
according to the common Intendment of Law. Coke on Litt. fo. 78.

Inter canem and lupum -- Margeria filia Nicholai de Okele appellat Johannem
Chose pro raptu and pace Regis fracta die Martis prox, etc. inter canem and
lupum. i. In crepusculo, scilicet Anglice twylight, i. Inter diem and noctem,
etc. Inter Plac. de Trin. 7 Edw. 1. Rot. 12. Glouc. -- In placito de domo
combusta maliciose, hora vespertina, scilicet, inter canem and lupum, venerunt
malefactores, etc. Plac. Cor. apud Novum Castrum 24 Ed. 1. Rot. 6.

Intercommoning, Is, where the Commons of two Manors lie contiguous, and the
Inhabitants of both have time out of mind depastured their Cattle promiscuously
in each of them.

Interdiction, (Interdictio) Has the same signification in the Common, as it
has in the Canon Law, which thus defines it: Interdictio est censura
Ecclesiastica prohibens administrationem divinorum. And so it is used 22 Hen.
8. ca. 12 and 25. ejusdem, cap. 20.

Interdicted of Water and Fire, Were in old time those, who, for some crime
were banished; which Judgment, though it was not by express sentence
pronounced, yet, by giving order, That no man should receive them into his
house, but deny them Fire and Water, (the two necessary elements of life) they
were condemned, as it were to a Civil death; and this was called legitimum
exilium. Livie.

Interest, (Interesse) Is vulgarly taken for a term or Chattel real, and more
particularly for a future term; in which case it is said in pleading, that he
is possessed de interesse termini. But ex vi termini, in legal understanding,
it extends to Estates, Rights and Titles, that a man has of, in, to, or out of
Lands; For, he is truly said to have an interest in them. Coke on Litt. fo.
345. b.

Interlocutory Order, (Ordo interlocutorius) Is that which non definit
controversiam, sed aliquid obiter, ad causam pertinens, decernit. As, where an
Order is made, by motion in Chancery, in a Suit there depending, for the
Plaintiff to have an Injunction, to quiet his possession, till the hearing of
the Cause; This, or any such like order, which is not final, is called
interlocutory.

Interpleder. See Enterpleder.

Intestates, (Intestati,) There are two kinds of Intestates; one that makes no
Will at all; another that makes a Will and Executors, and they refuse; in which
case he dies quasi intestatus. 2 Part Inst. fol. 397.

Intiertie. See Entierty.

Intrusion, (Intrusio,) Is, when the Ancestor dies seized of any Estate of
inheritance, expectant upon an estate for life, and then Tenant for life dies,
between whose death and the entry of the Heir, a stranger does interpose
himself and intrude. Coke on Litt. fo. 277. To the same effect is Bracton, lib.
4. ca. 7. Intrusio est ubi quis, cui nullum jus competit in re nec scintilla
juris, possessionem vacuam ingreditur, etc. See him at large, and Fleta, lib 4.
ca. 30. Sect. 1 and 2. Britton, ca. 65. See Abatement, Entrusion, and the Stat.
21 Jac. ca. 14.

Intrusione, Is a Writ that lies against the Intruder, Regist. fo. 233.

Invadiationes, Morgages, or Pledges. -- Confirmamus eis omnes alias
donationes, venditiones and invadiationes eis rationabiliter factas. Mon. Angl.
1. pa. fo. 478. a.

Inventarie, (Inventarium,) Is a list or repertory, orderly made, of all dead
men's goods and Chattels, prized by four credible Men or more, which every
Executor or Administrator ought to exhibit to the Ordinary, at such time as he
shall appoint. West, Part 1. Symbol. lib. 2. Sect. 696. where likewise you may
see the form. This Inventary proceeds from the Civil Law; for, whereas by the
ancient Law of the Romans, the Heir was tied to answer all the Testators Debts,
by which means Inheritances were prejudicial to many men: Justinian, to
encourage men the better to take upon them this charitable Office, ordained,
That, if the Heir would first make and exhibit a true Inventary of all the
Testators Substance coming to his hands, he should be no farther charged then
to the value of it. Lib. ult. Cod. de. Jure deliberando.

In ventre sa mere, (Fr.) In the Mothers Belly; Is a Writ mentioned in the
Register of Writs, and in Anno 12 Car. 2. ca. 24.

Invest, (from the Fr. Invester,) Signifies to give possession. Investitura
proprie dicitur quando hasta vel aliquod corporeum traditur a Domino, says the
Feudist, lib. 2. tit. 2. We use likewise to admit the Tenant, by delivering him
a Verge or Rod into his hands, and ministering him an Oath, which is called
Investing. Others define it thus, Investitura est alicujus in suum jus
introductio, a giving Livery of seisin or possession.

Invoice, (12 Car. 2. ca. 34.) Is a particular of the value, custom, and
charges of any goods sent by a Merchant in another man's Ship, and consigned to
a Factor or correspondent in another Country.

Inure, Signifies to take effect, or be available; As the pardon inureth --
Stamf. Praerog. fo. 40. See Enure.

Jocalia, Jewels. -- Edward the First employed one Andevar, ad socalia sua
impignoranda. Claus. 29 Edw. 1. -- Praeterea confiderantes gratam subventionem
quam praefati abbas and Monachi (Rading.) nobis fecerunt de magnis and
praeciosis Jocalibus ac aliis rebus suis in subsidium expensarum and sumptuum,
quos circa praesens passagium nostrum versus parts transmarinas, etc. In mem.
Scac. de Anno 20 Ed. 3. Trin. Rot. 3.

Jocarius, a Jester. In a Deed of Richard Abbas de Bernayo to Henry Lovet, sine
dat. among the witnesses to it, was Willielmo tunc Jocario Domini Abbatis.

Joclet, (Sax.) Praediolum, agri colendi portiuncula: A little Farm or Manor,
in some parts of Kent called a Yoklet, as requiring but a small Yoke of Oxen to
till it. Sax. dict.

Jotson. See Jetsen and Flotson.

Joynder, Is the coupling or joining of two in a Suit or Action against
another. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 118. and in many other places, as appears in the
Index, verbo Joynder.

Joyntenants, (Simul tenentes, or qui conjunctim tenent,) Are those that come
to, and hold Lands or Tenements jointly by one title pro indiviso, or without
partition. Littleton, lib. 3. ca. 3. And, these Joyntenants must jointly plead,
and jointly be impleaded by others, which property is common between them and
Coparceners, but Joyntenants have a sole quality of survivorship, which
Coparceners have not. For, if there be two or three Joyntenants, and one has
Issue and dies, he or those Joyntenants that survive shall have the whole by
survivorship. See Coke on Litt. fo. 180.

Joining of Issue, (Junctio exitus.) See Issue.

Jointure, (Junctura,) Is a Covenant or Settlement, whereby the Husband, or
some other friend in his behalf assures to his Wife, in respect of Marriage,
Lands or Tenements for term of her life or otherwise. It is so called, either,
because it is granted ratione Juncturae in matrimonio; or because the Land in
Frank-marriage is given jointly to the Husband and Wife, and after to the heirs
of their bodies, whereby the Husband and Wife are made Joyntenants during the
Coverture. Coke, lib. 3. Butler and Bakers Case. Ioynture is also used as the
abstract of Ioyntenants. Coke, lib. 3. Marq. of Winchesters Case.

Journal, (Fr.) A Diary, or Day-book. Iournals of Parliament are no Records,
but Remembrances; they are not of necessity, nor have been of long continuance.
See Hob. Rep. fo. 109.

Journ-choppers, (Anno 8 Hen. 6. ca. 5.) Were Regraters of Yarn. Whether that
we now call Yarn was in those days called Iourn, I cannot say; but, choppers
in these days are well known to be changers; As, to chop and change, is a
familiar phrase. See Chop-chirch.

Journy-man, (from the Fr. Iournee. i. A day, or days work) Was properly he,
that wrought with another by the day; though now by Statute it be extended to
those likewise that covenant to work with another in their Occupation or Trade,
by the year. Anno 5 Eliz. ca. 4.

Ire ad largum, To go at large, to escape, to be set at liberty.

Irregularity, (Irregularitas,) Disorder, going out of Rule: In the Canon Law
it is taken for an impediment, which hinders a man from taking Holy Orders; as,
if he be base-born, notoriously desamed of any notable Crime, maimed, or much
deformed, or has consented to procure another death, with diverse other.

Irrepleviable, or Irreplevisable. That may not, or ought not by Law to be
replevied, or set at large upon Sureties. The Distress shall remain
irrepleviable. Anno 13 Ed. 1. ca. 2.

Isinglas, (Gluten piscium,) Is a kind of Fishglue, or Fish-gum, brought from
Iseland and those parts, and is used in Medicines, and, by some, in the
adulteration of Wines, in which last use it is prohibited by Stat. 12 Car. 2.
ca. 25.

Issue, (Exitus,) Has diverse applications; sometime being used for the
Children begotten between a Man and his Wife; sometime for Profits growing from
Amercements or Fines; sometimes for Profits of Lands or Tenements, (Westminster. 2.
An. 13 Ed. 1. ca. 39.) Sometime for that point of matter depending in Suite,
whereon the parties join, and put their Cause to the Trial of the Jury. And, in
all these, it has but one signification, which is an effect of a Cause
preceding; as Children are the effect of the Marriage; the Profits growing to
the King or Lord from the punishment of any man's Offense, is the effect of his
Transgression; the point referred to 12 Men is the effect of pleading or
process. Issue, in this last signification, is either general, or special.

General Issue seems to be that, whereby it is referred to the Jury to bring in
their Verdict, whether the Defendant have done any such thing as the Plaintiff
lays to his charge: For example, if it be an Offense against any Statute, and
the Defendant plead not culpable, this being put to the Jury, is called the
General Issue; See Doctor and Student, fo. 158. b. The Special Issue then must
be that, where special matter being alleged by the Defendant, for his defense,
both parties join thereupon, and so grow either to a demurrer, if it be
quaestio juris, or to a Trial by the Jury, if it be quaestio facti. An. 4 Hen.
8. ca. 3. See the New Book of Entries, verbo Issue, and 18 Eliz. ca. 12.

Itinerant, (Itinerans, i. That takes a journey,) Those were anciently called
Justices itinerant, who were sent with Commission into diverse Counties, to hear
such causes specially as were termed Pleas of the Crown. See Justices in Air.

Judaism, (Iudaismus,) The Custom, Religion or Rites of the Jews: This word was
often used by way of exception, in old Deeds; as Sciant -- Quod ego Rogerus de
Morice dedi -- Willielmo Harding pro tribus marcis argenti -- unum croftum --
Habend de me and heredibus meis sibi and haeredibus ejus vel ejus assignatis
and eorum heredibus cuicunque, quocunque vel quandocunque dictum Croftum dare,
vendere, legare, invadiare, vel aliquo modo assignare voluerint in quocunque
statu fuerint, libere, quiet, integre, been and in pace, excepta Religione and
Judaismo, etc. Sine dat. The Stat. De Iudaismo was made 18 Edw. 1. At which
Parliament, the King had a Fifteenth granted him Pro expulsione Iudaeorum.

Iudaismus, was also anciently used for a Morgage. -- Pro hac autem donatione
dederunt mihi dicti Abbas and Canonici sex Marcas Sterling. ad acquietandam terram
praedictam de Judaismo, in quo fuit impignorata per Rob. fratrem meum, etc. Ex
magno Rot. Pipae, de Anno 9 Edw. 2.

Judgment (Iudicium, quasi juris dictum) The very voice of Law and Right, and
therefore Iudicium semper pro veritate accipitur: The ancient words of Judgment
are very significant, Consideratum est, etc. because Judgment is ever given by
the Court upon consideration had of the Record before them; and in every
Judgment there ought to be three persons Actor, Reus and Iudex. Of Judgments,
some are final and some not final, etc. See Coke on Littl. fol. 39. a.

Judicium Dei, The Judgment of God; so our Ancestors called those now
probibited Trials of Ordael, and its several kinds. Si se super defendere non
posset Judicio Dei, scil. Aqua vel ferro, fieret de eo justitia. LL. Divi Edw.
Confess. cap. 16. See Spelm. Gloss. on this word.

Judgment or Trial by the Holy Cross (long since disused) See Cressy's
Church History, fol. 960.

Jugum terrae, In Domesday, contains half a P o(...)and.

Jun(...)ia (from juncus) A Soil where Rushes grow. Coke on Littl. fol. 5. --
Cum Piscariis, Turbariis, Juncariis, and communibus Pasturis, ad Messuagium
praedictum pertin. Pat. 6 Edw. 3. pa. 1. m. 25.

Jura Regalia. See Regalia.

Jurats (Iurati, Anno 2 and 3 Edw. 6. cap. 30.) As the Major and Iurats of
Maidstone, Rye, Winchelsey, Tenterdon, etc. are in the nature of Aldermen for
Government of their several Corporations; and the name is taken from the
French, where (among others) there are Major and Iurati Suessenses, etc. Vide
Choppin. Doman. Fran. lib. 3. Tit. 20. sect. 11. p. 530. So Iersey has a
Bailiff, and Twelve Iurats, or sworn Assistants to govern the Island. Came.
Romene^ Marsh is incorporate of one Bailiff, xxiiii Iurats, and the Commonalty
thereof, by Charter Dat. 23 Febr. 1 Edw. 4. See Mr. Dugdale Hist. of Imbanking
and Draining, fol. 34. b.

Jury (Iurata, from Iurare to swear) Signifies Twenty four or twelve Men sworn
to inquire of the matter of Fact, and declare the Truth upon such Evidence as
shall be delivered them, touching the matter in question; of which Jury who
may, and who may not be impaneld, see Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 165. There are two
manner of Trials in England; one by Battle, the other by Assise or Jury. See
Smith de Repub. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 5, 6, 7. who adds a third, by Parliament.
The Trial by Assise (be the Action Civil or Criminal, Public of Private,
Personal or Real) is referred for the Fact to a Jury; and as they find it, so
passes the Judgment; which by Bracton (lib. 2. cap. 7.) is called Regale
beneficium, etc. This Jury is not only used in Circuits of Justices, but in
other Courts, and Matters of Office; as if the Coroner enquire how a subject,
found dead, came to his end, he uses an Enquest; the Justices of Peace in
their Quarter Sessions; the Sheriff in his County and Turn; the Bailiff of a
Hundred; the Steward of a Court Leet, or Court Baron, if they enquire of any
offense, or decide any Cause between party and party, do it by the same manner.
So that where it is said, all things are tryable by Battle or Assise: Assise in
this place, is taken for a Jury, or Enquest, empanelled upon any Cause in a
Court where this kind of Trial is used. This Jury, though it pertain to most
Courts of the Common Law, yet is it most notorious in the half-yearly Courts of
the Justices Itinerants, or of the Great Assizes, and in the Quarter Sessions,
where it is usually called a Jury; and that in Civil Causes; whereas in other
Courts it is oftener termed an Enquest, and in the Court Baron, a Jury of the
Homage. In the General Assise, there are usually many Iuries, because there are
many Causes, both Civil and Criminal, commonly to be tried, whereof one is
called the Grand Jury, or Great Enquest, and the rest Petit Iuries, whereof it
seems there should be one for every Hundred. Lamb. Eiren. lib. 4. cap. 3. page
384.

The Grand Jury consists ordinarily of Twenty four grave and substantial
Gentlemen, or some of them of the better sort of Yeomen, chosen indifferently
out of the whole County by the Sheriff, to consider of all Bills of Indictment
preferred to the Court, which they do either approve, by writing upon them
Billa Vera, or disallow, by writing Ignoramus; such as they approve, or find,
as they term it, if they touch life and death, are farther referred to another
Jury to be considered of; because the Case is of such importance; but others of
less moment in Trespass, or for misdemeanors, are, upon their allowance,
without more ado, fined by the Bench, except the party Traverse the Indictment,
or challenge it for insufficiency; or remove the Cause to a higher Court by
Certiorari; in which two former Cases it is referred to another Jury, and in
the later, transmitted to the higher Court. Lamb. Eiren. lib. 4. cap. 7. And
presently upon the allowance of this Bill by the Grand Enquest, a Man is said
to be indicted; such as they disallow, are delivered to the Bench, by whom they
are forthwith cancelled.

The Petit Jury in Criminal Causes, consists of Twelve Men, at least, and being
impanelled, do bring in their Verdict, either guilty, or not guilty; whereupon,
the Prisoner, if he be found guilty, is said to be Convict, and accordingly
afterward receives his Judgment, and Condemnation, or otherwise is acquitted.
Those that pass upon Civil Causes real, are so many, as can conveniently be
had, of the same Hundred, where the Land or Tenement in question lies, or four,
at the least: And they, upon due examination of the Matter, bring in their
Verdict, either for the Demandant or Tenant. Of this, see Fortescu, cap. 25,
26, 27. According to which, Judgment passes afterward in the Court, where the
Cause first began; and the reason hereof is, because these Justices of Assise
are in this Case, for the ease of the Country; only to take the Verdict of
the Jury, by virtue of the Writ called Nisi Prius, and so return it to the
Court, where the Cause is depending. See Nisi Prius, and Enquest.

Juridical Days (Dies Juridici) Days on which the Law is administered, days in
Court. See Dies.

Juris utrum, Is a Writ, which lies for the Incumbent, whose Predecessor has
alienated his Lands or Tenements; the diverse uses whereof, see in Fitz. Not.
Br. fol. 48.

Jurisdiction (Jurisdictio) Is an Authority or Power, which a Man has to do
justice in Causes of Complaint made before him: Of which, there are two kinds;
the one, which a Man has by reason of his Fee, and by virtue thereof, does
right in all Plaints concerning the Lands of his Fee; the other is a
Jurisdiction given by the Prince to a Bailiff. Which Division I have in the
Custumary of Normandy, cap. 2. which is not unapt for the practice of our
Commonwealth, for by him whom they call a Bailiff, we may understand all that
have Commission from the Prince, to give Judgment in any Cause. See Sir Edw.
Cokes Pr^^mium to his 4 Inst.

Jus Coronae (the Right of the Crown) Is part of the Law of England, and
differs in many things from the General Law, concerning the Subject. Vid. Coke
on Littl. fol. 15. b.

Jus Curialitatis Angliae. See Courtesy of England.

Jus Patronatus, Is the Right of presenting a Clerk to a Benefice. See the New
Book of Entries, verbo, Jure Patronatus in Quare impedit, fol. 465. col. 3.

Justes (Fr. Jouste, i. Decursus) Were contentions between Martial-men, and
Persons of Honor, with Spears on Hors-back, by way of exercise. Anno 24 Hen. 8.
cap. 13. Edictum Regis Edw. 1. prohibendo sub forisfacturd omnium quae
forisfactae possint, quod non Torneant, Bordeant, Adventuras Querant, Justus
faciant seu ad arma presumant fine Licentia Regis. Pas. 29 Edw. 1. Essex 101.

Justice (Justiciarius) Signifies him that is deputed by the King to administer
justice, and do right by way of Judgment: The reason why he is called Justice,
and not Judex, is; because, in ancient time, the Latin word for him was
Justicia, and not Justiciarius, as appears by Glanvil, lib. 2. cap. 6. and
Hoveden, fol. 413. a^ Secondly, Because they have their Authority by
deputation, as Delegates to the King, and not Jure Magistratus; and therefore
cannot depute others in their stead; the Justice of the Forest only excepted,
who has that liberty especially given him by the Statute 32 Hen. 8. cap. 35.
For the Chancellor, Marshal, Admiral, and such like are not called Justiciarii,
but Judices. Of these Justices we have diverse sorts in England, the manner of
their Creation with other Appurtenances read in Fortescu, cap. 51. These in
Mag. Char. cap. 12. and other Statutes are called Justicers.

Chief Justice of the Kings Bench (Capitalis Justicia vel Iusticiarius Banci
Regii) Has the Title of Lord, whilst he enjoys his Office, and is called
Capitalis Iusticiarius, because he is the chief of the rest. His Office is
specially to hear, and determine all Pleas of the Crown, that is, such as
concern offenses, committed against the Crown, Dignity, and Peace of the King,
as Treasons, Felonies, Mayhems, and such like, which you may see in Bracton,
lib. 3. tract. 2. per totum. And in Stanf. Pleas of the Crown. He also, with
his assistants, hears all Personal Actions, incident to his Jurisdiction. See
Sir Edw. Cokes 4 Inst. fol. 74. who says, The Chief Justice of this Court was
anciently created by Letters Patent, but now by Writ, in this form.

-- Rex, etc. I. K. militi salutem. Sciatis quod constituimus vos Justiciarium
nostrum Capitalem, ad Placita coram nobis tenenda, durante been placito nostro.
Test, etc.

Of the ancient Dignity of this Chief Justice, thus. Liber niger siscalis, cap.
4. In Scaccario residet, im^ and praesidet, primus in regno, Capitalis,
scilicet, Justicia. In the time of King John, and others of our ancient Kings,
it often occurs in Charters of Privileges, Quod non ponatur respondere, nisi
coram nobis vel Capitali Justicia nostra. The Oath of the Justices see in the
Stat. 18 Edw. 3. stat. 4. And in Origines Iuridiciales, a Catalogue of all the
Lord Chief Justices of England. See Kings Bench.

Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Has also the Title of Lord, whilst he
enjoys his Office, and is called Dominus Iusticiarius Communium Placitorum,
who, with his Assistants, did originally, and do yet hear and determine all
Causes at the Common Law, that is, all Civil Causes, as well personal as real,
between common persons; wherefore it was called The Court of Common Pleas, in
distinction from The Pleas of the Crown, or the Kings Pleas, which are special
and appertaining to him only. This Court was appointed to be in a settled
place, and not as other Courts, to follow or attend the Kings Court or Palace,
as appears by the Stat. 9 Hon. 3. cap. 11. Of its Jurisdiction, see 4 Inst.
fol. 99. The Justices Oath, see 18 Edw. 3. stat. 4.

Justice of the Forest (Iusticiarius Forestae) Is also a Lord by his Office,
and has the hearing and determining all offenses within the Forest, committed
against Venison or Vert; of these there are two, whereof the one has
Jurisdiction over all the Foresta on this side Trent, the other over all
beyond. The chiefest point of their Jurisdiction consists in the Articles of
the Kings Charter, called Charta de Foresta, made 9 Hen. 3. See Came. Britan.
page 214. The Court, where this Justice sits, is called the Justice Seat of the
Forest, held once every three years. See Manwood, par. 1. page 121. and 154. He
is also called Justice in Air of the Forest. This is the only Justice that
may appoint a Deputy by Stat. 32 Hen. 8. cap. 35.

Justice of Assise (Iusticiarii ad capiendas Assisas) Are such as were wont by
special Commission to be sent (as occasion was offered) into this or that
County to take Assizes, for the ease of the people. And it seems the Justices
of the Common Pleas had no power to take Assizes, until the Statute of 8 Rich.
2. cap. 2. for by that, they are enabled thereto, and to deliver Goals. And the
Justices of the Kings Bench have by that Statute such power affirmed unto them,
as they had One hundred years before. Of later years it is come to pass, that
these Commissions, Ad capiendas Assisas, are executed in the Lent; and long
Vacation, when the Justices and Lawyers are most at leisure to attend them.
Hence the matters, accustomed to be heard by more general Commission of
Justices in Air, are heard all at one time, with the Assizes, which was not so
of old, as appears by Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 7. number. 2. Yet no Justice of either
Bench, nor any other, may be Justice of Assise in his own Country. Anno 8
Rich. 2. cap. 2. and 33 Hen. 8. cap. 24. And these, who are in one word called
Justices of Assise, and twice every year go the circuit by two and two through
all England, have one Commission to take Assizes, another to deliver Goals,
another of Oyer and Terminer, etc. See Assise and Cromp. Iuris. fol. 210. That
Justices of Assise, and Justices in Air, did anciently differ, appears Anno 27
Edw. 3. cap. 5. And that Justices of Assise, and Justices of Goal Delivery,
were diverse, is evident by Anno 4 Ed. 3. cap. 3. The Oath taken by Justices of
Assise, is all one with that taken by the Justices of the Kings Bench. Old
Abridgment of Statutes, titulo, Sacramentum Iusticiariorum.

Justices of Oyer and Terminer (Justiciarii ad audiendum and terminandum) were
Justices, Deputed upon some special or extraordinary occasion, to hear and
determine some particular Causes. Fitz. (in his Not. Br.) says, The Commission
of Oyer and Terminer is directed to certain persons, upon any Insurrection,
heinous Demeanor or Trespass committed. And, because the occasion of granting
this Commission should be maturely weighed, it is provided by the Statute 2
Edw. 3. cap. 2. That no such Commission ought to be granted, but that they
shall be dispatched before the Justices of the one Bench, or the other, or
Justices Errants, except for horrible Trespasses, and that by special favor of
the King. The Form of this Commission, see in Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 110.

Justices in Air (Justiciarii itinerantes, alias Errantes, alias
Perlustrantes) are so termed of the old French word Err, i. iter; as a grand
Err, i. magnis itineribus, proverbially spoken. These, in ancient time, were
sent with Commission into diverse Counties, to hear such Causes specially, as
were termed the Pleas of the Crown; and that for the ease of the Subject, who
must else have been hurried to the Courts at Westminster, according to their
several Jurisdictions.; if the Cause were too high for the County Court. These
Justices (according to Gwin, in his Preface to his Reading) were anciently sent
but once in seven years, with whom Horn (in his Mirror of Justices) seems to
agree, Lib. 2. cap. Queux point estre actors, etc. And Lib. 3. cap. De Justices
in Air, where he also declares what belonged to their Office; but that they
were sent oftener, see Orig. Iuridiciales. They were instituted by Henry the
Second. Came. Brit. page 104. and were much like in some respect to the Justices
of Assise at this day; although for Authority and manner of proceeding, far
different. Coke on Littl. fol. 293. b.

Justices of Goal Delivery (Iusticiarii ad Goalas deliberanda^) Are such as are
sent with Commission, to hear and determine all Causes appertaining to those,
who for any offense, are cast into the Goal; part of whose authority is to
punish such, as let to Mainprise those Prisoners, who by Law are not bailable,
Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 151. These probably, in ancient time, were sent into the
Counties upon this several occasion: But afterward Justices of Assise had this
in Commission also. Anno 4 Edw. 3. cap. 3. Their Oath is all one with other of
the Kings Justices of either Bench.

Justice of the Hundred (Iusticiarius Hundredi) Erat ipse Hundredi Dominus, qui
and Centurio and Centenarius Hundredique Aldermannus appellatus est. Praeerat
omnibus Hundredi Friborgis, cognovitque de causis majusculis, quae in eisdem
finiri non potuerunt. Spelm.

Justicements (from Iustitia) All things belonging to Justice. Coke on Westminster.
1. fol. 225.

Justices of Laborers, Were Justices appointed, in former times, to redress the
frowardness of Laboring men, who would either be idle or have unreasonable
wages. Anno 21 Edw. 3. cap. 1. -- 25 Ejusdem; cap. 8. And 31 Ejusdem, cap. 6.

Justices of Nisi Prius, Are now all one with Justices of Assizes: For it is a
common Adjournment of a Cause in the Common Pleas, to put it off to such a day,
Nisi prius Iusticiarii venerint ad eas parts ad capiendas Assisas. Upon which
Clause of Adjournment, they are called Justices of Nisi Prius, as well as
Justices of Assizes, by reason of the Writ or Action they have to deal in.
Their Commission you may see in Cromp. Iuris. fol. 204. Yet he makes this
difference between them, because Justices of Assise have power to give Judgment
in a Cause, and Justices of Nisi Prius only to take the Verdict. But in the
nature of both their Functions, this seems to be the greatest difference, that
Justices of Nisi Prius have Jurisdiction in Causes Personal, as well as Real;
whereas Justices of Assise, in strict acception, deal only in the Possessory
Writs, called Assizes. Cowel.

Justices of Trail-baston, Were Justices appointed by King Edward the First,
Anno 1305. upon occasion of great disorders in the Realm, during his absence in
the Scottish and French Wars: They were so called, according to Holinshed, of
trailing or drawing the Staff of Justice, or for their summary proceeding,
according to Coke, 12 Rep. fol. 25. where it is said they were in a manner
Justices in Air, and their Authority founded on the Statute of Ragman. What
their Office was, take from a coetaneous Author. -- Circa haec tempora
processit in publicum novae inquisitionis breve, quod anglice dicitur
Trail-baston, contra Intrusores, Conductitios hominum vapulatores, conductitios
seisinae captores, pacis infractores, raptores, incendiarios, murduratores,
pugnatores. Multi hoc perempti, multi redempti, multi noxii, pauci innoxii sunt
inventi. Adeo quidem rigide processit huju^ ^^ertionis justitia, quod pater
proprio filio non parceret, etc. dira multa. Hist. Roffens, fol. 200. de Anno
1305. By means of which Inquisitions, many were punished by Death, many by
Ransom, many fled the Realm, which was there^y quieted, and the King gained
great riches toward the support of his Wars. See Matthew. Westminster. in Anno 1305.
We find also a Commission of Trail-baston coram Rogero de Gray and Sociis suis
Justic. apud St. Albanum. Anno Regni Regis Edw. tertii post Conquestum 5. See
Spelm. Gloss. verbo, Trail-baston.

Justices of the Pavilion (Justiciarii Pavilonis) Are certain Judges of a
Pyepowder Court, of a most transcendent Jurisdiction, anciently authorized by
the Bishop of Winchester at a Fair held on S. Giles Hill near that City, by
virtue of Letters Patent granted by Edward the Fourth. -- Episcopos Wynton and
successores suos, a tempore quo, etc. Justiciarios suos, qui vocantur
Justiciarii Pavilonis, cognitiones placitorum and aliorum negotiorum eadem
Feri^ Durante, nec non claves partarum and custodiam praedictae Civitatis
nostrae Wynton. pro certo tempore Feriae illius, and nonnullas alias
libertates, immunitates and consuetudines habuisse, etc. See the Patent at
large in Prynnes Animad. on 4 Inst. fol. 191.

Justices of the Peace (Justiciarii ad pacem) Are those, who are appointed by
the Kings Commission to attend the Peace of the County where they dwell; of
whom some, for special respect, are made of the Quorum, because some business
of importance may not be dispatched without the presence or assent of them, or
one of them. See Quorum. The Office and Power of these, is various and grounded
upon several Statutes, too long to recite. They were called Guardians of the
Peace, till the Thirty sixth year of Edward the Third, cap. 12. where they are
called Justices. Lamb. Eiren. lib. 4. cap. 19. page 578. See Shepherds Sure
Guide for I. of Peace.

Justices of Peace, Within Liberties (Justiciarii ad pacem infra Libertates)
Are such in Cities, and other Corporate Towns, as those others of the Counties;
and their Authority or power is all one within their several Precincts. Anno 27
Hen. 8. cap. 25.

Justiciar (Fr. Justicier) A Justice or Justicer. The Lord Bermingham,
Justiciar of Ireland. Baker, fol. 118.

Justicies, Is a Writ, directed to the Sheriff, for the dispatch of Justice, in
some special Cases in his County Court, of which, by his ordinary power he
cannot hold Plea there. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 117. Kitchen, fol. 74. says, That
by this Writ the Sheriff may hold Plea of a great sum, whereas of his ordinary
authority he cannot hold Pleas, but of sums under Forty shillings, with whom
Crompton agrees, fol. 231. It is called a Justicies, because it is a Commission
to the Sheriff Ad justiciandum aliquem, to do a Man justice or right, and
requires no Return or Certificate of what he has done. Bracton, lib. 4. tract.
6. cap. 13. number. 2. makes mention of a Iusticies to the Sheriff of London, in a
case of Dower. See the New Book of Entries, verbo, Iusticies.

Justification (Iustificatio) Is a maintaining or showing a good reason in
Court, why one did such a thing, which he is called to answer. As to justify
in a cause of Replevin. Broke, tit. Replevin.

Justificators (Iustificatores) Will. Rex Angliae H. Camerario and
Justificatoribus suis, omnibus suis fidelibus Norf. salutem. Inquirite per
Comitatum quis justius hujusmodi forisfacturam haberet tempore Patris mei, five
Abbas Ramesiae five antecessor W. de Albenio. Et si Comitatus concordaverit
quod Abbas rectius praedictam forisfacturam debet habere, tunc praecipio ut C.
solidi quos Radul. Passel. implacitavit, sine mora Abbati reddantur. T.
Episcopo Dunelmensi. Sir Henry Spelman leaves it thus without explication.
Iustificators seem to signify Compurgators, or those that by Oath justify the
Innocence, Report or Oath of another, as in the case of Waging Law; also
Jurymen; because they justify that party, on whose behalf they give their
Verdict.

K.
KAlender-Moneth (Mentioned in the Stat. 16 Car. 2. cap. 7.) Consists of Thirty
or thirty one days, according to the Calendar. A Twelve-moneth in the singular
number, includes all the year; but Twelve-moneths shall be computed according
to Twenty eight days to every Month. See Coke, lib. 6. fol. 61. b. Catesbies
Case, and see Computation.

Kantref, (Brit.) In Wales it signifies a Hundred Villages -- Le premer
Conquereur des treis Kantrefs de la tere de Breckenoch, estoit Bernard de
Nefmarche, Norman. Mon. Angl. 1. pa. fol. 319. b. See Cantred.

Karle (Sax.) A Man; and sometimes a Servant or a Clown. Hence the Saxons
called a Seaman, a Buscarle, and a Domestic Servant, Huscarle. This word is
often found in Domesday, Seldens Mare Clausum, and other ancient Records; from
hence, by corruption, comes our modern word Churl.

Karrata faeni (Mon. Angl. 1. par. fol. 548. b.) A Cart load of Hay. See
Carecta.

Kay (Kaia and Caya, Sax. caeg) Area in littore onerandarum atque exonerandarum
navium causa, e compactis tabulis trabibusque (clavium instar) firmata. A Wharf
to Land, or Ship Goods or Wares at. The Verb Caiare in old Writers, signifies
(according to Scaliger) to keep in, or restrain; and so is the Earth or Ground
where Kays are made, with Planks and Posts.

Kayage (Kaiagium) Portorium quod Kaiae nomine, exigit Telonarius. The Money or
Toll paid for Loading or Unloading Wares at a Kay or Wharf. Rot. Pat. 1 Edw. 3.
m. 10. and 20 Edw. 3. m 1.

Kedel (Anno 12 Edw. 4. cap. 7.) See Kiddle.

Keeper of the Great Seal (Custos magni Sigilli) Is a Lord by his Office,
styled Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and is of the Kings Privy
Council, through whose hands pass all Charters, Commissions, and Grants of the
King, under the Great Seal. Without which Seal, many of those Grants and
Commissions, as to diverse particulars, are of no force in Law; the Kings Great
Seal being as the Public Faith of the Kingdom, in the high esteem and
reputation, justly belonging and attributed thereunto. This Lord Keeper by the
Statute 5 Eliz. cap. 18. has the same Place, Authority, Pre-eminence,
Jurisdiction, Execution of Laws, and all other Commodities and Advantages as
the Lord Chancellor of England has. Both these great Officers cannot properly
be at the same time, since the said Statute, but before they might. Yet Sir
Francis Bacon was made Lord Keeper, 7 Martii, 1616. The Lord Chancellor Egerton
then living, but died the next day. He is made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal,
Per Traditionem Magni Sigilli sibi per Dominum Regem, and by taking his Oath. 4
Inst. fol. 87.

Keepers of the Liberties of England, by Authority of Parliament. See Custodes
Libertatis.

Keeper of the Privy Seal (Custos privati Sigilli) Is a Lord by his Office,
through whose hands pass all Charters signed by the King, before they come to
the Great Seal, and some things which do not pass the Great Seal at all. He is
also of the Kings Privy Council, and was anciently called Clerk of the Privy
Seal. Anno 12 Rich. 2. cap. 11. Gardien del Privy Seal. In Rot. Parl. 11 Hen.
4. number. 28. And Lord Privy Seal. Anno 34 Hen. 8. cap. 4.

Keeper of the Touch (Anno 12 Hen. 6. cap. 14.) Seems to be that Officer in the
Kings Mint, which at this day is called Master of the Assay. See Mint.

Keeper of the Forest, (Custos Forestae) Is also called Chief Warden of the
Forest, and has the principal Government of all things, and the check of all
Officers, thereto belonging: And the Lord Chief Justice in Air of the Forest,
when it pleases him to keep his Justice Seat, sends out his general Summons to
him forty days before, to warn all under Officers to appear before him, at a
day assigned in the Summons. Manw. par. 1. p. 156, etc.

Kennets, A sort of course Welsh Cloth, mentioned Anno 33 Hen. 8. cap. 3.

Kernes, Idle persons, Vagabonds. -- Nec non de illis qui dicuntur homines
ociosi, and malefactoribus, qui etiam Kernys dicuntur. Ord. Hibern. 31 Edw. 3.
m. 11, 12.

Kernellatus. -- Et Dux (sc. Lanc.) dicit, quod ipse clamat pro se and
haeredibus suis habere Castrum suum de Halton, Kernellatum. Pl. de quo War.
apud Cestriam, 31 Edw. 3. Fortified or Embattelled.

Keyles or Keeles (Cyuli or Ciules) A kind of Long Boats of great Antiquity,
mentioned Anno 23 Hen. 8. cap. 18. Longae Naves quibus Britanniam primo
ingressi sunt Saxones. Spel.

Kidder (Anno 5 Eliz. cap. 12.) -- Every person being a Common Badger, Kidder,
Lader, or Carrier. -- Says the Statute; whereby it seems to signify one, that
Badges or carries Corn, Dead Victual, or other Merchandise up and down to sell;
called also Kyddiers, Anno 13 Eliz. cap. 25.

Kiddle, Kidel, or Kedel (Kidellus) A Dam, or open Wear in a River, with a loop
or narrow cut in it, accommodated for the laying of Weels, or other Engines to
catch Fish. 2 Part. of Cokes Instit. Angustias, machinas sive ingenia in
fluminibus posita ad Salmones, aliosque pisces intercipiendos. Some Fishermen
corruptly call them Kettles. The word is ancient, for in Magna Charta, cap. 24.
we read thus -- Omnes Kidelli deponantur de caetero penitus per Thamesiam and
Medeweyam and per totam Angliam, nisi per costeram Maris. And in a Charter made
by King John, power was granted to the City of London, De Kidellis amovendis
per Thamesiam and Medeweyam. Anno 1 Hen. 4. cap. 12. It was accorded (inter
alia) That a Survey should be made of the Wears, Mills, Stanks, Stakes, and
Kidels in the great Rivers of England. Inq. capt. apud Derb. 15 Nov. 1 Eliz.
post mortem Tho. Fyndern, etc. -- Et fuit s^isitus de uno Kidello vocat. a
Were, ac de libera piscaria in Potlok. Esc. Bundello. 3.

Kilketh, Was an ancient servile kind of payment; For, in an old Manuscript I
find Kilketh pro qualibet husbandrea 2 denar.

King of Heralds, (Rex Heraldorum,) Is a chief Officer at Arms that has the
pre-eminence of the Society; Among the Romans he was called Pater patratus. See
Herald.

King of the Minstrels, at Tutbury in Com. Staff. his power and privilege
appears in the following Charter.

JOhan par le grace de Dieu, Roy de Castile and de Leon Duke de Lancastre a
touts ceux, que cestes nos letres verront ou orront saluz. Saches nous avoir
ordonez constitut and assignez nostre bien ame le Roy des Ministraulx deins
nostre Honeur de Tuttebury quore est, ou qui pur le temps serra, pur prendre
and arrester touts les Ministralx deins meisme nostre Honor and Franchise;
queux refusont de fair lour services and Ministralcie as eux appurtenants, a
fair de ancient temps a Tuttebury suisdit annuelment les jours del Assumption
de nostre dame. Donants and grantants au dit Roy des Ministralx pur le temps
estant pl^in poier and mandement de les fair resonablement justifier and
constrener de fair lour services and Ministralcies en manner come appeint, and
come illonques ad este use and de ancient temps accustom. En testimoigniance
de quel chose nous avons fait fair cestes nos letres patents, don souz nostre
privy Seal a nostre Castle de Tuttebury le xxii jour de August le an de regne
nostre tresdulces le Roy Richard Second, quart. Confirmed by Hen. 6. 22. Febr.
21 Regni.

Item est ibidem quaedam Consuetudo quod Histriones, venientes ad matutinds in
festo Assumptionis Beatae Mariae, habebunt unum Taurum de Priore de Tuttebury,
si ipsum capere possunt citra aquam done propinquiorem Tuttebury, vel Prior
dabit eis xl d. pro qua quidem Consuetudine dabuntur Domino ad dictum Festum
annuatim xx d. Mon. Angl. 1 Par. fo. 355. b. See Minstrels.

King's Bench, (Bancus Regius, from the Sax. Banca, a Bench or Form) Is the
Court or Judgment Seat, where the King of England was sometimes wont to sit in
his own person, and was therefore moveable with the Court or Kings household,
and called Curia Domini Regis, or Aula Regis; wherein, and in the Exchequer
(which were the only Courts of the King till Henry the Thirds days) were
handled all matters of Justice, as well civil as criminal. This Court was wont,
in ancient times, to be especially exercised in all criminal matters and Pleas
of the Crown, leaving private Contracts and Civil actions to the Common Pleas
and other Courts. Glanvil, lib. 1. ca. 2, 3, etc. Smith de Repub. Angl. lib. 2.
ca. 11. See Cokes 4 Inst. fo. 70.

Kings silver, Is that Money which is due to the King in the Court of
Common Pleas, pro licentia concordandi, in respect of a License there granted
to any man for levying a Fine, Coke Vol. 6. fol 39. a and 43. b.

Kings Swanheard, (Magister deductus Cignorum,) Pat. 16 R. 2. pars 1. m. 38. --
Radulphum Scot, Custodem Cignorem nostrorum, five per alium quemcunque qui pro
tempore Custos cignorum nostrorum praedictorum fuerit. No Fowl can be a stray
but a Swan. 4 Inst. fo. 280.

Kintal, (Span. Quintal,) Is a kind of weight, most commonly of one hundred
pounds, or something under or over, according to the diverse uses of sundry
Nations; Plowden, fol. 3. in the Case of Renynger and Fogassa, mentions 2000
Kintals of Woad.

Kirk^ys-Quest, Is an ancient Record remaining with the Remembrancer of the
Exchequer, the meaning and etmology whereof will appear by what follows. Md.
quod Anno Dom. 1277, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi filii Regis Henrici quinto, misit
idem Rex per totam Angliam Ballivos inquirere sub juramento and in secreto de
universis terris Angliae per Johannem de Kirkby Thesaurarium suum, quisquis
teneret and cujus feodi, and quantum, and cujus Regis tempore feoffati essent.
Ex Registro Glaston. Caenobii penes Rad. Sheldon Ar. fo. 71. b.

Knave, (Sax. Cnawa,) Is used for a Manservant, Anno 14 Edw. 3. Stat. 1. ca. 3.
It did anciently signify a Child; also a Minister or Servant. Matthew. 8. 6.
Puer meus jacet in domo paralyticus, was, in the Saxon Translation, turned mine
knawa. -- Hence seyld knawa, pro, Armigero, quasi scuti famulus seu minister;
he that bore the Weapon or Shield of his Superior. It was sometimes of old used
as a titular addition. -- Johannes filius Willielmi Couper de Denby Knave, ad
satisfaciendum Regi de omni eo quod ad Regem pertinet, occasion cujusdam
Utlagariae in ipsum in placito transgressionis ad sectam Regis promulgata.
Original. de anno 22 Hen. 7. 36 Derby.

Knight, (Sax Cnyt. Miles, Chivalier, or Eques auratus, from his gilt Spurs
usually worn, and thence called anciently Knights of the Spur. Signifies one
that bears Arms, who, for his virtue, and Marshal prowess, is by the King, or
one having his Authority, exalted above the rank of Gentlemen to a higher
account or step of dignity. The manner of making them Came. in his Britan. thus
shortly expresses. Nostris vero temporibus, qui Equestrem dignitatem suscipit,
flexis genibus leviter in humero percutitur, Princeps his verbis Gallice
affatur; Sus vel sois Chevalier au nom de Dieu. i. Surge aut fis Eques in
nomine Dei. This is meant of Knight-Bachelers, which is the lowest but most
ancient degree of Knighthood with us. By the Stat. 1 Edw. 2. ca. 1. All
Gentlemen having a full Knights Fee, and holding their Land by Knights Service,
might be compelled by distress to procure himself to be made Knight, when he
came to Man's Estate. But, by the Statute 17 Car. 1. ca. 20. it is ordained,
that no man shall be compelled to take the Order of Knighthood, etc. The
privilege belonging to a Knight see in Ferns Glory of Generosity, p. 116. Of
Knights there are two sorts, one Spiritual, so called by Divine, in regard of
their Spiritual Warfare; the other Temporal, Cassanaeus de gloria mundi, Part
9. Considerat. 2. See Seldons Titles of Honor, fo. 770.

Knights of the Garter, (Equites Garterii, or Periscelidis,) Arc an Order of
Knights, created by Edward the Third, after he had obtained many notable
Victories, who, for furnishing this honorable Order, made choice in his own
Realm, and all Christendom, of 25 the most excellent and renowned persons for
virtue and honor; Himself and His Successors, Kings of England, were ordained
to be the Sovereigns, and the rest Fellows and Brethren of this Order. Smith
de Repub. Angl. lib. 1. ca. 20. The Officers belonging to it, are, The Prelate
of the Garter, (which is always the Bishop of Winchester:) The Chancellor of
the Garter; the Register, who is always Dean of Windsor; The Principal King at
Arms called Garter, whose chief function is to manage their Solemnities at
their Feasts and Installations; Lastly, the Usher of the Garter, being the
Usher of the Black Rod. This most honorable Society is a College or
Corporation, having a great Seal belonging to it. See Garter.

Knights Baneret. See Baneret. John Coupeland, (for his valiant service against
the Scots) had the honor of Baneret conferred on him and his Heirs for ever,
by Patent, 29 Edw. 3. part 1. m. 2.

Knights of the Bath, See the Antiquity and Ceremony of their Creation in Mr.
Dugdales Description of Worcestershire, fo. 531, 532. They are so called from
their Bathing the night before their Creation; Their place is before Knights
Batchelors, and after Baronets.

Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, (Milites Sancti Johannis Hierosol^mitani,)
Had beginning about the year 1119. and denomination from John the charitable
Patriarch of Alexandria, though vowed to St. John Baptist their Patron. They
had their primary foundation and chief abode first in Jerusalem, and then in
the Isle of Rhodes, until they were expelled thence by the Turk, Anno 1523.
Since which time their chief Seat is in the Isle of Malta, where they have done
great Exploits against the Infidels, especially in the year 1595, and are now
called Knights of Malta. They had one general Prior, who had the Government of
the whole Order within England and Scotland. Reg. of Writs, fol. 20. b. and was
the first Prior of England, and sat in the Lords House of Parliament. Of these
Knights mention is made in the Stat. 25 Hen. 8. ca. 2. and 26 ejusdem, ca. 2.
But, Anno 32 Hen. 8. ca. 24. They in England and Ireland, being found overmuch
to adhere to the Pope against the King, were suppressed, and their Lands and
Goods referred by Parliament to the Kings disposition. See Hospitalers.

Knights of Malta. See Knights of St. John. --

Knights of Rhodes. (Anno 32 Hen. 8. ca. 24.) See Knights of St. John. --

Knights of the Temple. See Templers.

Knights of the Chamber, (Milites Camerae,) mentioned in 2 Inst. fo. 666. and
in Rot. Pat. 29 Ed. 3. par. 1. m. 29: seem to be such Knights Batchelers, as
are made in time of Peace, because Knighted commonly in the Kings Chamber, not
in the Field, as in time of War.

Knights of the Shire, (Milites Comitatus) otherwise called Knights of
Parliament, are two Knights, or Gentlemen of worth, chosen upon the Kings Writ,
in pleno Comitatu, by the Freeholders of every County that can dispend 40 s.
per ann. Anno 1 Hen. 5. ca. 1. and 10 Hen. 6. ca. 2. who are in Parliament to
consult in behalf of the Commons of England, touching the Public Affairs of
the Realm. These, when every man that had a Knights Fee, was customarily
constrained to be a Knight, were of necessity to be milites gladio cincti, for
so runs the Writ at this day. But now Custom admits Esquires to be chosen to
this Office. -- Quod milites Comitat. pro Parliamento extunc eligend. sint
milites notabiles de eisdem Com. pro quibus sic eligentur, seu aliter notabiles
Armigeri, homines generosi de nativitate de eisdem Com. qui sint habiles
existere milites, and quod nullus homo sit talis miles, qui in gradu valetti
and inferiori existit, prout in Statuto continetur, viz. 23 H. 6. In breve de
Sum. ad Parl. Claus. 39 Hen 6. in dorso. m. 41. For the choice of these Knights
see the Statutes 7 Hen. 4. ca. 15. 23 Hen. 6. ca. 15. with others. Their
expenses are to be born by the County, 35 Hen. 8. ca. 11. though now a days
that is, for the most part, not required.

Knight Marshal, (Mareschallus Hospitii Regis,) Is an Officer of the Kings
House, having jurisdiction and cognizance of any transgression within the Kings
House, and verge of it; as also of contracts made within the same house,
whereto one of the House is a party. Reg. of Writs, fo. 185. a. and 191 b. and
Spelmans Glossar. in voce Marescallus.

Knight Service, (servitium militare) Was a tenure, whereby several Lands in
this Nation were held of the King, which drew after it Homage and Service in
War, Escuage, Ward, Marriage, etc. but is taken away by Stat. 12 Car. 2. ca.
24. In Domesday book some Land holden by Knights service is called Tainland,
and land holden by Soccage, Reveland, fo. 86. a.

Knights fee, (Feodum militare) Is so much inheritance, as is sufficient yearly
to maintain a Knight with convenient Revenue; which in Henry the Thirds days
was 15 l. Came. Brittan. pa. 111. But, Sir Thomas Smith, in his Repub. Angl.
lib. 1. ca. 18. rates it at 40 l. And, by the Stat. for Knights, 1 Ed. 2. ca.
1. such as had 20 l. per Ann. in Fee or for life, might be compelled to be
Knights; which Stat. is Repealed by 17 Car. 1. ca. 20. Stow; in his Annals, pa.
285, says, There were found in England at the time of the Conqueror 60211
Knights Fees, according to others 60215; whereof the Religious Houses, before
their Suppression, were possessed of 28015. -- Unde octo Carucatae terrae
faciunt feodum unius militis. Mon. Angl. 2 p. fo. 825. a. Of this you may read
more in Seldens Titles of Honor, fo. 691. and Bracton, lib. 5. Tract. 1. ca. 2.
See Coke on Litt. fo. 69. a. A Knights Fee contained 12 Plow-lands. 2 Part
Inst. fo. 596. or 680 Acres.

Knighten-gyld, Was a Gyld in London consisting of 19 Knights, which King Edgar
founded, giving them a portion of void ground lying without the Walls of the
City, now called Portsoken-ward. Stowes Annals, pa. 151. This, in Mon. Angl. 2.
p. fo. 82. a. is written Cnittenegild.

Kyddiers, (Anno 13 Eliz. ca. 25.) See Kidder.

Kylyw -- Et sint quieti de pastu and Kylyw, and omnibus aliis exactionibus,
quas Forestarii and alii Balivi solent exigere. Mon. Angl. 1 Par. fo. 722. b.
Perhaps it might signify some kind of Pottage; for Kele, in the North, is
still used for Pottage.

L.
LAborariis, Is a Writ that lies against such, as having not whereof to live,
do refuse to serve: or against him that refuses to serve in Summer, where he
served in Winter. Reg. of Writs, fo. 189. b.

Laches, (Fr. Lache, i. Frigidus, Ignavus,) Signifies slackness, or negligence.
As no Laches shall be adjudged in the Heir within age. Litt. fo. 136. and Old.
Not. Br. fo. 110. Where a Man ought to make, or do a thing, and he makes or
does it not; I, of his Laches cannot have an Assise, but must take an Action on
the Case. See Coke on Litt. fo. 246. and 380. b.

Lafordswick, (Sax. Hlaford, Dominus and swic, Proditio,) Infidelitas erga
Dominum, A betraying ones Lord or Master. In the Laws of Hen. 1. ca. 13.
Quaedam Placita emendari (i. Quaedam crimina expiari) non possunt; Husbrech,
Bernet, Openthefe, Eberemorth, and Lafordswick. Which word is also found in
Canutus Laws, ca. 61. and in some Authors corruptly written Labordfith.

Laga, (Sax. Lag.) Law. Lagam Regis Edwardi vobis reddo, cum illis
emendationibus, quibus Pater meus eam emendavit, says Magna Charta. Hence
Seaxenlage, Mercenlage, Danelage, etc.

Lageman, or Lahman, (Lagamannus) Homo legalis seu legitimus; Such as we call
now Good men of the Jury. I find the word in Domesday, and in the Laws of
Edward the Confessor, ca. 38. thus -- Postea inquisisset Justitia per
Lagamannos, and per meliores homines de Burgo, etc.

Lagen, (Lagena,) Fleta, lib. 2. ca. 8, 9. In ancient time it was a Measure of
six Sextarii. Hence perhaps our Flagen. Donatio insuper de sex Lagenis olei
annuatim. Carta 2 Ed. 3. m. 25. n. 82. See Minstrel.

Lagon, (From the Sax. Legan, and Liggan, i. Jacere) Is that which lies in the
bottom of the Sea. See Flotson.

Lahs^it, Lags^ite, Laghs^ite, (Sax. Lag, Lex. and flite. Ruptio) The breaking
or transgressing the Law; and sometimes the punishment for breaking a Law. --
Si quis Dei rectitudines per vim teneat, solvat Lahs^ite cum dacis, plenam
Wytam cum Anglis. Leg. Hen. 1. ca. 13.

Lairwite, Lecherwite, and Legergeldum, (A Sax. Lagan, seu Laegan, Concumbere
and site, Mulcta,) A Fine, or Custom of Punishing Offenders in Adultery and
Fornication; which privilege did anciently belong to the Lords of some
Manors, in reference to their Villains and Tenants: which Fleta (lib. 1. ca.
47.) seems to infer. See 4 Inst. fo. 206.

Lammas-day, (Anno 23 Hen. 8. ca. 4.) Is the first of August, and so called
quasi Lamb-Mass: on which day the Tenants that held Lands of the
Cathedral-Church of York, (which is dedicated to St. Peter ad Vincula,) Were
bound by their Tenure to bring a live Lamb into the Church at High-Mass on that
day. See Gule of August.

Landa, A Laren, or open Field, without wood. Robertus Comes Legrecestriae
Radulpho Pincernae and omnibus Baronibus and fidelibus suis salutem. Sciatis me
dedisse servo dei Malgero Monacho in Eleemosina parvam Landam quae est inter
Lunbreodam and Coptieleiam ad Mansiones and oratorium ibidem faciend. Testibus.
etc. Sine dat.

Landboc, (a Sax. Land, i. Terra and boc, Liber) A Charter or Deed, whereby
Lands or Tenements are held or given. -- Ut praefata Abbatissa praenominatam
terram, scil. centum Manentium cum libris, quos Angli dicunt Landboc -- in
perpetuam haereditatem traderet. Council. Synodale apud Clovesho, Anno Dom. 822.
Sic Anglo-Saxones Chartas and Instrumenta nuncuparunt, praediorum cessiones,
jura and firmitates continentia. Spel.

Landegandman, Was one of the inferior Tenants of a Manor. Custumariorum genus
seu inferiorum tenentium Manerii, says the learned Spelman, who adds --
Occurrit vox in Customar. de Hecham.

Landcheap, (Sax. Land-cear, from Cearan, to buy and sell) A certain ancient
customary Fine, paid either in Money or Cattle, at every alienation of land
lying within some Manor, or within the liberty of some Borough: As at Maldon
in Essex, there is yet a Custom claimed by the same name, viz. that for certain
Houses and Lands sold within that Borough, xiii d. in every Mark of the
Putchase-Money shall be paid to the Town: which Custom of Landcheap is claimed
by a Grant (inter al.) made to that Town by the Bishop of London, Anno 5 Hen.
4. The word is also found in Spel. de Council. Vol. 1. fo. 502. Somner in his
Sax. Dict. says, Landceap, fortasse precium fundi pacto datum ^el debitum.

Landgable, (Sax. Land-gafel) Terrae census vel redditus, A Tax, or Rent
issuing out of Land. Domesday, Census praedialis vel tributum quod a praediis
colligitur. -- Id est pro unoquoque domo unum denarium. Spel.

Landimers, (Agrimensores,) Measurers of Land, anciently so called. Landimera
autem est terrae limes vel meta. From the Sax. gemaere. i. terminus.

Landman (Sax. Landesman, Terricola) The Terre-tenant.

Land-tenant, Is he that actually possesses the Land, or has it in his Manual
occupation. Anno 14 Edw. 3. stat. 1. cap. 3. See Terretenant.

Langemanni. -- Item in ipsa Civitate erant 12 Langemanni, i. Habentes Socam
and Sacam. Domesday, tit. Lincolnscire.

Lanis de cresce^tia Walliae traducendis absque Custuma, etc. Is a Writ that
lies to the Customer of a Port, to permit one to pass over Wool, without paying
Custom, because he has paid it in Wales before. Reg. of Writs, fol. 279.

Lapse (Lapsus) Is a slip or omission of a Patron, to present a Clerk to a
Benefice within six Months, after it becomes void; in which case, we say the
Benefice is in lapse or lapsed. Anno 13 Eliz. cap. 12. And this lapse is
incurred, as well where the Patron is ignorant of the Avoidance, as privy;
except only upon the Resignation of the former Incumbent, or Deprivation upon
any Cause comprehended in the same Statute: In which Cases the Bishop ought to
give notice to the Patron.

Larceny (Fr. Larrecin, Lat. Latrocinium) Is a Theft of Personal Goods or
Chattels in the owners absence; and in respect of the thing stolen, it is either
great or small. Great Larceny is when the things stolen, though severally,
exceed the value of xii d. Petit Larceny, is when the Goods stolen exceed not
the value of xii d. Of this see more in Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 1. cap. 15, 16,
17. Inter minuta autem furta (says Spelman) quae Forenses vocant Petie
Larcenys, olim habebantur equi and bovis subtractio, ut perspicuum, est ex
Assisis Hen. 2. Clarendoniae editis, ubi sic legitur. Haec Assisa attenebit --
in murdro and proditions and iniqua combustione and in omnibus praedictis, nisi
in minutis furtis and roberiis, quae factae fuerunt tempore guerrae, sicut de
equis and bobus and minoribus rebus.

Larding-mony. In the Manor of Bradford in Com. Wilts, the Tenants pay to the
Marquess of Winchester, their Landlord, a small yearly Rent by this Name:
Which, I conceive to be for liberty to feed their Hogs, with the Mast of the
Lords Woods; the Fat of a Hog being called Lard.

Larons (Fr.) Thieves. In the Statute for View of Frank-pledge, made 18 Edw. 2.
The Fourteenth Article to be given in charge at Leets is. Of Pety, Larons, as
of Geese, Hens, or Sheafs of Corn.

Lashlite. Si quis decimam contra teneat, reddat Lasblite cum Dacis, Witam cum
Anglis. It denoted the Danish common for feiture, which was Twelve Ores, every
Ore valuing about xvi d. sterling. Seldens Hist. of Tithes, page 203.

Last (Sax.) Lest (Fr.) Signifies a burden in general, and particularly a
certain weight or measure. As a Last of Pitch, Tar, or Ashes, contains Fourteen
Barrels. 32 Hen. 8. cap. 14. A Last of Hides, or Skins, Twelve dozen. 1 Iac.
cap. 33. A Last of Cod-fish, Twelve Barrels, 15 Car. 2. cap. 7. A Last of
Herring, contains Twenty Cades, or Ten thousand; every Thousand, Ten hundred,
and every Hundred sixscore. Anno 51 Hen. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 2. A Last of Corn, or
Rapeseed, is Ten Quarters. A Last of Wool, is Twelve Sacks. A Last of Leather,
is Twenty Dickers, and every Dicker Ten Skins. Of Unpacked Herrings, Eighteen
Barrels make a Last. A Last of Osmonds is Four thousand weight. Sed cum
discederent (mercatores) 4 denarius de uno quoque Lesth habebant Rex and Comes.
Sc. Cestriae. LL. Edw. Conf. apud Seldom, tit. Hon. sol. 620.

Last also, in the Marshes of East Kent, signifies a Court held by Twenty four
Jurats, and summoned by the two Bailiffs thereof, wherein they make Orders, lay
and levy Taxes, impose Penalties, etc. For preservation of the said Marshes.
See the Hist. of Imbanking and Draining, fol. 54.

Last Heir (Ultimus Haeres) Is he to whom Lands come by Escheat for want of
lawful Heirs, that is the Lord of whom they are held, in many Cases, but the
King in others. Quippe Rex omnium haeredum ultimus est, uti Occanus omnium
fluviorum receptaculum. Bracton, lib. 7. cap. 17.

Lastage, Lestage, and Lesting (Lastagium, from the Sax. Last, i onus) A Custom
exacted in some Fairs and Markets to carry things where one will (according to
Rastal.) But Anno 21 Rich. 2. cap. 18. it is taken for the Balance of a Ship.
In a Charter of Henry the Third, to the Monastery of Semplingham, thus -- Et
sint quieti de Theolonio, and pontagio, and passagio, and pedagio, and
Lestagio, and stallagio. Where it is to be understood in the former
signification. Omnes homines London sint quieti and liberi and omnes res little
per totam Angliam, and per portus maris, de theolonio, and passagio, and
lastagio, and ab omnibus aliis consuetudinibus. Diploma Hen. 1. de Libertatibus
London.

Lastage (says another Author) Is properly that Custom which is paid for Wares
sold by the Last, as Herrings, Pitch, etc.

Lathe or Leth (Laestum, Leda) Sax. Laethe) Is a great part of a County,
sometimes containing three or more Hundreds or Wapentakes; as it is used in
Kent and Sussex. Suoque olim subaudiens Magistratui quem* Ledgrevium
appellabant. -- Et quod Anglice vocabant 3 vol 4 Hundreda, isti vocabant
thrihinga. In quibusdam vero provinciis, Anglice vocabant Laeth, quod isti
dicunt Trihinge. Quod autem in Trihinge definiri non poterat, ferebatur in
Seyram, i. in Curiam Comitatus: LL. Edw. Conf. cap. 35. -- Et sint quieti de
sectis Comitatuum, Leth, Hundred. and auxiliis Vicecomitum. Pat. 1 Hen. 4. par.
8. m. 8.

Latimer, Seems to be used by Sir Edw. Coke for an Interpreter. 2 Part. Inst.
fol. 515. Vox autem unde veniat, non liquet.

Latitat, Is the name of a Writ whereby all Men in Personal Actions are called
originally to the Kings Bench. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 78. which has this name,
upon a supposition, commonly untrue, that the Defendant does lurk and lie hid:
For Latitare est se maliciose occultare animo fraudandi creditores. The true
original of this Writ, is this: In ancient time whilst the Kings Bench was
moveable, the Custom was, when any Man was to be sued, to send forth a Writ, to
the Sheriff of the County of Middlesex, where the Court was Resident, called a
Bill of Middlesex to take him; whereupon the Sheriff returned Non est inventus
in Baliva nostra, etc. Then was there a second Writ sued forth, that had these
words, -- Cum Testatum est quod Latitat, etc. And thereby the Sheriff willed to
attach him in any other place, where he might be found: And when the Tribunal
of the Kings Bench came to be settled at Westminster, the former course of Writ
was kept for a long time, first sending to the Sheriff of Middlesex, to Summon
the Party; and if he could not be found there, then to apprehend him
wheresoever: But afterward, by the contrivance of Clerks, and upon a pretense
of Expedition of Justice, it was at last devised to put both these Writs into
one, and so to attach the party complained of, upon a Supposal or Fiction, that
he was not within the County of Middlesex, but lurking elsewhere; and that
therefore he was to be apprehended in any place else, where he was presumed to
lie hid, by a Writ directed to the Sheriff of the County where he is suspected
to be.

Launcegays (Anno 7 Rich. 2. cap. 13.) A kind of offensive Weapons now
disused, and prohibited by the said Statute.

Law (Lex) From the Saxon Lag or Laugh) The Law of England is divided into
Three Parts: The Common Law, which is the most Ancient and General Law of the
Realm; Statutes or Acts of Parliament; and thirdly, Particular Customs, I say,
particular; for if it be the General Custom of the Realm, it is part of the
Common Law. Coke on Littl. fol. 15. b. Bracton defines it to be Sanctio justa
jubens honesta and prohibens contraria. And the Divine Schoolman says, Lex
humana est quoddam dictamen rationis, quo diriguntur humani actus. See
Merchenlage.

Law has also a special signification, wherein it is taken for that which is
lawful with us, and not elsewhere: As Tenant by the courtesy of England. Anno
13. Edw. 1. cap. 3. To Wage Law (Vadiare Legem) and to make, or do Law (Facere
Legem.) Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 37. When an Action of Debt is brought
against one, upon some secret Agreement or Contract, as in an Action of Detinue
for Goods, Money, or Chattels, lent or left with the Defendant, the Defendant
may wage his Law, if he will, that is, swear, and certain persons with him,
that he detains not the Goods, or ows nothing to the Plaintiff, in Manner and
Form as he has declared, which is intended by Law, to be only in case of the
Plaintiffs want of Evidence, and when he cannot prove his Surmise by any Deed,
or open Act. When one wages his Law, he shall bring with him so many of his
Neighbors as the Court shall assign (Sir Edward Coke says Eleven) to swear with
him, That they think in their Consciences he has sworn truly; who in the Civil
Law are called Compurgators. The offer to make the Oath, is called Wager of
Law; and when it is accomplished, it is called The making, or doing of Law. See
Glanvil. lib. 1. cap. 9. and 12. Anciently Laga was used as Latin for Law. --
Lagam Regis Edwardi vobis reddo, etc. Magna Char. Hen. 1. Anno 1 Rich. 3. cap.
2. -- 31 Hen. 6. cap. 6. Coke on Littl. fol. 155. and 295. who says it is
called Wager of Law, because in old time the party did engage with surety, to
make his Law by such a day. Legem vadiare, est cautionem dare de perimplendo
Legis exigentiam in re litigata; ut de praestando Sacramento ad indictam diem,
cum indicto consacramentalium seu conjuratorum numero. Spelman. And was a
Custom anciently used among the Egyptians, as Boemus in his Book De moribus
Gentium, informs us.

Lawyer, (Legista, Legisperitus, Jurisperitus, Our Saxons called him Lahman.

Law of Merchants (Lex Mercatoria) Is become a part of the Laws of this Realm;
for, if there be two Joynt-Merchants of Wares and Merchandise, and one of them
dies, his Executor shall have the moiety, which is not so in the case of
others, not Merchants. Coke on Littl. fol. 182. Anno 13 Edw. 1. stat. 3. and 27
Edw. 3. cap. 8.

Law Spiritual (Lex Spiritualis) Is the Ecclesiastical Law, allowed by the Laws
of this Realm, which is not against the Common Law (whereof the Kings
Prerogative is a principal part) nor against the Statutes and Customs of the
Realm. And regularly according to such Ecclesiastical Laws, the Ordinary, and
other Ecclesiastical Judges do proceed in Causes within their Cognizance. Coke
on Littl. fol. 344.

Law of the Staple (27 Edw. 3. stat. 2. cap. 22.) Is the same with
Law-Merchant. See 4 Inst. fol. 237, 238. And Staple.

Law of Marque (Anno 27 Edw. 3. stat. 2. cap. 17.) From the German word March,
i. Limes, a Bound or Limit; because they, that are driven to make use of this
Law, do take the Shipping or Goods of that people, of whom they have received
wrong, and cannot get ordinary Justice, when they can take them within their
own Bounds or Precincts. See Reprisals.

Law-day, Is otherwise called View of Frankpledge, or Court Leet. Anno 1 Edw.
4. cap. 2. it is used for the County Court. -- Et quod terrae eorum imperpetuum
quietae sint de sectis Commit atuum and Hundredorum nostrorum, de visu Franci
plegii and Lawdayorum, de Turno and auxilio Vicecomitum, etc. Carta 39 Hen. 3.
m. 5.

Lawing of Dogs, Mastiffs must be lawed every three years. Cromp. Jur. fol.
163. that is, Three Claws of the Fore-foot shall be cut off by the Skin. Char.
Forestae, cap. 6. or the Ball of the Forefoot cut out. See Expeditate and
Pellota.

Lawless Court. On Kingshil at Rochford in Essex, on Wednesday morning next,
after Michaelmas day, at Cockscrowing, Is held a Court, vulgarly called The
Lawless Court. They whisper and have no Candle, nor any Pen and Ink but a Coal;
and he that ows Suit or Service, and appears not, forfeits double his rent
every hour he is missing. This Court belongs to the Honor of Raleigh, and to
the Earl of Warwick; and is called Lawless, because held at an unlawful or
lawless hour, or Quia dicta sine lege. The Title of it in the Court Rolls, runs
thus, Kingshil in Rochford. ss.
CUria de Domino Rege,
Dicta sine Lege.
Tenta est ibidem
Per ejusdem consuetudinem,
Ante ortum solis,
Luceat nisi polus,
Senescallus solus
Nil scribit nisi culis,
Toties voluerit,
Gallus ut cantaverit,
Per cujus soli sonitus,
Curia est summonita,
Clamat clam pro Rege,
In Curia sine Lege,
Et nisi cito venerint,
Citius paenituerint,
Et nisi clam accedant,
Curia non attendat,
Qui venerit cum lumine,
Errat in regimine:
Et dum sunt sine lumine,
Capti sunt in crimine:
Curia sine cura,
Jurati de injuria,
Tenta ibidem die Mercurii (ante Diem) proximi post Festum Sancti Michaelis
Arch- angeli, Anno regni Regis, etc.


This Court is mentioned in Came. Britan, though imperfectly; who says this
servile attendance was imposed on the Tenants, for conspiring at the like
unseasonable time to raise a Commotion, fol. 441.

Lawless-Man (Sax. Laugheles-Man, exlex) Is otherwise called an Outlaw. Pro
exlege tenebitur, cum Principi non obediat nec legi, and tunc utlagabitur sicut
ille qui est extra legem, sicut Laugheles-man. Bract. lib. 3. and Corona, cap.
11.

Lawn. See Landa.

Layland (Terra inculta, novale) Land that lies untilled.

Leap-year. See Bissextile.

Lease (from the Fr. Laisser, i. Relinquere, Permittere) Is a Demise or Letting
of Lands, Tenements, Right of Common, Rent, or any Hereditament to another, for
Term of Years or Life, for a Rent Reserved. If the Lease be written, it is said
to be an Indenture, Deed, Poll, or Lease in writing; if made by word of Mouth,
it is called a Lease Parol. The Party that Lets this Lease, is called the
Leassor, and he to whom it is made, the Leassee. A Lease has in it six Points
or Parts, 1. Words importing a Demise. 2. A Leassee named. 3. A Commencement
from a day certain. 4. A Term of Years 5. A Determination. 6. A Reservation of
Rent. Coke, vol. 6. Knights Case, fol. 55.

Lecherwite alias Legerwite. See Lairwite.

Leccator, A Riotous debauched Person, a Roaring Boy, a Tavern-hunter. Sciant
-- quod ego Johannes Constabularius Cestriae dedi -- Hugoni de Dutton, and
Haeredibus Magistratum omnium Leccatorum and Meretricum totius Cestershiriae
sicut liberius illum Magistratum teneo de Comite. Salvo jure meo mihi and
haredibus meis. Hiis testibus, etc. Sine dat. circa Annum 1220.

Laet (Leta, visus Franci-plegii) Otherwise called a Law-daw: This Court, in
whose Manor soever kept, is accounted the Kings Court; because the Authority
thereof is originally belonging to the Crown, and thence derived to inferior
persons, and is a Court of Record. It enquireth of all offenses under High
Treason, though it cannot punish many, but must certify them to the Justices
of Assize, by Stat. 1 Edw. 3. cap. ult. Of which, see 4 Inst. fol. 261. And the
Stat. 8 Edw. 2. Haec est Curia prisca illa (says Spelman) quae inter Saxones ad
Friborgos, Decanias, Tenmentalas pertinebat. Leet comes from the Sax. Laet, i.
Censura, arbitrium, or from Laetan, Censere, aestimare. Quod in hac olim Curia
de damnis aestimabatur inter vicinos emergentibus, ut patet in LL. Edw. Conf.
cap. 20. See the Antiquities of Warwickshire, fol. 2.

Legacy (Legatum) Is a particular thing given by a last Will and Testament; and
he to whom such Legacy is given is called a Legatee.

Legalis homo, Is taken for him, who stands Rectus in Curia, not Outlawed nor
Excommunicated, nor Defamed; and in his sense, are those words so often used
Probi et legales homines. Hence Legality is taken for the condition of such a
Man. -- Ipse tamen malefactor -- tradat fidejussores de pace and legalitate
tuenda, i. Sureties for his Good-behavior. LL. Edw. Conf. cap. 18. See Yoman.

Legatarie (Legatarius) He or she to whom any thing is bequeathed, a Legatee.
Spel. says, it is sometimes used Pro Legato vel Nuncio.

Legatorie (Anno 27 Eliz. cap. 16.) The same with Legatary.

Legergild (Legergildum) The same with Lairwite. But in the Laws of Hen. 1.
cap. 12. it seems to have a different signification. Si quis Dei fugitivum
habet injuste, reddat eum ad rectum, and persolvat ei cujus erit, and Regi
emender secundum Legergildum.

Legespend. See Lespegend.

Legitimation (Legitimatio) A making lawful, or Legitimate.

Lent (from the Sax. Lencten Faesten, i. Jejunium vel tempus quadragesimale,
The Spring Fast) A time of Fasting for forty days, next before Easter;
mentioned in the Stat. 2 and 3 Edw. 6. cap. 19. And (according to Sir Rich.
Baker, Chron. fol. 7.) first commanded to be observed in England by Ercombert,
Seventh King of Kent, before the year 800.

Lep and Lace (Leppe and Less) Is a Custom within the Manor of Writtel (in
Com. Essex) that every Cart that comes over a part thereof, called Greenbury
(except it be the Cart of a Nobleman) pays four pence to the Lord of the
Manor. This Greenbury is conceived to have anciently been a Market place, and
therefore had this privilege granted. Tobias Edmonds, Gen Senescal. ibid.

Leporarius, A Greyhound for the Hare. -- Concedo eis duos Leporarios and
quatuor Bracatos ad leporem capiendum in Foresta nostra de Essexia. Mon. Angl.
2 par. fol. 283. a.

Leproso amovendo, Is a Writ that lies for a Parish to remove a Leper or Lazar,
that thrusts himself into the Company of his Neighbors, either in Church or
other Public Meetings to their Annoyance. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 234.

Lespegend (Sax. Les-thegen, i. Barominor) -- Sint sub quolibet horum quatuor
ex mediocribus hominibus (quos Angli Lespegend nuncupant, Dani vero Young men
vocant) locati, qui curam and onus tum viridis tum veneris suscipiant.
Constitut. Canuti Regis de Foresta, Art. 2.

Lestage. See Lastage.

Leth. See Lath.

Letherwite. 2 Inst. fol. 488. This is doubtless there mistaken, or false
Printed for Lecherwite. See Lairwite.

Letters Patent (Literae Patentes) Are Writings, sealed with the Great Seal of
England, whereby a Man is enabled to do or enjoy that, which otherwise of
himself he could not. Anno 19 Hen. 7. cap. 7. And they are so called, because
they are open, ready to be showed for confirmation of the Authority thereby
given. Letters Patent may be granted by common persons, but they are rather
called Patents; yet for distinction, the Kings Letters Patent are sometimes
called Letters Patent Royal. Anno 2 Hen. 6. cap. 10. Letters Patent conclude
with Test me ipso, etc. Charters, with Hiis testibus. 2 Part Inst. fol. 78.

Letter of Attorney (Litera Atturnati) Is a writing authorizing an Attorney,
that is, a Man appointed to do a lawful act in our steeds. West, pa. 1. Symb.
lib. 2. sect. 559. As a Letter of Attorney to give Seisin of Lands, thus
anciently.

PAteat universis per presents quod ego Johannes Gour Dominus de Peodelestone
Attornavi loco meo dilectum mihi in Christo Johannem Hendyng ad ponendum
William Nasche and Rogerum Nasche in plena and pacifica seisina in omnibus
illis terris, and tenementis cum pertin. suis, quae and quas habeo in Orleton
prout in carta Feoffamenti dictis Will. and Rogero inde confecta before
continetur. Ratum haben. and gratum quicquid dictus Johannes nomine meo fecerit
in praemissis. In cujus, etc. dat. 43 Ed. 3.

Letters of Marq -- See Marq and Reprisals.

Levant and Couchant, Is, when Cattle have been so long in another Man's Ground,
that they have lain down, and are risen again to seed; in ancient Records
Levantes and cubantes. See Falda.

Levari facias, Is a Writ directed to the Sheriff for the levying a Sum of
Money upon his Lands and Tenements, who has forfeited a Recognizance. Reg. of
Writs, fo. 298. b.

Levari facias damna de disseisitoribus, Is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, for
the levying Damages wherein the Disseisor has formerly been condemned to the
Disseisee. Reg. of Writs, fo. 214. b.

Levari facias residuum debii, Is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, for the
levying the remnant of a Debt upon Lands and Tenements, or Chattels of the
Debtor, that has been in part satisfied before. Reg. of Writs, fol. 299.

Levari facias quando vicecomes returnavit quod non habuit emptores, Is a Writ
commanding the Sheriff to sell the Goods of the Debtor, which he has already
taken and returned, that he could not sell. Reg. of Writs, fol. 300. a.

Levy, (Levare) Signifies to gather, or exact, as to levy Money; and is
sometimes used to erect or set up, as to levy a Mill. Kitchen, fo. 180. Also to
raise or cast up, as to levy a Ditch. Old. Not. Br. fol. 110. And to levy a
Fine, which is now the usual term; but, I have seen a Deed, where in William
St. George Esquire convenants to rere a Fine of the Manors of Brandon and
Wych-hampton. Dat. 17 Hen. 6.

Lex Bretoise, The Law of the Britans, or Marches of Wales, Lex Marchiarum. See
Bretoyse.

Lex deraisnia, rectius Deraisina, Is the proot of a thing, which one denies to
be done by him, and his Adversary affirms it; defeating and confounding the
Assertion of his Adversary, and showing it to be without and against reason or
probability. Juris membrum est Normannici, quod in prisco ejusdem Custumario,
ca. 126. sic definitur. Deraisina autem est Lex quaedam in Normania constituta,
per quam in simplicibus querelis, insecutus, factum quod a part adversa ei
obiicitur, se non fecisse declarat. Vide plura ibidem. and Dereyn.

Ley gager. (Anno 1 Car. 1. ea. 3.) Wager of Law. See Law.

Ley, (Lex.) See Law.

Libel, (Libellus,) Literally signifies a little Book; but by use it is the
original Declaration of any action in the Civil Law, An. 1 Hen. 5. ca. 3 and 2
Ed. 6. ca. 13. It signifies also a scandalous report of any man cast abroad, or
otherwise unlawfully published in Writing but then, for difference sake, it is
called famosus libellus, an infamous Libel. See Cokes Rep. lib. 5. fo. 124,
125. and 3 Inst. fo. 174. See Rhyme.

Libello habendo. See Copia libelli deliberanda.

Liber taurus, A free Bull. -- Compertum per Jur. quod Will. de Losa fuit
seisitus de libero Tauro habendo in Hamsted, etc. -- Ideo consideratum est,
quod praedictus W. recuperet damna sua, quae taxantur per Iur. ad iv s, pro
imparcatione ejusdem Tauri, etc. Norf. 16 Ed. 1.

Libera batella, A free Boat. -- Per liberam batellam, hoc est, habere unam
cimbam ad piscand. subter pontem Cestriae and supra Etonam, and ibidem cum omni
genere retium. Plac. in Itin. apud Cestriam 14 Hen. 7.

Libera chasea habenda, Is a Writ judicial, granted to a man for a free chase
belonging to his Manor, after he has, by a Jury, proved it to belong to him.
Reg. of Writs judicial, fo. 36 and 37.

Liberate, Is an original Writ, issuing out of the Chancery to the Treasurer,
Chamberlanes, and Barons of the Exchequer, or Clerk of the Hamper etc. for the
payment of any annual pension, or other sum granted under the Great Seal; or
to a Sheriff, to deliver possession of Lands and Goods extended. See Broke tit.
Tail d' Exchequer, and 4 Inst. fol. 116.

Liberate probanda, Was a Writ that lay for such as were challenged for
Slaves, and offered to prove themselves free, etc. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 77.
Villenage, and the several appendixes thereof, viz. Infranchisement, Writs de
Nativo habendo and Liberate probanda, and the pleadings and trials relating
thereunto, were great Titles in the old Books, but now antiquated by time.
Pref. to Rolls Abridg.

Libertatibus allocandis, Is a Writ, that lies for a Citizen or Burgess, (that,
contrary to his liberty, is impleaded) to have his privilege allowed. Reg. of
Writs, fo. 262.

Libertatibus exigendis in itinere, Is a Writ whereby the King wills the
Justices in Air to admit of an Attorney for the defense of another Man's
liberty before them. Reg. of Writs, fo. 19.

Liberum Herbagium. See Herbagium.

Librata terrae, Contains four Oxgangs, and every Oxgang 13 Acres. Schene,
verbo Bovata terrae. See Fardingdeal.

License to arise, (Licentia surgendi,) Is a liberty, or space of time given by
the Court to a Tenant to arise out of his bed, who is essoyned de malo lecti,
in a real action. See Bracton, lib. 5. Tract. 2. ca. 7. 10 and 12. And Horns
Mirror, ca. des Essoins. Licentia surgendi is the Writ thereupon. Reg. fo. 8.

Licentia transfretandi, Is a Writ or Warrant directed to the keepers of
Dover-Port, etc. willing them to let such pass over-Sea, who have formerly
obtained the Kings License thereunto. Reg. of Writs, fo. 193.

Licentia concordandi, (Anno 12 Car. 2. ca. 12.) See Kings-silver.

Lidford-Law, Is grown to a kind of Proverb, to hang men first, and to indite
them afterward; so called, from a Town of that name in Cornwall; where a Court
is held, which was heretofore of great extent; the course whereof is very
summary. The like being said of Halifax in the County of York.

Lieftenant, or Lieutenant, (Locum-tenens,) The Kings Deputy, He that exercises
the Kings, or any other persons place, or represents his person: As the
Lieutenant of Ireland, Anno 4 Hen. 4. ca. 6. and 2 and 3 Edw. 6. ca. 2. Whence
that Officer seems to take his beginning. Lieutenant of the Ordnance, Anno 39
Eliz. ca. 7.

Life-rent, Is a Rent or Exhibition, -- which a Man receives either for Term of
life, or for sustentation of life. Nota quod Eschaeta terrarum felonis post
annum and diem, (viz. his Life-rent,) ipso vivente computatur inter bona
mobilia. Skenaus ad Quon. Attach. ca. 18. verse. 5.

Lieges, and Liege-people, (Ligati,) The Kings Subjects, anciently so called,
because they owe, and are bound to pay Allegiance to Him. Anno 8 Hen. 6. ca.
10. 14 Hen. 8. ca. 2. and diverse other Statutes: yet anciently private persons
had their Leiges. --

Reinaldus Dei gratia Abbas Ramesiae, Praeposito and hominibus de Brancestre
and omnibus vicinis Francis and Anglis salutem. Sciatis me dedisse terram Ulf
in depedene, (hodie Depedale) buic Boselino and uxori ejus Alfniae, ita been
sicut homines de Brancestre illum testificant verum habuisse, ea condition
quod effecti sunt homines Liges. Lib. Rames. Sect. 244.

Omnibus, etc. Reginaldus Rex Insularum salutem. Sciatis quod deveni homo
ligeus Domini Regis Angliae Iohannis contra omnes mortales quamdiu vixero, and
inde ei sidelitatem and sacramentum praestiti, Et in hujus rei testimonium hanc
eartam meam inde feci. T. Domino F. Wint. Episcopo. M. S. penes Will. Dugdale
Ar. See Ligeancy.

Lierwit. See Lairwite.

Ligeancy, (Ligantia, From the Ital. Liga, a League or Bond; Vinculum arctius
inter subditum and Regem utrosque invicem connectens; hunc ad protectionem and
justum regimen, illos ad tributa and debitam subjectionem,) Is such a Duty or
Fealty, as no man may owe or bear to more then one Lord; and therefore it is
most commonly used for that Duty and Allegiance which every good Subject owes
to his Liege-Lord the King.

Sovereign Lord, I Henry Percy become your Subgette and Liege Man, and promit
to God and you, that hereafter I Faith and Troth shall hear to you, as to my
Sovereign Liege Lord, and to your Heirs Kings of England of life and limme, and
of earthly worship, for to live and die ayeinst all erthly People, and to You
and to Your Commandments I shall be obeysant, as God me help and his Holy
Evangelists. 27 Oct. 9 Ed. 4. Claus. 9 Ed. 4. m. 13. in dorso. See Lieges.

Ligeance, (Ligeantia a Ligando,) Is a true and faithful obedience of the
Subject to his Sovereign. Sometimes it signifies the Dominion or Territory of
the Liege Lord. As Anno 25 Ed. (...). Stat. 2. Children born out of Ligeance of
the King. Also the same with Ligeancy. See Coke on Litt. fo. 129. a. and
Calvin's Case. 7. Rep.

Limitation of Assize, (Limitatio Assizae) Is a certain time set down by
Statute, wherein a Man must allege himself or his Ancestor to have been seized
of Lands sued for by a Writ of Assize. See the Stat^ of Merton, ca. 8. and
Westminster. 1. ca. 38. So it is used in Old Not. Br* fo. 77. in these words, The
Writ de Consuetudinibus and servitiis lies, where I or my Ancestors, after the
limitation of Assize, were not seized of the Customs, etc. But before the
limitation of Assize we were seized, etc.

Linarium, A place where Flax is sown, a flax-plat. -- Et messuagium quod est
juxta cimiterium, cum linario, quod jacet juxta praedictum Messuagium. Pat. 22
Hen. 4. Par. 1. m. 33.

Littera, As tres Carectatas Litterae, three Cartloads of Straw or Litter. Mon.
Angl. 2 Par. fo. 33 b.

Libery, (from the Fr. Livre, i. Insigne, Gestamen,) Signifies a Hat, Coat,
Cloak or Gown, which a Noble or Gentleman gives to his servants or followers,
with cognizance or without, and is mentioned in 1 Rich. (...). ca. 7. and 3
Car. 1. ca. 4. and diverse other Statutes. See Reteiner. Also, before the Stat.
of 12 Car. 2. ca. 24. it did signify a delivery of possession to those Tenants
which held of the King in Capite, or Knights-service; for, the King, by his
Prerogative, had primier seisin, or the first possession of all Lands and
Tenements so holden of him. Stamf. Praerog. ca. 3. fo. 12. it was in the nature
of a Restitution, says Sir Edward Coke. And the Writ which lay for the Heir to
obtain the possession or seisin of his Lands at the Kings hands, was called his
Livery. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 155. but by the said Statute all Wardships,
Liveries, etc. are taken away and discharged.

Livery of seisin, (Deliberatio seisinae,) Is a delivery of possession of
Lands, Tenements, or other corporeal thing, (for, of things incorporeal no
Livery of seisin may be) to one that has right, or a probability of right
thereto. For, (as Bracton says, lib. 2. ca. 18. number. 3.) Traditio debet esse
vestita, and non nuda. It is a Ceremony used in conveyance of Lands or
Tenements, where an estate in Feesimple, Feetayl, or a Freehold passes; And,
it is a testimonial of the willing departure of him, who makes the Livery, from
the thing whereof Livery is made. And the receiving of the Livery is a willing
acceptance by the other party of all that whereof the other has divested
himself. The common manner of delivery of Seisin, is thus: If it be in the open
Field, where is no House, nor building, and if the estate pass by Deed, one
openly reads it or declares the effect of it, and after that is fealed, the
Vendor takes it in his hands, with a clod of Earth upon a twig or bough, which
he delivers to the Vendee, in the name of Possession or Seisin, according to
the effect of the Deed: But if there be a House or Building upon the Land, then
this is to be done at the door of it, (none being left at that time within the
house) and the Ring of the door delivered to the Vendee, who enters alone,
shuts the door, and presently opens it again. If it be a House, without Land or
Ground, the Livery is made, and Possession taken by delivery of the Ring of the
door, and Deed only. And where it is without Deed, either of Lands or
Tenements, there the party declares by word of Mouth, before witnesses, the
estate he parts with, and then delivers Seisin or Possession in manner
asoresaid: And so the Land or Tenement passes as well as by Deed, and that by
force of the Livery of Seisin. See West. par. 1. Symbol. lib. 2. sect. 196. and
Coke on Littl. fol. 48. a. This was anciently a Pair of Gloves, a Ring, Knife,
Ear of Wheat, etc. was delivered in sign or token of* Livery and Seisin.

Local (Localis) Tied or annexed to a place certain: As the thing is local and
annexed to the Freehold. Kitchen, fol. 180. An Action of Trespass for Battery,
etc. is transitory, not local, that is, not needful that the place of the
Battery should be set down, as material in the Declaration, or if it be set
down, that the Defendant should Traverse the place set down, by saying he did
not commit the battery in the place mentioned in the Declaration, and so avoid
the Action. And again, fol. 230. the place is not local, that is not material
to be set down in certainty, or that the Action should be tried or laid in the
same County where the Fact was done. The guard of the person, and of the Lands,
differs in this; because the person, being transitory, the Lord might have his
Ravishment de Guard, before he was seized of him, but not of the Land, because
it is local. Perkins. Grants, 30.

Locus Partitus, Signifies a Division made between two Towns or Counties, to
make trial in, whether the Land or place in question lies. Fleta, lib. 4. cap.
15. number. 1.

Lode Ship, A kind of Fishing Vessel, mentioned 31 Edw. 3. stat. 3. cap. 2.

Lodeworks, One of the Works belonging to the Stannaries in Cornwall; for which,
see Stremeworks.

Lodemerege. -- Item en droit de Lodemerege dient les avantditz Jurez, que leur
sembli cest case, ils ne scayvent meilleur advise ne remedy, mays que ce soit
desore user and fait per manner quest conteyne en le Ley D'Oleron. Pryns Animad.
on 4 Inst. fol. 116.

Logating, An unlawful game, mentioned 33 Hen* 8. cap. 9. now disused.

Logwood, Is a kind of Wood, which diverse use, otherwise called Block-wood,
brought from Compethe, and other rem^^^ parts, and was prohibited by Stat. 23
Eliz. ca. 9. and 39 ejusdem, cap. 11. But since by Stat. 14 Car. 2. cap. 11.
the importation and use of it is allowed.

Loich or Loych Fish. (31 Edw. 3. stat. 3. cap. 2.) And that no Fish called
Loych Fish, be chosen or tried, but only in three parts, that is to say, Lob,
Ling, and God.

Lollardy and Lollery (Anno 1 and 2 Phil. and Ma. cap. 6.) The Doctrine and
Opinion of the Lollards. Rogerus Acton miles* pro Proditione and Lollardia
distrahatur and suspendatur, and sic suspensus pendeat ad voluntatem Regis.
Middlesex Plac. Hill. 1 Hen. 5. Rot. 7. and Trin. 2 Hen. 5. Rot. 6.

Lollards (so called from Walter Lollard, a German, First Author of this Sect,
living about the year 1315.) Were certain Heretics (at least, in the Opinion
of those times) that abounded here in England in the days of Edward the Third,
and Henry the Fifth, whereof Wicliff was the chief in this Nation, according to
Stow in his Annals, fol. 425. They are mentioned Anno 2 Hen. 5. cap. 7. Against
these Lollards much was decreed by Tho. Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, in a
Council at Oxford. See their Tenets in Spotswoods. History of Scotland, fol.
61. The High Sheriff of every County, is bound by his Oath, to suppress them.

-- You shall (says the Oath) do all your pain and diligence, to destroy, and
make to cease all manner of Heresy and Errors, commonly called Lollardies,
within your Bailiwick from time to time with all your power, etc.

The intent of the Heretics called Lollards, was to subvert the Christian
Faith, the Law of God, the Church, and the Realm; so said the Statute of 2 Hen.
5. cap. 7. which was repealed 1 Edw. 6. cap. 12. See 3 Inst. fol. 41. and
Caudries Case.

Lord (Dominus, Sax hlaford, signifying a Bread-giver, Bountiful, or
Hospitable) Is a word of Honor with us, and used diversely. Sometimes being
attributed to those, who are noble by Birth or Creation, and are otherwise
called Lords of the Parliament, and Peers of the Realm; sometimes to those, who
are so called by the courtesy of England, as all the Sons of a Duke, or
Marquess, and the eldest Son of an Earl. Sometimes to Persons, Honorable by
Office, as Lord Chief Justice, etc. And sometimes to an Inferior Person* that
has Fee, and consequently, the Homage of Tenants within his Manor; for by his
Tenants he is called Lord, and in some places, for distinction sake, Landlord.
In which last signification, it is most used in our Law Books, where it is
divided into Lord Paramount, and Lord Mesn. Lord Mesn is he that is owner of a
Manor, and by virtue thereof hath-Tenants holding of him in Fee, and by Copy
of Court-Roll; and yet holds himself of a Superior Lord, called Lord Paramount,
or above him. Old Not. Br. fol. 79. We likewise read of Very Lord, and Very
Tenant. Very Lord is he, who is immediate Lord to his Tenant; and Very Tenant,
he that holds immediately of that Lord. So that if there be Lord Paramount,
Lord Mesn, and Tenant; the Lord Paramount is not very Lord to the Tenant. Broke
tit. Heriot, number 1.

Lord in Gross, Is he who is Lord, not by reason of any Manor, as the King in
respect of his Crown. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 3. and 8. where also is a Case
wherein a private person is a Lord in Gross. As a Man makes a Gift in Tail of
all the Land he has, to hold of him, and dies; his Heir has but a Seigniory
in Gross.

Lorriners or Lorimers (Fr. Lormier, from the Lat. Lorum) Is one of the
Companies of London, that make Bits for Bridles, Spurs, and such like small
Iron ware. Anno 1 Rich. 2. cap. 12.

Lot or Loath, Is the thirteenth Dish of Lead, in the Darbishire Mines, which
belongs to the King, Pro dominio suo. -- Presentatum est in Ragemannis per 12
de Alto Pecco, quod Rad. de Wine fecit quandam Purpresturam in solo Domini
Regis in Tatington and Prestcliv^, faciendo mineram plumbi, unde Rex s^lebat
percipere le Lot mineris, i. Tertium decimum vas, etc. Rot. Rageman and de quo
Warranto de Itin. de Derbi. 9 Edw. 1. -- Et de miner^ lucrata in hujusmodi
opere in feodo Domini Regis, Dominus Rex habebit pro Dominio suo tertium
decimum discum, qui dicitur le Loath. Eschaet. de Anno 16 Edw* 1. number. 34. See
Cope.

Lotherwit alias Leyerwit, Is a Liberty or Privilege, to take amends of him
that defiles ones Bondwoman without License. Rastals Exposition of Words.
According to others, it is an amends for lying with a Bondwoman. See Lairwit.
Some think it should be rather written Legerwit, for Ledger in Saxon, signifies
a Bed; or Lecherwite, a mulct or punishment for Lechery.

Lourgulary (Fr. Lou^deri^, i. Inhumanitas, incivilitas) In Statuto pro stratis
London. impresso Anno 1573. Art. 45. Casting any corrupt thing, appoisoning the
Water, is Lowrgulary and Felony; some think it a corruption of Burglary. See
Glossar. in december Scriptores, verbo, Burglaria.

Lowbellers (Anno 23 Eliz. cap. 10.) Are such as go with Light and a Bell, by
the sight whereof, Birds sitting on the Ground, become somewhat stupefied, and
so are covered with a Net, and taken. This name is derived from the word Low,
which, in the Saxon, or old English, signifies a Flame of fire. See the Antiq.
of Warwickshire, p. 4.

Lushborow or Lushburgs, Was a base sort of Money coined beyond Seas, to the
likeness of English Money, in the days of Edward the Third, and brought in, to
deceive the King and his People. To avoid which, it was made Treason, for any
Man wittingly to bring in any such. Anno 25 Edw. 3. stat. 4. cap. 2. 3 Part
Inst. fol. 1.

M.
M. Every Person convicted for Murder, (Manslaughter) and admitted to the
benefit of his Clergy, to be marked with an M. upon the Brawn of the
Left-thumb. Anno 4 Hen. 7. cap. 13.

Macegriefs alias Macegrefs (Mac^ecar^i) Are such as willingly buy and sell
stolen Flesh, knowing the same to be stolen. Britton, cap. 29. In turnis
Vice-com' 12 Juratores, inter alia, presenteront -- D^ Macegrefs achat^uns and
vendauns a ^scient chars ^mbles. Cromptons Justice of Peace, fol. 193. a. Vide
LL. In^ cap. 20. de ^arnem furtivam e^^^t^.

Madning-money: Old Roman Coyns, sometimes found about Dunstable, are so called
by the Country people; and retains the name from Magintum used by the Emperor
Antonine in his Itinerary for Du^stable. C^m.

Maeremium, Is derived from the Old Norman word Marism^, for Timber.

Rex -- dilecto -- Roger^ de Horsley Constabulario Castri sui de Baumburg
salutem. M^ndamus vobis quod ^omines partium pr^dict. nuper in Castro pr^dicto
pro salvatione Corporum and rerum suarum contra aggressus Scot^rum commorantes,
Maeremium de logi^^ suis, (...) non bona and catalla ac victualia sua in codem
Castro, and in F^ssato and Mot^ ejusdem existentia, sine impedimonto, capere
and cari^re, and quo voluerint a^portare, pormittatis, etc. T. Rege apud
Co(...)k. 12 Ju^ii. Claus. 16 Edw. 2. m. 3.

Magbote or Maegbote (From the Sax. Maeg, i. cognatus, and bote compensatio) A
recompense for the slaying or murder of ones Kinsman. For anciently, in this
Nation, Corporal punishments for Murder, and other great offenses, were
sometimes transmuted into pecuniary Fines, if the Friends of the party slain,
were so content. LL. Canuti Regis, Par. 1. cap. 2.

Magna Assisa Eligenda, Is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, to summon four
lawful Knights before the Justices of Assise there, upon their Oaths, to choose
Twelve Knights of the Vicinage* etc. to pass upon the Great Assise, between A.
Plaintiff, and B. Defendant. Reg. of Writs, fol. 8. (...)*

(...), The Great Charter, Granted in the Ninth year of Henry the Third, and
confirmed by Edward the First, and other Kings. The reason why it was so
termed, was either for the excellency of the Laws and Liberties therein
contained, or else, because there was another Charter, called the Charter of
the Forest, established with it, which was the lesser of the two; or, because
it contained more then many other Charters, or more then the Charter of King
Henry the First. Or in regard of the Wars and great troubles in the obtaining
of it, or the great and remarkable solemnity, in the denouncing Excommunication
and direful Anathema's against the infringers of it. See Spelmans Gloss. on
this word at large, who calls it Augustissimum Anglicarum libertatum diploma
and sacra Anchora. So Edward Coke says, It is Magnum in Parvo, and that it has
been above thirty times confirmed. On Littl. fol. 81.

Mahim (Mahemium) from the Fr. Mehaigner, i. mutilare) Signifies a Corporal
hurt, whereby a Man loses the use of any Member, that is, or may be any
defense to him in Battle: As the Eye, the Hand, the Foot, Scalp of the Head,
Foretooth, or, as some say, any Finger, or To^. Glanvil. lib. 14. cap. 7. See
Br^ct^n at large, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 24. number. 3. The cutting of an Ear or
Nose, or breaking the hinder Teeth, is no Mahim; because it is rather a
deforming the Body, then a diminishing its strength: And when the case is
difficult to judge, whether it be a Mahim, or not, the ^udges commonly behold
the party wounded, and sometimes take the opinion of some able Surgeon. The
Canonists call it Membri Mutilationem. All agree, that it is the loss of a
Member, or the use thereof. See Skene, verbo, Machanium.

Maiden ^ents, Is a Noble paid by every Tenant in the Manor of Builth in Com.
Radnor, at their Marriage, and it was anciently given to the Lord for his
quitting the Custom of Marcheta, whereby some fancy, That he was to have the
first Nights Lodging with his Tenants Wife: But I rather suppose it be a Fine
for the License to marry a Daughter. Sir Edm. Sawyer is now Lord of this
Manor. See Marcheta.

Maignagium (from the Fr. Maignen, i. Faber ararius) A Brasiers-shop. Idem H^go
tenebat unum Maignagium in for^ ^jusdem villa, etc. Lib. Ram^s. sect. 265. See
Cotland. Though 4 Inst. fol. 338. confounds Managium with M^suagium.

Maile, Anciently a kind of Money. Etiam latiu^ accipitur, nec tantum pro
denarii^ pl^^ibus, sed and portione aliqua rei fr(...) (...) anno^aria; ^oc
vere in plaga Angliae Bor^ali Blackmaile dicitur, ut pocuniario illo
distinguatur. Inquis. capta post mortem Will. de Coway, Anno 20 Edw. 3. n. 63.
Lan^. Est in ^^verston quoddam proficuu^ vocat ^^^smales, and qu^dda^ proficuum
apud Plumpton, vocat. Cowmale. Spel. See Blackmaile.

Mainour, Manor, or Meinour (from the Fr. Manier, i. manu tractar^) Signifies
the thing that a Their takes away or steals. As, to be taken with the Manor
(Pl. Cor. fol. 179.) Is to be taken with the thing stolen about him. Again, fol.
194. it was presented, that a Theife was delivered to the Viscount together
with the Manor. And again, fo. 149. If the Defendant were taken with the
Manor, and the Manor be carried to the Court, they in ancient times would
arraign him upon the Manor, without any Appeal or Indictment. -- Si dicti
Servientes seu Baliv^ sui aliquem latronem pro aliquo furto ubicunque f^erit
facto, cum Mannopere, infra feodum Dominii sui pr^dicti ceperint seu attach.
and si ille latro feloniam illam coram quatuor villat. voluntary cognoverit,
tunc liceat dictis Servientibus seu Balivis suis dictum (...)onem decollare,
and dictus Dux, (Lanc.) tunc ^abebit omnia bona sua, etc. Plac. apud Cestriam,
31 Ed. 3. de Quo War. in Manner de Halton. In Old Not. Br. fo. 110. it is thus
used. where a Man makes a thing by Manor, or levying or estoping, in such case
he shall have Assise, where it signifies handy-labour, and is but an
abbreviation of Mainovery.

Mainpernable, Bailable. What Prisoners ar^ Mainpernable, and what not. Anno 3
Edw. 1. ca. 15. See Mainprise.

Maine-porte, Is a small tribute, (commonly of Loaves of Bread,) which in some
places the Parishioners pay to the Rector of their Church, in recompense for
certain Tithes. See Waxshot. Vicaria de Wragby, (in Com. Linc.) consistit in
toto Altarag^o and in Ceragio, vulgariter dict. Waxshot in panibu^ vulgariter
dict. Manport, and in incremento denariorum. Sancti Petri, vulgariter dict.
Fireharth. Spelman.

Mainprise, (Manucaptio,) of the Fr. Main. i. Manus and Prins. i. Captus,)
Signifies the taking or receiving a Man into friendly custody, who otherwise
is, or might be committed to Prison, upon security given for his forthcoming,
at a day assigned. As to let one to Mainprise, (Old Not. Br. fo. 42.) Is to
commit him to those that undertake his appearance at the day appointed. And
they, that thus undertake for any, are called Mainpernors; because they receive
him into their hands. Pl. Cor. fo. 178. Hence the word Mainpernable, that may
be thus bailed; For* in many cases a Man is not Mainpernable, whereof see
Brook, tit. Mainprise. And Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 249.

Manwood, (in his 1 Par. For. Laws, pa. 167.) makes a great difference between
Bayl and Mainprise; For, he that is Mainprised, is already said to be at large,
and to go at his own liberty, after the day he is set to Mainprise, until the
day of his appearance; But, not so, where a Man is let to Bayl^ to four or two
men, by the Lord Justice in Air of the Fore^t, or any other Judge, until a
certain day; For, there he is always accounted by the Law to be in their ward
and custody for the time; And they may, if they will, keep him in Prison all
that time. So that, he that is so bailed, shall not be said by the Law, to be
at large, or at his own liberty. Thus Manwood.

Mainprise also is an undertaking in a su(...) certain: Bail answers the
comdemnation in Civil Causes, and in Criminals body for body. Cottoni post^uma.

When Mainprises may be granted, and when not, see Cromptons Justice of P. fo.
136. and Britton, fol. 73. The Author of the Mirror of Justices says, that
Pledges are those that Ball or redeem any thing but the body of a Man, and
Mainpernors those, that free the body; That pledges therefore belong properly
to real and mixed Actions, and Mainpernors to personal. lib. 3. ca. des Pledges
and Mainpernors. See 4 Inst. fo. 179.

^ainsworn, in the North, signifies as much as Forsworn. Brownl. Rep 4. H^b.
rep. 8.

Maintainor, (Anno 19 Hen. 7. ca. 14.) Is he that maintains or seconds a Cause
depending in Suit between others, either by disbursing Money, or making Friends
for either party, toward his help.

Maintenance, (Manutenentia) Signifies the upholding or maintaining a Cause or
Person, eithor by Word, Writing, Countenance or Deed; Metaphorically taken from
the succoring a young Child that learns to go by ones hand; and is used in the
evil part. Anno 32 Hen. 8. ca. 9. When a Man's Act in this kind is by Law
accounted Maintenance, and when not. See Brook, tit. Maintenance and Kitchen,
fo. 202. There lies a Writ against a Man for this offense, called a Wr^t of
Maintenance. See Coke on Litt. fo. 368. b.

Maison dieu, (Fr.) An Hospital, or Almshouse. See Meason dieu.

Make, (Facere,) Signifies to perform or execute; as to make his Law, is to
perform that Law, which he has formerly bound himself unto, that is, to clear
himself of an Action commenced against him, by his Oath, and the Oaths of his
Neighbors. Old. Not. Br. fo. 267. Ki^c^in, fo. 192. Which Law seems to be
borrowed of the Feudists, who call those Men that swear for another in this
Case, Sacramen^ales. The formal words used by him that makes his Law, are
commonly these: Hear, O ye Justices? that I do not o^^ this sum of Money
demanded, neither all, nor any part thereof, in Manner and Form declared: So
help me God, and the Contents of this Book. To make Services or Custom, is
nothing else but to perform them. Old Not. (...). fo. 14.

^alediction, (Maledictio,) A Curse, which was of old usually annexed to
Donations of Land, made to Churches and Religious Hous^^. -- Si quic autem
(quod no^ (...)) (...)c ^ostram Donationem infringero (...)* p^rp^ss^^ (...)
gelid^^ glaci(...) ^^^tibus and malig^orum Spiri^u^m* terribiles (...)
cruciat^^ (...)sisse non qui^sca^, n^s^ pri^^ in rigu^^ p(...) g^mit(...), and
pur^ ^mendatione emenda^^rit. Carta Regis Athelstani Monast. d^ Wil^un^* Anno
933.

Again -- Bolial s^ q^i^ fili^^ carta^^ ha^^ j(...) (...) conscriptam inimicali
zel^ corrumper^ de^id^r (...), (...) non d^bi^^t, a (...) mei servientibus* deo
nunc and (...) and usque in s^mpiternum abdicatum and excommunicatum sine fine
cruciandum, unde post mortem a Tartariis rapsus Ministris, in profundum
pestiferae mortis inferni flammigera concludetur in Domo, and ibidem in quandam
ollam Vulcani, ligatis projicietur membris, quae assidue bulliente pice repleta
esse testatur; and a talibus frangentibus seu minuentibus intolleratissime,
atrociterque, absque ulla misericordia sentitur; nisi hoc ante mortem
paenitentiae lamentis emendaverit. Carta Eadredi Regis. Mon. Angl. 2 Par. fo.
867.

-- Quod si forte post haec aliquis haeredum meorum de biis Elemosynis a
pr(...)fata Ecclesia aliquid abstulerit, ex ore meo in conspectu Dei sit ille
maledictus, and in tremendo Iudicio, nisi resipuerit, condemnatus; Amen. Carta
Roberti Camerarii Comitis Richmundiae, in Bibl. Cotton.

Malefesance, (From the Fr. Malfaire, i. To offend, or transgress) A doing of
evil, a transgressing. Crokes Rep. 2 Par. fo. 266.

Maletent, or Maletolte, (Fr. Maletoste,) (i. Malum vel indebitum Telonium,) In
the Statute called the Confirmation of the Liberties, etc. Anno 25 Edw. 1. ca.
7. Is interpreted to be a Toll of 40s. for every sack of Wool. Stow in his
Annals calls it a Maletot, fo. 461. See the Stat. de Tallagio non concedendo,
Anno 35 ejusdem. Nothing from henceforth shall be taken of Sacks of Wool, by
color or occasion of Maletent. In France they had an extraordinary Tax called
Maletoste.

Malin. See Marle.

Malveis procurors, in Art. super Chartas, ca. 10. Is understood of such as use
to pack Juries by nomination, or other practice or procurement. 2 Inst. fo. 561.

Manbote, (Sax. Man-bot,) A recompense for Homicide, or a compensation due to
the Lord, for the slaughter of his Man or Vassal. Manbote vero, i. compensatio
Domino persolvenda pro homine suo occiso) Anglorum lege Regi and Archiepiscopo
tres Marcas de hominibus eorum propriis: sed Episcopo ejusdem Comitatus and
Consuli and dapifero Regis viginti solidos, Baronibus autem aliis december
solidos, etc. Spel. de Council. Vol. 1. fol. 622. See Hoveden part poster.
annal. fo. 344. and Bote.

Manca, (Charta Regis Eadgari Eccles. Sancti Pauli, Anno 867. Indictione 15. --
cum lato digno pretio. i. lx. Mancas in auro purissimo.) was a square piece of
Gold, commonly valued at 30 pence; and Mancusa, was as much as a Mark of
Silver. Notes upon Canutus Laws. (id est, Manucusa, Coined with the hand.)

Manciple, (Manceps -- A Clerk of the Kitchen, or Caterer,) An Officer
anciently so called in the Inner Temple) now he is called Steward there;) and
still in Colleges, of whom Jeoffrey Chaucer, our ancient Poet, and a Student
in this House, thus

A Manciple there was in the Temple, Of which all Catours might taken
(ensemple.

Mandamus, Is a Writ that lay after the year and day, where, in the mean time,
the Writ called Diem clausit extremum had not been sent out to the Escheator.
Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 253. b. See Diem clausit extremum. Mandamus was also a
charge to the Sheriff to take into the Kings hands, all the Lands and Tenements
of the Kings Widow, who, against her Oath formerly given, Married without the
Kings consent. Reg. fo. 295. b. See Widow.

Mandatary, (Mandatarius,) He, to whom a Commandment or Charge is given. Also
he that comes to a Benefice by a Mandamus.

Mandate, (Mandatum,) Is a Commandment judicial of the King or his Justices,
to have any thing done for the dispatch of Justice, whereof you may see
diversity in the Table of the Register Judicial, on this word. The Bishops
Mandat to the Sheriff, Anno 31 Eliz. ca. 9.

Manentes, Was anciently used for Tenentes, or Tenants. Council. Synodal. apud
Clovesho. Anno 822. Also Manses, or Hides of Land. Cressy's Chapter History, fo.
723.

Manning, (Manopera,) A days Work of a Man; in some ancient Deeds I have seen
reserved so much Rent and so many Mannings.

Manor, (Manerium a Manendo, of abiding there; because the Lord of it did
usually reside there,) Est feodum nobile partim vassallis (quos Tenentes
vocamus) ob certa servitia concessum; partim Domino in usum Familiae suae, cum
jurisdictione in vassallos, ob concessa praedia reservatum. Quae vassallis
conceduntur terras dicimus tenementales, quae domino reservantur dominicales.
Totum vero feodum dominium appellatur, olim Baronia; unde Curia quae huic
praeest jurisdictioni hodie Curia Baronis nomen retinet.

Touching its original, There was anciently a certain compass of Ground,
granted by the King to some Baron, or such like man of worth, for him and his
heirs to dwell upon, and to exercise some jurisdiction, more or less, within
that circuit, as he thought good to grant; performing him such services, and
paying such yearly rent for the same, as he by his grant required; and, that
afterward this great Man parcelled his Land to other meaner Men, enjoining them
again such services and rents, as he thought good; and by that means, as he
became Tenant to the King, so the inferiors became Tenants to him. See Perkins
Reservations. 670. and Horns Mirror of Justices, lib. 1. ca. du Roy Alfred. In
these days a Manor rather signifies the jurisdiction and Royalty incorporeal,
than the Land or site: For, a man may have a Manor in Gross, that is, the
right and interest of a Court Baron, with the Perquisits, and another enjoy
every foot of the land belonging to it. Kitchen, fo. 4. Bracton, lib. 5. Tract.
5. ca. 28. nu. 1. See Fee. A Manor may be compounded of diverse things, as of a
House, Arable Land, Pasture, Meadow, Wood, Rent, Advowzen, Court Baron, and
such like. And this ought to be by long continuance of time, bey and man's
memory; For, at this day, (as some hold) a Manor cannot be made, because a
Court Baron cannot be made, and a Manor cannot be without a Court Baron, and
two suitors at least.

Manpygarnon. Will. Walcote tenet Manerium de Adington in Com. Surr. per
servitium inveniendi, ad Coronationem Regis, quoddam Potagium, vocat.
Manpygarnon.

Mansion, (Mansio, a Manendo,) A dwelling house, a Country habitation; most
commonly used for the Lords chief dwelling House within his Fee; otherwise
called the Capital Message, or the chief Manor-place. See Skene, verbo,
Mansus. The Latin word Mansia, in the Charter, granted by King Kenulphus to
Ruchin, Abbot of Abingdon, and mentioned by Sir Edward Coke in his Report de
Jure Regis Ecclesiastico, seems to signify a certain quantity of Land. Hida
vel Mansia. Mat. Westminster. in Anno 857. And in a Charter of Edw. Conf. it is
written Mansa. v. Hist. of Paul's, fo. 189.

Mansura and Masura, Are used in Domesday and other ancient Records, for
Mansiones vel habitacula villicorum; But in carta de Anno 1 Edw. 3. n. 3. we
read -- de tribus mansuris terrae in Wigornia -- quaere.

Manslaughter, (Homicidium,) Is the unlawful killing a Man without prepensed
malice; as when two meet, and, upon some sudden occasion falling out, the one
kills the other. It differs from Murder, because it is not done with foregoing
malice; and, from Chancemedley, because it has a present intent to kill; and
this is Felony, but admits Clergy for the first time. Stamf. pl. Cor. lib. 1
ca. 9. and Britton, ca. 9. It is confounded with Murder in the Stat. 28 Edw. 3.
ca. 11.

Mansus, Anciently a Farm. Seldens Hist. of Tithes, pa. 62.

Haec Indentura testatur, quod Reginaldus Gray Dominus de Hastings, Weisford
and de Ruthin tradidit Iohanni Saunders -- Mansum Manerii de Bedworth, etc.
dat. 18 Hen. 6. Here Mansum Manerii is used for the Manor House, or
Mannor-Place. Mansum capitale dicitur de aedibus Domini Manerii, quas aulam
vulgo nuncupant. Mansum or Mansus is sometimes confounded with Mesuagium.
Spelman.

Manubrium, The handle, or haft of a Sword or Dagger. -- Iur. praesentant quod
A. de C. Aurifaber 2 Iunii 2 Iac. apud S. praedict. quoddam Manubrium pugionis
ferreum, Anglice dictum, A Dagger hilt of Iron, etc. Apud Maidston.

Manucaptio, Is a Writ that lies for a Man, who, taken on suspicion of Felony,
and offering sufficient Bayl for his appearance, cannot be admitted thereto by
the Sheriff, or other having power to let to Mainprise. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 249.
See Mainprise. How diversely it is used see the Table of Reg. of Writs. And
Pryns Animadversions, fo. 268.

Manuel, (Manuelis,) That whereof present profit may be made, or that is
employed or used by the hand. Stamf. Praerog. fol. 54. As such a thing in the
Manuel occupation of one. i. Actually used, or employed by him.

Manumission, (Manumissio,) Is the freeing a Villain or Slave out of bondage.
The form of this in the time of the Conqueror, Lamb. in his Archai, fo. 126.
sets down in these words, Si quis velit servum suum liberum facere, tradat cum
vicecomiti per manum dextram, in pleno comitatu, and quietum illum clamare
debet a jugo servitutis suae per manumissionem, and ostendat ei liberas portas
and vias, and tradat illi libera arma, scilicet lanceam and gladium, and deinde
liber homo efficitur. Some also were manumitted by Charter. Vide Brook tit.
Villenage, fo. 305. Another way of Manumitting, was, for the Lord to take the
Bondsman by the Head, and say, I will that this Man be Free, and then shove him
out of his hand. There was also Manumission implied, as when the Lord made an
Obligation for payment of Money to the Bondsman at a certain day, or sued him,
where he might enter without Suit, or the like. See Neif.

EDWARDUS Dei Gratia, Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae, Omnibus
ad quos praesentes Literae nostrae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis quod nos ex
gratia nostra speciali and ex mero motu nostro Manu misimus and ab omni jugo
servitutis liberamus Johannem Dedwiche de Orleton in Com. Heref. Husbandman,
and William Dedwiche de eadem Husbandman Nativos nostros de Manerio sive
Dominio nostro de Orleton praedict. Cum omnibus bonis and catallis suis and
tuta eorum sequela and progeny de eorum corporibus procreatis sive
procreandis. Ita quod nec Nos nec heredes nec Successores nec Assignati nostri
aliquod Iuris vel clamei ratione alicujus Villenagii in ejusdem Johanne and
Willielmo seu de eorum progeny procreatis sive procreandis, seu de bonis and
Catallis suis exigere vel vendicare poterimus in futuro, etc. In cujus rei
testimon. has literas nostras sub sigillo nostro Comitis nostrae Marchiae fieri
fecimus Patentes. Dat. vicessimo. die Mensis Aprilis anno regni nostri octavo.
Ex ipso autographo penes Johan Colman Genesis locus sigil. i.

Sigillum: Edwardi quarti dei gra: regis anglie francie diu: hiberme
conntatussin marchie


Manupastus. Saepe obvenit in forensi dialecto, pro famulo and serviente
Domestico. Spelman. -- Erat culpabilis tanquam de Manupasto (Manwood, cap. 16.
n. 6.) i. He shall be culpable, as of a thing done by one of his family. Gloss.
in x. Scriptor.

Manutenentia, Is a Writ used in case of Maintenance. Reg. of Writs, fol. 182.
and 189. See Maintenance.

Manworth (Sax. Manwyrth) The price or value of a Man's Life or Head; every Man,
according to his degree, being rated at a certain price, according whereunto,
satisfaction was, of old made to his Lord, for the killing him.

Marches (Marchia) Are the Bounds and Limits between us and Wales, or between
us and Scotland. Anno 24 Hen. 8. cap. 9. Which last are divided into West and
Middle Marches. Anno 4 Hen. 5. cap. 7. and 22 Edw. 4. cap. 8. The word is used
in the Statute 24 Hen. 8. cap. 12. generally, for the Precincts of the Kings
Dominions; and may be derived from the Sax. Mean, i. Signum, nota, Character.

Marchers, Were the Noblemen that lived on the Marches of Wales or Scotland,
who in times past (according to Camden) had their private Laws, like Petty
Kings, which are now abolished by the Statute 27 Hen. 8. cap. 26. Of these
Marchers, you may read Anno 2 Hen. 4. cap. 18. -- 26 Hen. 8. cap. 6. and 1 Edw.
6. cap. 10. where they are called Lord Marchers. See also 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma.
cap. 15.

Marchet (Marchetum) Consuetudo pecuniaria in Mancipiorum filiabus maritandis.
Bract. lib. 2. tit. 1. cap. 8. number. 2. Merchetum vero pro filia dare non
competit libero homini. Extenta Manerii de Wivenho, 18 Dec. 40 Edw. 3. and alia
13 Edw. 3. Anno Dom. 1230. Rich. Burr tenet unum Mesuagium -- Et debet
Tallagium, Sectam Curiae and Merchet hoc modo, quod si maritare voluerit filiam
suam cum quodam libero homine extra villam, faciet pacem Domini pro maritagio,
and si eam maritaverit alicui Custumario Villae, nil dabit pro maritagio. This
Custom is in diverse parts of England and Wales, as also in Scotland, and the
Isle of Gernsey. See Spelman, at large on it. Sir Edward Coke on Littl. fol.
140. says it is called Marchet, as it were a Chete or Fine for Marriage. By the
Custom of the Manor of Denever, in the County of Carmarthen (whereof Sir Edw.
Rice is Lord) every Tenant at the marriage of his Daughter, pays x s. to the
Lord, which in the British Language is called Gwabr Merched, i. A Maids Fee.
See Meiden Rents and Gwabr-merched.

Mareshal (Marescallus, from the Germ. Marschalk, i. Equitum Magister) With us
there are diverse Officers of this name, the chief is the Earl Marshal of
England, mentioned Anno 1 Hen. 4. cap. 7. and in diverse other Statutes; his
Office consists especially in matters of War and Arms, as well with us, as in
other Countries; as you may read in Lupanus de Magistratibus Franciae, lib. 1.
cap. Marcshallus.

The next is, the Marshal of the Kings House, whose special authority is
(according to Britton) in the Kings place, to hear and determine all Pleas of
the Crown, and Suits between those of the Kings House, and others within the
Verge, and to punish faults committed within the Verge, etc. Cromp. Jurisd.
fol. 102. Anno 18 Edw. 3. stat. 2. cap. 7. and other Statutes See more of this
Office in Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 4.

There are other Inferior Officers of this name, as Marshal of the Justices in
Eyr. Anno 3 Edw. 1. cap. 19. Marshal of the Kings Bench (Anno 5 Edw. 3. cap.
8.) Who has the custody of the Prison, called the Kings Bench, in Southwark. I
find also in Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 15. mention of a Marshal of the Kings Hall.
There is also a Marshal of the Exchequer, Anno 51 Hen. 3. stat. 5. to whom the
Court commits the custody of the Kings Debtors, for securing the Debts. He also
assigns Sheriffs, Customers, and Collectors, their Auditors, before whom they
shall account.

Marshalsee (Maresealtia) Is the Court or Seat of the Marshal; also used for
the Prison in Southwark, so called; the reason whereof may be, because the
Marshal of the Kings House, was wont perhaps to sit there in Judgment, or keep
His Prison. See the Stat. 9 Rich. 2. cap. 5. And 2 Hen. 4. cap. 23.

Marriage (Maritagium) Signifies not only the lawful joining of Man and Wife,
but also the interest of bestowing a Ward, or a Widow in marriage. Mag. Char.
cap. 6. And it signifies Land given in marriage. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 34. and
39. See also Skene on the word Maritagium, which (according to Glanvil, lib. 7.
cap. 1.) Is that portion which the Husband receives with his Wife. See Dower.

Maritagio amisso per defaultam, Is a Writ for the Tenant in Frank-marriage, to
recover Lands, etc. whereof he is deforced by another. Reg. fol. 171.

Maritagio forisfacto. See Ferisfactura Maritagii.

Mark (Merca, from the Sax. Mearc. i. Signum) In ancient time I find a Mark of
Gold was eight ounces. Stows Annals, page 32. A Mark of Silver is now well
known to be 13 s 4 d. Char. Reg. Joh. de dote B. Reginae (quondam ux. R.
Ricardi. Paten. 3. Joh. m. 17. n. 31. Assignavimus ei pro dote sua mill marcas
argenti annuatim, 13 s, 4 d. computatis pro Marca.

Marketzeld (Recti^s Marketgeld) -- Et valent per an. le Streteward and le
Marketzeld xviii s and ob. in omni terra pertinente ad Honorem de Haulton. Ex
Cod. M. S. in Bibl. Cottoniana. It signifies Toll of the Market. The word Zold
importing a payment. I find it elsewhere written Markethgald. Plac. apud
Cestriam 31 Edw. 3.

Mark-peny, Was one penny paid at Maldon, by those who had Pipes or Gutters
laid, or made out of their Houses into the Streets. Hill. 15 Edw. 1. Mr.
Philips of Purveyance.

Market (Marcatus) Comes from the Fr. March, i. Emporium, forum nundinarum,
and signifies the same thing with us; as also the Liberty or Privilege whereby
a Town is enabled to keep a Market. Old Not. Br. fol. 149. So Bracton uses it,
Lib. 2. cap. 24. number. 6. and lib. 4. cap. 46. where he shows, that one Market
ought to be distant from another, Sex leucas and dimidiam and tertiam partem
dimidiae. By Stat. 27 Hen. 6. cap. 5. no Fair nor Market is to be kept upon any
Sunday, nor upon the Feasts of the Ascension of our Lord, Corpus Christi, the
Assumption of our Blessed Lady; All Saints, nor Good Friday; except for
necessary victual, and in the time of Harvest.

Marle (Marla) Is a kind of Earth or Mineral, which Men, in diverse parts of
this Realm, cast upon their Land, to make it more fertile. It is otherwise
called Malin. Anno 17 Edw. 4. cap. 4.

Marlerium or Marletum, A Marlepit. Sciant -- quod ego Rogerus la Zouche dedi
-- Henrico de Hugefort and haeredibus suis, etc. -- Et quod habeant omnem
libertatem and liberam communiam in boscis, in planis, in viis, in semitis, in
aquis, in molendinis, in bruariis, in turbariis, in quarrer. in piscar. in
Marleriis, and in omnibus aliis locis and aisiamentis ad praedictum Manerium de
Tongue spectan. -- Et quod capiant Marlam pro voluntate sua ad terram suam
marlend. -- Reddendo inde annuatim mihi and haeredibus meis unum capellum
Rosarum die Nativitatis S. Jo. Baptistae, si in villa de Tongue fuerimus, si non
ponatur super imaginem Beatae Mariae in Ecclesia de Tongue, pro omnibus
servitiis -- Sine dat. penes Will. Dugdale Arm. And in another Deed xx. Acras
terrae Marlatas, Marled Lands.

Marque (from the Sax. Mearc, i. Signum) Signifies in our ancient Statutes as
much as Reprisals; as Anno 4 Hen. 5. cap. 7. Marquis and Reprisals are used as
Synonima, and Letters of Marque in the same signification. See Reprisals.

Marquis or Marquess (Marchio, qui regionis limitem incolit) Is a Title of
Honor, next before an Earl, and next after a Duke. Marchiones Walliae, viz.
Rogerus de Mortuo-mari, Jacobus de Audeley, Rogerius de Clifford, Rogerius de
Leyburn, Hamo Extraneus and ille de Turbervilla, cum pluribus aliis, qui de
bello praedicto de Jews nuper fugerunt, etc. Mat. Westminster. in Anno 1264. page
225.

Marshal. See Mareshal.

Martial Law, Is the Law that depends upon the just and arbitrary power, and
pleasure of the King, or His Lieutenant in time of Wars, For, though the King
does not, in time of Peace, make any Laws, but by consent of the Three Estates
in Parliament; yet in Wars, by reason of the great dangers rising from small
occasions, he uses absolute power, in so much, as His word goes for Law. Smith
de Repub. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 3. See Law of Arms.

Mast (Glans, Pessona) Glandis nomine continentur glans castanea, faginr, ficus
and nuces, and alia quaeque quae edi and pasci poterunt praeter herbam.
Bracton, lib. 4. 226. See Pessona.

Master of the Rolls (Magister Rotulorum) Is an assistant to the Lord
Chancellor of England, in the High Court of Chancery, and in his absence
hears Causes there, and gives Orders. Crompt. Jur. fol. 41. His title in his
Patent is, Clericus parvae bagae, Custos Rotulorum; as also, Domus Conversorum.
Because the place where the Rolls of Chancery are now kept, was anciently the
House for Habitation of those Jews who were converted to Christianity. But his
Office has that title from the safe keeping of the Rolls, of all Patents and
Grants that pass the Great Seal, and of all Records of the Court of Chancery,
etc. He is called Clerk of the Rolls, Anno 12 Rich. 2. cap. 2. And in Fortescu,
cap. 24. And no where Master of the Rolls until 11 Hen. 7. cap. 20. And yet
cap. 25. Ejusdem, he is also called Clerk. In which respect Sir Tho. Smith,
lib. 2. cap. 10. says, He may not unfitly be called Custos Archivorum. He has
the bestowing of the Offices of the Six Clerks, the Clerks of the Pettibag,
Examiners of the Court, and the Clerks of the Chapel. Anno 14 and 15 Hen. 8.
cap. 1. See Roll.

Master of the Mint (Anno 2 Hen. 6. cap. 14.) Is now called the Warden of the
Mint, whose Office is to receive the Silver of the Goldsmiths, and to pay them
for it, and to oversee all the rest belonging to his Function.

Master of the Court of Wards and Liberies, Was the chief Officer of that
Court, named and assigned by the King; to whose custody, the Seal of the Court
was committed, etc. Anno 33 Hen. 8. cap. 33. But this Court, with the Officers,
and Appurtenances thereof, is abolished by 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

Master of the Horse, Is he that has the Rule and Charge of the Kings Stable,
being an Office of high account, and always bestowed upon some Nobleman of
great merit, and is mentioned Anno 39 Eliz. cap. 7. and 1 Edw 6. cap. 5. This
Officer under the Emperors of Rome, was called Comes sacri Stabuli.

Master of the Posts, Was an Officer of the Kings Court, who had the
appointing, placing, and displacing of all such thorough England, as provided
Posthorses for the speedy passing of the Kings Messages, Letters, Pacquets,
and other business; and is mentioned Anno 2 Edw. 6. cap. 3. But now by Statute
12 Car. 2. cap. 34. One General Letter Office or Post Office is settled in
London; the Master of which Office, is appointed by the King, by Letters
Patent, with Rates and Rules prescribed in the said Act, for carrying Subjects
Letters.

Master of the Armory, Is he that has the care and oversight of His Majesty's
Armor, and mentioned 39 Eliz. cap. 7.

Master of the Jewel House, Is an Officer in the Kings Household, of great
credit, having charge of all Plate used for the King or Queens Table, or any
great Officer in Court; and of all Plate remaining in the Tower of London, of
Chains, and loose Jewels, not fixed to any garment. Anno 39 Eliz. cap. 7.

Master of the Kings Household (Magister Hospitii Regis) Is otherwise called
Grand Master of the Kings Household, and is called Lord Steward of the Kings
most Honorable Household. Anno 32 Hen. 8. cap. 39. But Primo Mariae, and ever
since, he is called Lord Steward of the Kings Household; under whom, there is a
Principal Officer of the Household, called the Master of the Household, of great
Authority as well as Antiquity.

Master of the Ordnance (Anno 39 Eliz. cap. 7.) Is a great Officer, to whose
care all the Kings Ordnance and Artillery is committed.

Masters of the Chancery (Magistri Cancellariae) Are assistants in the Chancery
to the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, and Master of the Rolls. Of these there
are some Ordinary, and some Extraordinary; of Ordinary there are twelve,
(whereof the Master of the Rolls is accounted one) whereof some sit in Court
every day throughout each Term; and have referred to them (at the Lord
Chancellors or Master of the Rolls discretion) the Interlocutory Reports for
stating Accounts, computing damages, and the like; taking of Oaths, Affidavits,
and Acknowledgments of Deeds and Recognisances. The Extraordinary do act in all
the Country Ten Miles from London, by taking Recognisances and Affidavits,
Acknowledgments of Deeds, etc. for the case of the Subject.

Master of the Kings Musters, Is a Martial Officer in all Royal Armies, most
necessary, as well for the maintaining the Forces complete, wel-armed, and
trained, as also for prevention of such Frauds; as otherwise may exceedingly
waste the Princes Treasure, and extremely weaken the Forces, etc. mentioned 2
Edw. 6. cap. 2. And Muster-Master-General. Anno 35 Eliz. cap. 4.

Master of the Wardrobe, (Magister Garderobae,) Is a great Officer in Court,
having his habitation belonging to that Office, called the Wardrobe, near
Puddle-Wharf in London. He has the charge and custody of all former Kings and
Queens ancient Robes, remaining in the Tower; and all Hangings, Bedding, etc.
for the Kings Houses. He has also the charge, and delivery out of all Velvet or
Scarlet allowed for Liveries, etc. Of this Officer mention is made Anno 39
Eliz. ca. 7.

Masura terrae, -- Sunt in eisdem masuris 60 Domus plus quam ante fuerunt.
Domesday. In Fr. Masure de terre, is a quantity of ground, containing about
four Oxgangs.

Matter in Deed, and matter of Record, Differ thus, (according to Old. Not. Br.
fo. 19.) The first seems to be nothing else, but some truth, or matter of Fact
to be proved, though not by any Record.

Matter of Record is that, which may be proved by some Record. For example, if
a man be sued to an Exigent, during the time he was in the Kings Wars, this is
Matter in Deed, not of Record: And therefore he that will allege this for
himself, must come before the Scire facias for execution be awarded against
him; for, after that, nothing will serve but matter of Record, that is, some
error in the Process appearing upon the Record. Kitchen, fo. 216. makes also a
difference between matter of Record, and a Specialty and nude Matter, this
being not of so high a nature, as either matter of Record, or a Specialty,
otherwise there called matter in Deed; Whereby it should seem, that nude matter
is a naked allegation of a thing done, to be proved only by Witnesses, and not
either by Record, or Specialty in Writing under Seal. Cowel.

Maugre, Being compounded of two French words, Mal and Gre. i. Animo Iniquo,
Signifies with us, as much as in despite, or in despite of ones teeth. As,
the Wife mauger the Husband, (Littleton, fo. 124.) that is, whether the Husband
will or no.

Maund, (Sax. Mano,) A kind of great Basket, or Hamper (of Books, or other
Merchandise,) containing eight Bales, or two Fats. Book of Rat^s, fo. 3.

Maxims in Law, Are the foundations of it, or certain Rules or Positions, which
are the Conclusions of Reason, and ought not at any time to be impeached or
impugned. As, it is a Maxim, that, if a man have Issue, two Sons by diverse
venters, and the one of them purchase Lands in Fee, and dye without issue, the
other brother shall never be his heir, etc. See Coke on Litt. fo. 11.

Mayor, (anciently Meyr, from the British Miret, 1. Custodire,) The chief
Magistrate of a City, as the Lord Mayor of London. Rich. 1. (Anno 1189) changed
the Bailiff of London into a Mayor. And, by that example, King John, Anno 1204,
made the Bailiff of Kings-Lin a Mayor, whilst the famous City of Norwich
obtained not this Title for her chief Magistrate till 7 Hen. 5. 1419. See more
on this word in Spelmans Gloss.

Meale-Rents, Are certain Rents still so called, but now payable in Money by
some Tenants within the Honor of Clun, which heretofore were paid in Meal, to
make Meat for the Lords Hounds.

Mean, (Medius,) Significes the middle between two extremes, and that either in
time or dignity. Example of the first; his Action was mean, betwixt the
Disseisin made to him and his recovery; that is, in the interim. Of the second,
there is Lord, Mean or Mesne, and Tenant.

Lords mean, mentioned in the Stat of Amortizing Lands, made tempore, Ed. 1.
See Mesn.

Mease, (Mesuagium, Fr. Maison,) A Mesuage, or dwelling House. Stat. Hiberniae,
14 Hen. 3. and 21 Hen. 8. ca. 13. In some places corruptly called a Mise, and
Mise-place. See Mise and Mese.

Measue. See Mesne.

Meason due, (Fr. Maison de Dieu,) A House of God; a Monastery or Religious
House. Hospitals are also so called in the Statutes, 2 and 3 Phil. and Mary,
ca. 23. 39 Eliz. ca. 5. and 15 Car. 2. ca. 7.

Measure, (Mensura,) according to the 25th Cha. of Mag. Char. and the Stat. 17
Car. 1. ca. 19. all Weights and Measures in this Nation ought to be the same,
and those too, according to the Kings Standard. See 4 Inst. fo. 273. and
Mensura.

Measurer. See Alneger. -- Also that William Norton, common Meter of Woollen
Cloth, may be Sworn to occupy his Office of Measurage truly and indifferently
upon pain, etc. Articles exhibited to the Lord Mayor of London, etc. by the
Commons of the City, tempore, Hen. 8.

Medfee, (Sax. Medfeoh,) The Sax. Dict. says, It is a Bribe or Reward; bat, it
also signifies that Bote or Compensation, which is given in an exchange, where
the things exchanged are not of equal value: As in 4 Ed. 3. Hugo de Courtenay,
made an exchange by Deed with Richard Hanlake and Joan his Wife; and there it is
expressd -- Quod ipsi non dabunt Medfee, from the word Meed, which signifies a
reward. See Arrura.

Medietas linguae, Signifies an Enquest empaner'd upon any Cause, wherein a
Forreigner or Stranger is party, whereof the one half consists of Natives or
Denizens, the other strangers; and is used in Pleas, wherein the one party is a
stranger, the other a Denizen. See the Stat. 28 Edw. 3. ca. 13. -- 27 ejusdem,
Stat. 2. ca. 8. and 8 Hen. 6. ca. 29. Before the first of these Statutes was
made, this was wont to be obtained of the King by Grant made to any Company of
Strangers. Stam Pl. Cor. lib. 3. ca. 7. and is called a Party-Jury, Anno 14
Car. 2. ca. 11.

Medio Acquietando, Is a Writ Judicial, to distrain a Lord, for the acquitting
a mean Lord from a Rent, which another claims. Reg. of Writs judic. fo. 29. b.

Mediterranean Sea, (so called, because it has its course in the midst of the
earth) Is that which stretches it self from West to East, dividing Europe,
Asia and Africa; and mentioned 12 Car. 2. in the Stat. of Tonnage.

Medium tempus, Was anciently used for the mean profits. As, Annum, diem and
medium tempus. See Flem.

Medlefe, Is that which Bracton, (lib. 3. Tract. 2. ca. 35.) calls Medletum,
and signifies quarrelling, scuffling, or brawling. Culpa dicitur, quam quis
inopinate commiserit non rixando solum and pugnando, sed immiscendo se pacifice
rei cuivis vel negotio, says Spelman. Hence our common phrase, to meddle with
other folks matters.

Mere, (Merus) Though an Adjective, yet is it used substantively, for mere
right. Old Not. Br. fo. 2. To join the Mise upon the Mere. See Mise.

Meg-bote. See Magbote.

Meld-feoh, (Sax.) The reward and recompense due, and given to him that made
the discovery of any breach of Penal Laws committed by another: The Promoter,
or Informers Fee. Sax. Dict.

Meliores. See Tales.

Meiny, (Menagium. Fr. Mesnie,) as the Kings Meiny, Anno 1 Rich. 2. ca. 4.) 1.
The Kings Family, Household, or Houshold-servants.

Melius inquirendo, Is a Writ that lay for a second enquiry, of what Lands or
Tenements a man dyed seized, where partial dealing was suspected upon the Writ
Diem clausit extremum. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 255.

Memories, Are used for certain Obsequies, or remmebrances for the Dead, in
Injunctions to the Clergy, 1 Edw. 6.

Menials, (from Moenia, the Walls of a Castle, or other building,) Are Household
or Menial Servants; that is, such as live under their Lord or Masters Roof, or
within his Walls, mentioned Anno 2 Hen. 4. ca. 21.

Mensura, Hoc est, quod Prior habet mensuras tam aridorum quam liquidorum
signatas signo Domini Regis, and quod nullus debet emere in foro seu vendere,
nisi per illas. Ex Registro Priorat. de Cokesford. Mensura bladi, a Bushel of
Corn.

Mensura regalis, The Kings Standard of the Exchequer. Anno 17 Car. 1. ca. 19.
See Measure.

Merchenlage, (Sax. Marcna laga. i. Merciorum lex,) Camb. in his Brit. pa. 94.
shows, that, in the Year 1016, this Land was divided into three parts;
whereof the West Saxons had one, governing it by the Laws called West Saxon
Laws, which contained these nine Shires, Kent, Southsex, Southrey, Berks,
Hampshire, Wilts, Somerset, Dorset, and Devon. The second by the Danes, which
was Governed by the Laws called Denelage, or Danelage, and that contained these
fifteen Shires, York, Darby, Nottingham, Leicester, Lincoln, Northampton,
Bedford, Bucks, Hartford, Essex, Middlesex, Northfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge and
Huntington. The third was Governed by the Mercians, whose Law was called
Merchenlage, comprehending these eight, Gloucester, Worcester, Hereford,
Warwick, Oxenford, Chester, Salop, and Stafford. Out of which three William the
Conqueror chose the best, and, to them, adding such of the Norman Laws as he
thought good, he ordained Laws for this Kingdom, some of which we have to this
day, and are called the Common Laws.

Mercimoniatus Angliae, Was anciently used for the Custom or Impost of England.

Mercy, (Misericordia,) Signifies the Arbitrament, or Discretion of the King,
Lord or Judge, in punishing any offense, not directly censured by the Law. As,
to be in the grievous mercy of the King, (Anno 11 Hen. 6. ca. 2.) is to be in
hazard of a great Fine or Penalty. See Misericordia.

Mertlage, Seems to be a corruption of, or a Law French word, for Martyrologe.
Vide 9 Hen. 7. fo. 14. b.

Mese, (from the Gr. (...). i. Medium,) of He^^ings is 500, the half of a
thousand.

Mesne or Measn, (Medius, Fr. Maisne,) Signifies him, that is Lord of a Manor,
and has Tenants holding of him, yet holds himself of a superior Lord: and
therefore it seems to be properly derived from the Fr. Maisne. i. Minor natu;
because his Tenure is derived from another, from whom he holds.

Mesn also signifies a Writ, which lies where there is Lord, Mesn and Tenant;
the Tenant holding of the Mesn, by the same services, whereby the Mesn holds
of the Lord, and the Tenant of the Mesn is distrained by the superior Lord, for
that his Service or Rent, which is due to the Mesn. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 135. See
13 Edw. 1. ca. 9.

Mesnalty, (Medictas, Fr. Maisnete. i. Youngership,) Signifies the right, or
condition of the Mesn; as, the Mesnalty is extinct. Old. Not. Br. fo. 44. and
Kitchen, fo. 147. Medietate tenentur feuda, quando aliqua persona intervenerit
inter Dominum and tenentes, Et hoc modo tenent omnes postnati, mediante ante
nato. Custumary of Normandy.

Messarius, A Mower, or Harvester. Fleta, lib. 2. ca. 75.

Messenger of the Exchequer, Is an Officer, of which sort there are four in
that Court, who are Pursuivants attending the Lord Treasurer, to carry his
Letters and Precepts. See Pursuivant.

Message, (Messuagium,) A dwelling House, (Honestius est habitaculum cum aliquo
fundi adjacentis in ejusdem usum deputati.) But, by that name may also pass a
Curtilage, a Garden, an Orchard, a Dovehouse, a Shop, a Mill, a Cottage, a
Toft, as parcel of a Message. Bracten, lib. 5. ca. 28. Plowden, fo. 199. 170.
yet they may be demanded by their single names. Messuagium in Scotland
signifies, (according to Skene,) the principal House, or dwelling place within
a Manor, which we call the Mannor-house, and some, the Site. A Praecipe lies
not de Domo, but de Messuagio, Coke on Litt. ca. 8.

Mestilo, onis. Mesline, Muncorne, Wheat and Rye mingled together. -- and nonam
garbam frumenti, mestilonis, siliginis and omnis generis bladi. Pat. 1 Edw. 3.
Par. 1. m. 6.

Metegabel, (Sax.) Cibariorum vectigal, A Tribute, or Rent paid in Victuals; a
thing usual of old, as well with the Kings Tenants, as others, till Henry the
Firsts time, who changed it into Money. Sax. Dict.

Metheglin, (British, Meddiglin,) A kind of Drink made of Wort, Herbs, Spice
and Honey boyld together, most used in Wales; mentioned in the Act for Excise,
15 Car. 2. ca. 9.

Michis, -- A sort of white loaves, paid as a Rent in some Manors. Extenta de
Wivenho, in dorso, Will. Lamb. -- Capient de praedicto Priore pro qualibet
Waya cirporum tres albos panes, vocatos Michis, and nigrum panem and alia
cibaria.

Mild (Anno 1 Jac. ca. 24.) A kind of Canvas, whereof Sail-Clothes, and other
furniture for Ships are made.

Mile, (Milliare,) Is the distance of one thousand paces, otherwise described
to contain eight furlongs, and every Furlong to contain forty Lugs or Poles,
and every Pole 16 foot and a half. Anno 35 Eliz. ca. 6.

Militia, (Lat.) The Implements and Furniture for War, mentioned 15 Car. 2.
ca. 2.

Milleate, (Anno 7 Jac. ca. 19.) A trench to convey water to or from a Mill:
Rectius, a Mill. leat. An unusual Word in Conveyances in Devonshire.

Mineral Courts, (Curiae minerales,) Are particular Courts for regulating the
Affairs of Lead Mines, as Stannery Courts are for Tyn.

Miniments, or Muniments, (Munimenta, from Munio, to defend,) Are the Evidences
or Writings, whereby a man is enabled to defend the title of his Estate. An. 5.
Rich. 2. ca. 8. and 35 Hen. 6. fo. 37. b. Wangford says this word Muniment
includes all manner of Evidences. See Muniment House.

Ministri Regis, Extend to the Judges of the Realm, as well as to those that
have Ministerial Offices. 2 Inst. fo. 208.

Minobery, (Anno 7 R. 2. ca. 4.) Seems to be compounded of the French Main. i.
Manus and Ouvrer. i. Operari; and to signify some trespass or offense
committed by a Man's handy work in the Forest; as an Engine to catch Deer.
Briton. (ca. 40.) uses the verb Meinoverer, to manure Lands; and ca. 62.
Main-ovre, for handy work.

Minstrell, (Minstrellus and Menestrallus, from the French Menestrel,) A Fiddler
or Piper; mentioned 4 Hen. 4. ca. 27. Lit. Pat. 24 April 9 Edw. 4. -- Quod
Mariscalli and Minstrelli predicti per se forent and esse deberent unum Corpus
and una Communitas perpetua, etc. Upon a Quo warranto 14 Hen. 7. Laurentius
Dominus de Dutton clamat, quod omnes Ministrelli infra Civitatem Cestriae and
infra Cestriam manentes, vel officia ibidem exercentes debent convenire coram
ipso vel Senescallo suo apud Cestriam, ad Festum Nativitatis S. Johannis
Baptistae annuatim, and dabunt sibi ad dictum Festum quatuor Lagenas vini and
unam Lanceam; and in super quilibet little dabit sibi quatuor denarios and unum
obolum ad dictum Festum, and habere de qualibet Meretrice infra Comitatum
Cestriae, and infra Cestriam manente, and Officium suum exercente quatuor
Denarios per annum ad Festum praedictum, etc. See King of the Minstrels.

Mint, Is the place where the Kings Coin is formed, be it Gold or Silver, which
now is, and long has been the Tower of London: Though it appear by diverse
Statutes, that in ancient times the Mint has also been at Caleis, and other
places. Anno 21 R. 2. ca. 16. and 9 Hen. 5. Stat. 5. ca. 5. The particular
Officers belonging to the Mint, see in Cowels Interpreter, verbo, Mint.

Minute tithes, (Minutae sive minores decima,) Small Tithes, such as usually
belong to the Viccar, as of Herbs, Seeds, Eggs, Honey, Wax, etc. See 2 Part
Inst. fo. 649. and Udal and Tindals case. Hill. 22 Jac. where the tyth of Woad
was adjudged to be minuta decima. 3 Part Crokes Rep. fo. 21. See Tithes.

Misaventure, or Misadventure, (Fr. Mesadventure, i. Infortunium,) Has an
especial signification for the killing a man, partly by negligence, and partly
by chance. As if one, thinking no harm, carelessly throws a stone, or shoots an
Arrow, wherewith he kills another. In this case he commits not Felony, but
only loses his goods, and has a Pardon of course for his life. Stam. Pl. Cor.
lib. 1. ca. 8. Britton, ca. 7. distinguishes between Aventure and Misavonture;
The first he makes to be mere chance, as if a Man, being upon, or near the
Water, be taken with some sudden sickness, and so fall in, and is drowned, or
into the fire, and is burnt. Misaventure he says is, where a man comes to his
death by some outward violence, as the fall of a Tree, the running of a
Cart-wheel, the stroke of a Horse, or such like. So that Misadventure in
Stamfords opinion, is construed somewhat more largely then Britton understands
it.

West. part 2. Symbol. tit. Indictment. Sect. 48, and 49. makes Homicide casual
to be, merely casual or mixed. Homicide by mere chance, he defines to be, when a
man is slain by mere fortune, against the mind of the killer, as if one hewing,
the Axe flies off the haft and kills a man; And this is al one with Brittons
Misaventure. Homicide by chance mixed, he defines (Sect. 50.) to be, when the
killers ignorance or negligence is joined with the chance; as if a man lop
Trees by a highway side, in which many usually travel, and cast down a Bough,
not giving warning, etc. by which Bough a man is slain.

Miscognisant, Ignorant or not knowing. In the Stat. 32 Hen. 8. ca. 9. against
Champertie and Maintenance; It is ordained that the Justices of Assise shall
twice in the year in every County cause open Proclamation to be made of this
present Act, and of every thing therein contained, etc. to the intent, that no
person should be ignorant or miscognisant of the dangers and penalties therein
contained.

Miscontinuance, (Kitchen, fo. 231.) the same with Discontinuance, which see.

Mise, (A French word, signifying expense, or disbursement: sometimes written
Missum in Lat. and sometimes Misa,) has diverse significations; first, it is a
kind of honorable gift, or customary present, with which the People of Wales
are wont to salute every new King and Prince of Wales, at their entrance into
that Principality. It was anciently given in Cattle, Wine and Corn, for
sustentation of the Princes Family; but, when that Dominion was annexed to the
English Crown, the Gift was changed into Money, and the Sum is 5000 l.
Sterling, or More; and it happened to be thrice paid in King James's Reign,
First, at his own coming to the Crown, and that Principality. Secondly, when
Prince Henry was created Prince of Wales. And Thirdly, When King Charles the
First succeeded him in that Principality.

Anno 27 Hen. 8. ca. 26. it is ordained, That Lords Mayors shall have all such
Mises and profits of their Lands, as they have had in times past, etc. Misae
etiam dicuntur praestationes illae quas ob fruendas pristinas immunitates
Cestriae Palatinatus subditi novo cuique Comiti impendunt, i. 3000 Marks for
that County.

Sometimes Mises are taken for Taxes, or Tallages. Anno 25 Edw. 1. ca. 5.
Sometimes for Costs or Expenses, as pro misis and custagiis, for Costs and
Charges in the Entries of Judgments in personal Actions.

Mise is also a word of Art, appropriated to a Writ of right, so called,
because both parties have put themselves upon the mere right, to be tried by
the grand Assise, or by Battle; so as that which in all other Actions is called
an Issue, in a Writ of Right in that case is called a Mise. But, in a Writ of
Right, if a collateral point be tried, there it is called an Issue; and is
derived from missum, because the whole cause is put upon this point. Coke on
Litt. fol. 294. b. Anno 37 Ed. 3. ca. 16. To join the Mise upon the Mere, is as
much as to say, to join the Mise upon the clear right, and that more plainly,
to join upon this point, whether has the more right, the Tenant or Demandant.

Mise is sometimes used as a Participle, for cast or put upon. Cokes 6 Rep.
Saffins Case; and sometimes corruptly for Mease, a Message, or Tenement: As a
Mise-place in some Manors is taken to be such a Message or Tenement as
answers the Lord a Herriot at the death of its owner. 2 Inst. fo. 528. which,
in our French, is written Mees. Ceste Endenture temoigne que come Will. Terrye
de Dounham tiegne de Johan de Veer Coonte d'Oxenford un Mees and sys acres de
terre, etc. dat. 14 Ed. 3. penes Will. Andrew, Baronet.

Miserere, Is the name and first word of one of the Paenitential Psalms, most
commonly that which the Ordinary gives to such guilty Malefactors, as have the
benefit of the Clergy allowed by Law; and it is usually called the Psalm of
mercy.

Misericordia, Is used for an Arbitrary Amerciament or Punishment imposed on
any Person for an offense. For where the Plaintiff or Defendant in any Action
is amerced, the Entry is always -- Ideo in misericordia, etc. And it is called
Misericordia (as Fitzherbert says, Not. Br. fol. 75.) for that it ought to be
but small, and less then the offense, according to the tenor of Magna Charta,
cap. 14. Therefore, if a Man be unreasonably amerced in a Court, not of Record,
as in a Court Baron, etc. there is a Writ called Moderata Misericordia directed
to the Lord, or his Bailiff, commanding them, that they take Moderate
Amerciaments, according to the quality of the fault. Est enim misericordia
Domini Regis (says Glanvile) qua quis per juramentum legalium hominum de
viceneto, eatenus amerciandus est, ne aliquid de suo honorabili contenemento
amittat. And again, Mulcta lenior sic dicta, quod lenissima imponitur
misericordia; graviores enim mulctas Fines vocant, atrocissimas, Redemptiones.
See Glanv. page 75. a. And see Moderata Misericordia. -- He shall be in the
great Mercy of the King. Westminster. 1. cap. 15.

Misfeasans, Misdoings or Trespasses. -- Jury to enquire of all Purprestures
and Misfeasans. 2 Part Croke, fol. 498. And Misfeasor, a Trespasser. 2 Inst.
fol. 200.

Mishering, Est de estre quit de amerciemenz pur quereles en aucun Courts
devant qui que il seyt, nent ordinament ou proprement demonstre. MS. LL. Temp.
E. 2. See Abishersing and Miskering.

Miskenning (Meskenninga, LL. Hen. 1. cap. 12.) Iniqua vel injusta in jus
vocatio; inconstanter loqui in Curia, vel invariare. -- Renovamus etiam and
confirmamus Privilegia antiquorum Regum, atque ob reverentiam Dominae nostrae
perpetuae Virginis Mariae Sanctique Benedicti, Sanctarumque virginum,
omnibusque futuris ibidem Abbatibus in tota possessione Monasterii, Sacham and
Socham Theloneumque suum in terra and in aqua concedo, and Consuetudines, ut ab
omnibus apertius and before intelligantur, Anglice scriptas, scilicet,
Mundbriche, Feardwite, Firwite, Blodewite, Mistzeninge, Frithsoke, Hamsockne,
Forstall, Forphange, Theifphange, Hangwite, Frithbriche, Utlepe, Infongenthefe,
Supbriche, Tol and Tem, aliassque omnes leges and Consuetudines quae ad me
pertinent, tam plene and tam libere, sicut eas in manu mea habebam. Confirm.
Fundationis Monast. de Ramsey per S. Edw. Conf. Mon. Angl. 1 par. fo. 237.

Miskering, Hoc est quietus pro querelis coram quibuscunque in transumptione
probata. MS. LL. Rob. Cot. pa. 262. See Mishering.

Misnomer, (compounded of the Fr. Mes, which in composition always signifies
amiss, and nomer, i. nominare,) the using one name for another, a mis-terming,
or mis-naming.

Misprision, (Fr. Mespris. i. contempt, or neglect,) Signifies a neglect,
negligence, or oversight; as Misprision of Treason, or Felony is a neglect, or
light account made of Treason or Felony committed, by not revealing it, when we
know of it. Stam. pl. Cor. lib. 1. cap. 19. or by suffering any person,
committed for Treason or Felony, or suspicion of either, to go before he be
indicted.

Misprision of Clerks, (Anno 8 Hen. 6. ca. 15.) Is a neglect of Clerks, in
writing or keeping Records. By misprision of Clerks no Process shall be
adnulled or discontinued. 14 Edw. 3. ca. 6. Stat. 1. For Misprision of Treason,
the offenders are to suffer imprisonment during the Kings pleasure, lose their
Goods and the Profits of their Lands during their lives. Misprision of Felony
is only Finable by the Justices, before whom the party is attainted. Cromp. I.
of Peace, fo. 40. Other faults may be accounted Misprisions of Treason, or
Felony, because later Statutes have inflicted that punishment upon them,
whereof you have an example, Anno 14 Eliz. ca. 3. of such as Coin foreign
Coyns, not current in this Realm, and their Procurers, Aiders and Abettors.
Misprision also signifies a mistaking, Anno 14 Ed. 3. Stat. 1. ca. 6. v. 3
Inst. fo. 36, and 139.

Mis-trial, A false or erroneous Trial. Crokes Rep. 3 Part. fo. 284. Delves
Case.

Mis-user, Is an abuse of liberty, or benefit; As, He shall make Fine for his
Misuser. Old. Not. Br. fo. 149.

Mitta, (Sax.) Mensura december modiorum. MS. In Which. salina redd. 30 mittas
salis. Domesday, tit. Wirec. scire. Ego Wulfrun, (uxor Anketelli) Singulis
annis vitae meae ad Festum S. Benedicti, quod est in aestate, december mittas de
brasio and quinque de gruto and quinque mittas farinae triticiae and 8 pernas
and 16 caseos and duas vaccas pingues de terra mea Hicheling pro respectu annuo
eidem Ecclesiae, (Ramesiensi) procurari decerno. Lib. Rames. Sect. 38. --
Praeterea concessi eis septem Mittas Salis quolibet anno percipiendas apud Wiz.
Mon. Angl. 2 Par. so. 262. b.

Mittendo manuscriptum pedis Finis, Is a Writ Judicial, directed to the
Treasurer and Chamberlains of the Exchequer, to search and transmit the foot of
a Fine, acknowledged before Justices in Air, into the Common Pleas, etc. Reg.
of Writs, fo. 14.

Mittimus, Is a Writ by which Records are transmitted from one Court to
another, as appears by the Stat. of 5 Rich. 2. ca. 15. as out of the Kings
Bench into the Exhhequer; And sometimes by a Certiorari into the Chancery, and
from thence by a Mittimus into another Court, as you may see in 28 Hen. 8.
Dyer, fo. 29. and 29 Hen. 8. Dyer, fo. 32. Mittimus also signifies the Precept
that is directed by a Justice of Peace to a Jailer, for the receiving and safe
keeping a Felon, or other Offender, committed by the said Justice. See Table of
Reg. of Writs, for other uses and applications of this Word.

Mixed tithes, (decimae mixtae,) Are those of Cheese, Milk, etc. and of the
young of beasts. See Cokes 2 Part Inst. fo. 649. and see Tithe.

Mockadoes, (Anno 23 Eliz. ca. 9.) A kind of Stuff made in England, and
elsewhere.

Moderata misericordia, Is a Writ that lies for him who is amer^^d in a
Court Baron, or other Court not of Record, for any transgression or offense
beyond the quality of the fault. It is directed to the Lord of the Court or his
Bailiff, commanding them to take a moderate Amerciament of the party, and is
founded upon Magna Charta, ca. 14. Quod nullus liber homo amercietur, nisi
secundum qualitatem delicti, etc. The rest touching this Writ see in Fitz. Not.
Br. fo. 75. See Misericordia.

Modo and forma, Are words of art in pleadings, namely in the Answer of the
Defendant, whereby he denies to have done the thing laid to his charge, modo
and forma declarata. Kitchen, fo. 232. The Civilians in like case, say, Negat
allegata, prout allegantur, esse vera. Where modo and forma are of the
substance of the Issue, and where but words of course, see Coke on Litt. fo.
281. b.

Modus decimandi, Is either, when Land, or a yearly Pension, sum of Money, or
other profit belong to the Parson, Viccar, etc. by composition or Custom, in
satisfaction of Tithes in kind. MS. penes Auth. See 2 Inst. fo. 490.

Molendinum bladonicum, A Corn-mill; for which in ancient Charters we also find
Molendinum bladum and molendinum de blado. So a Fulling-mill is thus variously
Latin'd in Re-Records, Molendinum fullonicum, Mol. fullanicum, Mol. Fullere,
Mol. Fullarium and Mol de Fulelez.

A Windmill, Molendinum ad ventum, and venti; Molendinum ventriticum, and
ventricium.

A Water-mill, Molendinum aquaticum and aquatilium.

A Horse-mill, Molendinum Equitium.

A Grinding, or Griest-Mill, Molendinum molare. Ex Cartis and Record. in Mon.
Angl.

Molman. Prior. Lewens. pa. 21. -- omnis Lanceta, omnis Toftman and omnis
Molman (qui non sedet super Ogeland) debent spergere unam reiam de fiens, etc.
i. Unam strigam vel tractum stercoris, a rue of muck.

Molasses, (Anno 12 Car. 2. ca. 25.) Is the refuse Sirrop in the boiling of
Sugar; with which (by the said Statute) Wine is prohibited to be mingled, or
adulterated.

Monetagium, Jus and artificium cudendi monetas.

Moniers, or Moneyors, (Monetarii) Ministers of the Mint, which make Coin, and
deliver out the Kings Moneys. Anno 25 Edw. 3. ca. 20. Reg. of Writs, fo. 262.
It appears that in ancient time our Kings of England had Mints in most of the
Counties of this Realm; and in the Tractate of the Exchequer, written by
Ockham, we find, that, whereas Sheriffs ordinarily were tied to pay into the
Exchequer the Kings Sterling-Money, for such Debts, as they were to answer,
they of Northumberland and Cumberland were at liberty to pay in any sort of
Money, so it were Silver; and the reason is there given, because those two
Shires, Monetarios de antiqua institutione non habent. Moneyers are now also
taken for Banquers, or those that make it their Trade to turn and return money.

Monger, Seems to be a little Sea-vessel, which Fishermen use, Anno 13 Eliz.
ca. 11.

Monopoly, (from the Gr. (...), unus and (...) vendo,) Is an Institution, or
allowance of the King by his Grant, Commission, or otherwise to any person or
persons, of, or for the sole buying, selling, making, working, or using of any
thing, whereby any person or persons are restrained of any freedom or liberty
that they had before, or hindered in their lawful Trade; which is declared
illegal by 21 Jac. ca. 3. Except in some particular cases, which see in 3 Inst.
fo. 181.

Monstrans de droit, (i. Showing of ones right) Signifies a writ issuing out of
the Chancery to be restored to Lands or Tenements, that indeed are mine in
right, though, by some Office, found to be in possession of one lately dead.
See Stamf. Praer. ca. 21. at large, and Cokes Rep. lib. 4. fo. 54. Wardens of
the Sadlers Case.

Monstraverunt, Is a Writ that lies for Tenants that hold freely by Charter in
ancient Demaine, being distreined for the payment of any Toll or Imposition,
contrary to the liberty, which they do, or should enjoy. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 14.

Month, or Month, (Sax. Monath,) Shall be understood to consist of 28 days.
See Coke, lib. 6. fo. 61. b. And see Kalendermoneth.

Moot, (from the Sax. Motian, to treat, or handle) Is well understood at the
Inns of Court, to be that exercise, or arguing of Cases, which young Barrasters
and Students perform, at certain times, for the better enabling them for
practice, and defense of Clients Causes. The place where Moot-cases were
argued, was anciently called a Moot-hall, from the Sax. Motheal. In the Inns of
Court there is a Bailiff, or Surveyor of the Moots, who is yearly chosen by the
Bench, to appoint the M^otmen for the Inns of Chancery, and to keep account of
performance of Exercises both there and in the House. See Orig. Juridiciales,
fo. 212.

Mootmen, Are those that argue Readers Cases, (called also Moot-cases) in the
Houses of Chancery, both in Terms and in Vacations. Cokes Rep. 3 Part in
Proaemio.

Moratur, or Demoratur in Lege, Signifies as much as he Demurrs; because the
Party goes not forward in pleading, but rests or abides upon the Judgment of
the Court in the point, who deliberate, and take time to argue, and advise
thereupon. Whenever the Counsel learned of the Party is of opinion, that the
Count or Plea of the adverse party is insufficient in Law; then he Demurrs or
abides in Law, and refers the same to the Judgment of the Court. Coke on Lit.
fo. 71. b. See Demurrer.

Moriam, Is all one in signification with the French Morion, i. Cassis, a
headpiece, and that from the Italian Morione. Anno 4 and 5 Phil. and Mary, ca.
2. now called a Pot.

Morling alias Mortling, Signifies that Wool which is taken from the Skin of a
dead Sheep, whether dying of the rot, or being killed. Anno 4 Edw. 4. cap. 2.
and 3. and 27 Hen. 6 cap. 2. This is written Morkin, Anno 3 Jac. cap. 18.
Morling or Shorling, Anno 3 Edw. 4. cap. 1. and 14 Car. 2. cap. 18. See
Shorling.

Mortdancester. See Assize.

Mortgage (Mortuum vadium vel Mortgagium) from the French Mort, i. Mors; and
Gage, i. Pignus) Signifies a Pawn of Land or Tenement, or any moveable thing,
laid or bound for Money borrowed, peremptorily to be the Creditors for ever, if
the Money be not paid at the day agreed on. And the Creditor, holding such Land
on such Agreement, is in the mean time called Tenant in Mortgage. Glanvile
(lib. 10. cap. 6.) defines it thus, Mortuum vadium dicitur illud, cujus fructus
vel reditus interim percepti in nullo se acquietant. Thus it is called a Dead
Gage, because whatsoever profit it yields, yet it redeems not it self by
yielding such profit, except the whole sum borrowed be likewise paid at the
day, the Morgagee by Covenant being to receive the profits, till default of
payment. He that lays this Pawn or Gage, is called the Morgager, and he that
takes it, the Morgagee. This, if it contain excessive Usury, is prohibited Anno
37 Hen. 8. cap. 9.

Mortmain (Manus Mortua, i. Dead Hand. From the. Fr. Mort, i. Mors, and Main,
i. Hand) Signifies an Alienation of Lands or Tenements to any Corporation,
Guild, or Fraternity, and their Successors, as Bishops, Parsons, Viccars, etc.
which may not be done without License of the King, and the Lord of the Manor,
or of the King alone, if it be immediately holden of him. The reason of the
name proceeds from this, that the services and other profits due for such
Lands, should not, without such License come into a Dead Hand, or into such a
Hand, as it were Dead, and so dedicate unto God, or pious uses, as to be
abstractedly different from other Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, and is
never to revert to the Donor or any Temporal or common use. Mag. Charta, cap.
36. and 7 Edw. 1. commonly called the Statute of Mortmain. 18 Edw. 3. stat. 3.
cap. 3. and 15 Rich. 2. cap. 5. Which Statutes are something abridged by Anno
39 Eliz. cap. 5. whereby the gift of Land, etc. to Hospitals, is permitted
without obtaining of Licenses of Mortmain. Hottoman in his Commentaries De
verbis Feudal. verbo Manus mortua, says thus. Manus mortua locutio est, quae
usurpatur de iis quorum possessio, ut ita dicam, immortalis est, quia nunquam
haeredem habere desinunt. Qua de causa res nunquam ad Priorem Dominum
revertitur; nam Manus pro possessione dicitur, Mortua pro immortali, etc. And
Skene says, That Dimittere terras ad Manum Mortuam, est idem atque dimittere ad
multitudinem sive universitatem, quae nunquam moritur. The President and
Governors for the poor within the Cities of London and Westminster, may without
License in Mortmain, purchase Lands, etc. not exceeding the yearly value of
3000 l, etc. Stat. 14. Car. 2. cap. 9.

Mortuary (Mortuarium) Is a gift left by a Man at his death, to his Parish
Church, in recompense of his Personal Tithes and Offerings, not duly paid in
his life time. A Mortuary is not properly and originally due to an
Ecclesiastical Incumbent from any, but those only of his own Parish, to whom
he ministers Spiritual Instruction, and has right to their Tithes. But by
Custom in some places of this Kingdom, they are paid to the Incumbent of other
Parishes, in the Corpse of the Dead Bodies passage through them. See the Statute
21 Hen. 8. cap. 6. before which Statute Mortuaries were payable in Beasts.
Mortuarium (says Lindwood) sic dictum, est quia relinquitur Ecclesiae pro anima
defuncti. Custom in tract of time, did so far prevail, as that Mortuaries being
held as due debts, the payment of them was enjoined, as well by the Statute De
circumpecte agatis, in 13 Edw. 1. as by several Constitutions, etc. A Mortuary
was anciently called a Cors-present, (because the Beast was presented with the
Body at the Funeral) and sometimes a Principal. Of which see a learned
discourse in Mr. Dugdales Antiquities of Warwickshire. fol. 679. And see
Seldens History of Tithes, page 287. There is no Mortuary due by Law, but by
Custom. 2 Part Inst. fol. 491. See Spel. de Council. Tom. 2. fol. 390.

Moss-Troopers, Are a rebellious sort of Malefactors in the North of England,
that live by Robbery and Rapine; not unlike the Tories of Ireland, or Banditi
in Italy, for suppression of whom, the Statutes 4 Jac. cap. 1. -- 7 Jac. cap.
1. and 14 Car. 2. cap. 22. were made.

Mote (Mota) Sax. gemote) A Court, Plea, or Convention. As Mota de Hereford, i.
Curia vel placita Comitatus de Hereford. Charta Matildis Imperatricis filiae
Regis Hen. 1. -- Sciatis me fecisse Milonem de Glocestre, Comitem de Hereford
and dedisse ei Motam Herefordiae cum toto Castello in Feudo and Hereditate. Of
this there were several kinds, as Wittenagemot, Folcgemot, Sciregemot,
Hundredgemot, Burgemote, Wardegemote, Haligemot, Swainegemot, etc.

Hence to Mote or Moot, i. To Plead, and in Scotland they call it to Mute, as
The Mute Hill at Scone, i. Mons placiti de Scona. But we now most commonly
apply the word Moot, to that practice of Pleading and Arguing Cases, which
young Students use in the Inns of Court and Chancery.

Mota was sometimes used of old for a Fortress or Castle, as Turris de London
and Mota de Windsor -- Charta pacis inter Stephanum Regem and Hen. Ducem postea
Regem. See Moot.

Mote, Does also signify a Standing Water to keep Fish in, or a great Ditch of
Water encompassing a Castle or Dwelling House. -- Hec Indentura facta inter
Rogerum Grene Clericum ex part una and Thomam Horeworde Clericum ex part
altera, testatur, quod praedictus Rogerus tradidit prefato Thomae tria stagna
and unam Motam Piscariam existen. infra manerium Domini de Yeffyn Habend. and
tenend. predicta tria flagna and predictam Motam cum tota piscatione in eisdem
and cum incremento piscium in eisdem cum libero ingressu and egressu, etc. Dat.
18 Febr. 11 Edw. 4.

Muchehunt. -- Habeant hi quatuor unam regalem potestatem, (salva semper nobis
nostra praesentia) quaterque in anno generales Forestae demonstrationes and
viridis and veneris forisfactiones, quas Muchehunt dicunt, etc. Constable. Canuti
de Foresta, cap. 11.

Mulier (as used in our Laws, seems to be corrupted from Melior, or the Fr.
Melieur) Signifies the lawful Issue, preferred before an Elder Brother born out
of Matrimony. Anno 9 Hen. 6. cap. 11. Smith de Republ. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 6.
But by Glanvile, lib. 7. cap. 1. The lawful Issue seems rather Mulier, then
Melier, because begotten e Muliere, and not ex Concubina, for he calls such
issue Filios mulieratos, opposing them to Bastards. And Britton, cap. 70. has
Friar mulier, i. The Brother begotten of the Wife, opposite to Friar bastard.
This seems to be used in Scotland also: For Skene says, Mulieratus filius is a
lawful Son, begotten of a lawful Wife. A Man has a Son by a Woman before
marriage, which is a Bastard and unlawful, and after he marries the Mother of
the Bastard, and they have another Son, this second Son is called Mulier, and
is lawful, and shall be heir to his Father: You shall always find them with
this Addition, when compared, Bastard eigne and mulier puisne. See Coke on
Littl. fol. 170 b. and 243 b.

Mulier also, was anciently used as an Addition; As, Omnibus -- Domina Johanna
de Foresta, mulier, salutem. Noverit universitas vestra quod, etc. dat. 3 Regis
Edw. Filii Edw. Ex Autographo penes Authorem. By this it was doubted whether
Mulier signified a Wife, or a Woman born in lawful Wedlock. But the following
Deed clearly shows it the former, and is conform to what Sir Edw. Coke says, 2
Inst. fo. 434. That, of ancient time, Mulier was taken for a Wife.

Elizabetha Grendon filia and haeres legitima Domini Hamonis Peshal mil. dum
vixit and Aliciae uxoris suae quondam Roberti Harley and Johannae uxoris
ejusdem Roberti, filii and haeredis quondam Roberti Harley mil. and Margaretae
uxoris suae pars appellans and actrix ex part una, and Johanna Harley Mulier
pars appellata and rea ex altera. Eadem Johanna Harley per Officialem Diocesis
Middlesex, occasion frigiditatis sive impotentiae naturalis Roberti mariti sui
coeund. sive eam carnaliter cognoscend. mota, ab eodem Roberto separata fuit.
Et nunc, ex supplicatione praefatae Elizabethae Grendon, ea separatio cassatur
and annullatur, and matrimonium inter eos solidum and firmum fuisse declaratur
per instrumentum publicum. Dat. Anno 1400. Ex MS. penes Will. Dugdale Ar.

Muliertie, or Mulerie, (Coke on Litt. fo. 352. b.) the being, or condition of
a Mulier, or lawful issue. Fait a remember que Osbart Parles engendra Reynald
de Asseles en Bastardie; le quele Osbart enfeffa le dit Reynald en Fee en tote
son tenement de Asseles, a lui and a ses heirs a toutz jours: le quele Reynald
engendra Simon de Asseles en Muleric, le quele Simon engendra Alive, Agnes and
Margerie en Muleric. MS. penes Will. Dugdale Ar.

Multa, or Multura Episcopi, Is derived a Mulcta; for that it was a Fine, or
final satisfaction given the King, that they might have power to make their
last Wills and Testaments, and to have the Probat of other Men's, and the
granting Administrations. See 2 Inst. fo 491.

Multiplication, (Multiplicatio) Multiplying, or Augmenting. It is ordained and
established, That none from henceforth shall use to Multiply Gold or Silver,
nor use the Craft of Multiplication, and if any the same do, he shall incur the
pain of Felony. Anno 5 Hen. 4. ca. 4. which Statute was made upon a presumption
that some persons skilful in Chimistry, could multiply or augment those
Metals, by Elixir or other ingredients, and change other Metals into very Gold
or Silver. For, Letters Patents were granted by Henry the Sixth to certain
persons, (who undertook to perform the same, and to find out the Philosophers
Stone) to free them from the penalty in the said Stat. Rot. Pat. 34 Hen. 6. in.
13. Coke 3. Inst. fo. 74.

Multitude, (Multitudo) must, (according to some Authors) be ten persons or
more; but Sir Edward Coke says, he could never read it restrained by the Common
Law to any certain number, but left to the discretion of the Judges. on Litt.
fo. 257.

A Multo fortiori, or a Minore ad Maius, Is an argument often used by
Littleton, (...) force of it thus, -- If it be so in a Feoffment, passing a new
right, much more is it for the restitution of an ancient right, etc. Coke on
Litt. fo. 253. a. and 260. a.

Multure, (Molitura vel Multura) Signifies the Toll that the Miller takes for
grinding Corn. -- Et totam sequelam Custumariorum meorum qui ad dictum
molendinum bladum suum molent, ad sextum decimum vas, and braseum suum sine
Multura. Mon Angl. 2 p. fo. 825. a. -- And if that will grynd at his milne, to
grend at xxiiii vessel. And for their Malt neght give Multer, etc. An Award
dat. 28 Hen. 6.

Mundbrech, (Sax. Mund. i. Munitio, Defensio, and Brice. Fractio vel violatio.)
Si Rex Ecclesiam, Monasterium, Burgum, hominem aliquem vel societatem, eorumve
res aut praedia in suam susceperat protectionem, dicebatur hoc omne and
ejusmodi quicquicd in Regis esse Mundio, Saxonice on Cyningesmunde, cujus
violatio etiam Mundbrice dicta est. q. Protectionis violatio, aut datae pacis
fractio, quae in Anglorum lege 5 libris plectebatur. Spelm. But Mundbrech is
expounded in late times clausarum fractionem, a breach of Mounds, by which name
Ditches and Fences are still called in some parts of England.

Mundeburde, (Mundeburdium, from the Sax. Mund. i. Tutela: And Board vel Borh.
i. Fidejussor.) Defensionis vel patrocinii fidejussio and stipulatio.

Muniments, (Munimenta,) Mat. Paris, fo 311. Episcopus itaque cum Munimentorum
inspectionem habere non potuit. Scripta scilicet authentica, Chartae Donationum
and evidentiae. See Miniments.

Munimenthouse, (Munimen) In Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, Castles,
Colleges, or such like, is a House, or little Room of strength purposely made
for keeping, the Seal, Evidences, Charters, etc. of such Church, College, etc.
Such Evidences being called Muniments, corruptly Miniments, from Munio, to
defend; because inheritances and possessions are defended by them. 3 Part Inst.
fo. 170.

Murage, (Muragium, Anno 3 Ed. 1. ca. 30.) Is a reasonable Toll, to be taken of
every Cart, or Horse, coming laden into a City or Town, for the building or
repairing the Walls of it, for the safeguard of the People, and is due either
by Grant or prescription. Cokes 2 Part Inst. fo. 222.

Murder, (Murdrum, from the Sax. Morther, or British Murndwrn. Fr. Meurtre. i.
Internecio) Is a wilful and Felonious killing another upon prepensed Malice,
whether secretly or openly, English man, or Forreiner, living under the Kings
protection. 52 Hen. 3. ca. 25. -- 14 Ed. 3. ca. 4. Prepensed malice is either
express or implied; Express, when it may be evidently proved, There was
formerly some ill will: Employed, when one kills another suddenly, having
nothing to defend himself, as going over a Style, or such like. Cromp. Just. of
P. ca. of Murder, fo. 19. Per parol de Murder en grants, le Grantee clama de
aver amerciaments de Murderes. Broke tit. quo warrant. 2.

Murengers, Are two ancient Officers in the City of Chester, of as great
antiquity as any other in that City, being two of the principal Aldermen,
yearly elected, to see the Walls kept in good repair, and who receive certain
Tolls and Customs for maintenance thereof.

Muster, (from the Fr. Moustre. i. Specimen, Exemplum, as Fair moustre
generale de toute son armic, Is as much as lustrare exercitum) the
signification is well known. Mustred of Record, (Anno 18 Hen. 6. ca. 19.) Is to
be enrolled in the number of the Kings Soldiers. Master of the Kings Musters.
See in Master.

Muster-master-general, (Anno 35 Eliz. ca. 4.) See Master of the Kings Musters.

Mute, (Mutus) That speaks not; dumb, speechless. -- A Prisoner may stand Mute
two manner of ways. 1. When he speaks not at all, and then it shall be
enquired, whether he stood Mute of malice, or by the act of God; if by the
later, then the Judge ex officio ought to enquire, whether he be the same
person, and of all other Pleas, which he might have pleaded, if he had not
stood Mute. 2. When he pleads not-guilty, or does not directly answer, or will
not put himself upon the enquest to be tried. Coke 2 Part Inst. ca. 12. Anno 32
Hen. 8. ca. 3. See Pain Fort and Dure.

N.
NAam, (Namium) (from the Sax. Naeme. i. Captio) Signifies the taking or
apprehending another man's moveable Goods, and is either lawful or unlawful:
Lawful Naam is a reasonable Distress proportionable to the value of the thing
distreined for; and this Naam was anciently called either Vif or Mort, quick or
dead, according as it is made of dead or quick Chattels. Lawful Naam is so
either by the Common Law, as when one takes another Man's Beasts damage feasant
in his Grounds; or by a Man's particular fact, as by reason of some contract
made, that for default of payment of an Annuity, it shall be lawful to distrain
in such or such Lands, etc. Horns Mirror of Justices. lib. 2. ca. de Naam. See
Withernam. non libebit Namium sumere vel vadimonium, nec averia sua
imparchiare. Mon. Angl. 2 Par. fo. 256. b. Nemo Namium capiat in comitatu vel
extra Comitatum, priusquam ter in Hundredo suo rectum sibi perquisierit. LL.
Canuti MS. ca. 18. quae inscribitur de Namiis capiendis, Quod si reddere
noluerint (debitores) nec ad disrationandum venire, tunc cives quibus debita
sua debent, capiant in Civitate, Namia sua, vel de comitatu in quo manet, qui
debitum debet. Char. Hen. 1. de libertat. London. See Vetitum Namium.

Namation, (Namatio) A distreming, or taking a distress. In Scotland it is used
for impounding.

Naperie (Anno 2 Ric. 2. ca. 1.) (from the French, Nappe, a Table-cloath,) we
may call it linnen-clothery.

Nathwyte. -- Quod nec dictus Philippus de Avery, nec haeredes sui de caetero
petere possint aliqua tallagia, nec etiam francum plegium, nec etiam aliam
demandam, quae vocatur Nathwyte. Carta 55 Hen. 3. m. 6. Perhaps, from the Sax.
Nyth. i. Lewdness, and so it may signify the same with Lairwite.

Nativity, (Nativitas) Birth; Casting the Nativity, or, by calculation, seeking
to know how long the Queen should live, etc. made Felony, Anno 23 Eliz. ca. 2.
Nativitas was anciently taken for Bondage, or Villenage -- terram, quam Nativi
sui tenuerunt de se in Nativitate. Mon. Angl. 2 par. fo. 643. a.

Nativo habendo, Was a Writ that lay to the Sheriff, for a Lord, whose Villain,
claimed for his inheritance, was run from him, for the apprehending and
restoring him to his Lord. Reg. of Writs, fo. 87. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 77.

Nativus, Is qui natus est servus, and sic differat ab eo qui se venundari
passus est. Servos enim alios Bondos dicimus, alios Nativos, alias Villanos.
Bondi sunt qui pactionis vinculo se astrinxerint in servitutem, unde and nomen,
nam Bond, anglice vinculum, Bondi quasi astr^cti nuncupantur. De Nativis jam
supra. Villani, sunt qui glebae ascripti villam colunt Dominicam, nec exire
licet, sine Domini licentia. Spelm. Vide Chart. Rich. 2. qua omnes manumittit a
Bondagio in Com. Hertford. Walsingham, page 254. -- Quod si aliquis Nativus
alicujus in praefato Burgo manserit and terram in eo tenuerit, and fuerit in
praedicta Gilda and Hansa and Loath and Scoth cum eisdem Burgensibus nostri^ per
unum ann um and unum diem sine calumpnia, deinceps non possit repeti a Domino
suo, ut in eodem Burgo liber permaneat. Carta Hen. 3. Burgensibus Mungumery.

Native tenentes, Sunt (ipsi etiam liberi) qui terram tenent Nativam: Hoc est
Nativorum servitiis obnoxiam. Spel.

Naturalization (Naturalizatio) Is when an Alien born is made the Kings Natural
Subject. See Denizen.

Ne Admittas, Is a Writ that lies for the Plaintiff in a Quare Impedit, or him
that has an Action of' Darein Presentment depending in the Common Bench, and
fears the Bishop will admit the Clerk of the Defendant, during the Suit between
them; which Writ must be sued within six Months after the avoidance, because
after the six Months, the Bishop may present by Lapse. Reg. of Writs, fol. 31.
Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 37.

Neat-land (Sax.) Terra Villanorum: Land let or granted out to the Yeomanry. Ex
Vet. Charta.

Negative Pregnant (Negativa Praegnans) Is a Negative, which implies or brings
forth an Affirmative; as, if a Man being impleaded to have done a thing on such
a day, or in such a place, denies that he did it Modo and forma declarata,
which implies nevertheless that in some sort he did it. Or, if a Man be
impleaded for having alienated Land in Fee, etc. he denies that he has
alienated in Fee; this is a Negative which includes an Affirmative, for it may
be he has made an Estate in Tail. Dyer fol. 17. number. 95. And see Brook, hoc
tit.

Neif (Fr. Naif, i. Naturalis, Nativa) Signifies a Bondwoman, a she villain.
Mentioned Anno 9 Rich. 2. cap. 2. See Nativus. Anciently when a Lord made his
Bondwoman free, he gave her this kind of Manumission.

Sciant praesentes and futuri quod ego Radulphus de Crombewel Miles Senior and
Dominus de Lambeley dedi Domino Roberto Vicario de Dedeling Beatricem filiam
Willielmi Hervy de Lambeley quondam Nativam Meam, cum tota sequela sua, cum
omnibus catallis suis perquisitis and perquirendis. Habend. and Tenend.
predictam Beatricem cum tota sequela sua and omnibus catallis suis and omnibus
rebus suis perquisitis and perquirendis praedicto Domino Roberto vel suis
assignatis libere quiet been and in pace imperpetuum. Ita quod nec ego
praedictus Radulphus and heredes mei sive assignati mei aliquod juris vel
clamii in predicta Beatrice vel in catallis suis sive in sequela sua ratione
servitutis vel nativitatis de caetero exigere vel vendicare poterimus, sed
quieta sit and absoluta de me and haeredibus meis seu assignatis meis ab omni
onere servitutis and nativitatis imperpetuum. In cujus -- ^iis testibus -- Dat.
apud Lambeley in die Sancti Laurentii Martyris. Anno 13 Edw. 3. See Manumission.

Writ of Neifty, Was an ancient Writ, now out of use, whereby the Lord claimed
such a Woman for his Neif, wherein but two Neifs could be put.

Ne injuste vexes, Is a Writ that lies for Tenant, who is distreined by his
Lord for other Services, then he ought to make, and is a prohibition to the
Lord in it self, commanding him not to distrain. The special use of it is,
where the Tenant has formerly prejudiced himself, by performing more Services,
or paying more Rent without constraint, then he needed; For, in this case, by
reason of the Lords seisin, he cannot avoid him in Avowry, and therefore is
driven to this Writ, as his next remedy. Reg. of Writs, fo. 4. Fitz. Not. Br.
fol. 10.

Nesse (Anno 4 Hen. 7. ca. 21.) Se^ems to be the proper name of Orford Haven in
Suffolk.

Ne vicecomes Color mandati Regis quenquam amoveat a possessione Ecclesiae
minus just. Reg. of Writs, fo. 61.

Nient comprise, Is an exception taken to a petition as unjust, because the
thing desired is not contained in that Act or Deed, whereon the Petition is
grounded. For example, one desires of the Court to be put in possession of a
House, formerly among other Lands, etc. adjudged to him; The adverse party
pleads, that this petition is not to be granted, because, though the Petitioner
had a judgment for certain Lands and Houses, yet this House is not comprised
among those, for which he had Judgment. New Book of Entries, tit. Nient
comprise.

Ni^^e, (Anno 3 Edw. 4. ca. 5.) Both Cowel and Spelman have it without any
explication. I suppose it a corruption from nihil, and to signify a Toy, or
thing of no value.

Nihils, or Nichils, (Anno 5 Rich. 2. Stat. 1. ca. 3. and 27 Eliz. ca. 3.) Are
Issues, which the Sheriff, that is apposed, says, Are Nothing worth, and
illeviable, for the insufficiency of the parties that should pay them. Practice
of the Exchequer, pa. 101. Accounts of Nihil shall be put out of the Exchequer.
Anno 5 Rich. 2. Stat. 2. ca. 13.

Nihil dicit, Is a failing to put in Answer to the Plaintiffs Plea by the day
assigned; which, if a Man do omit, Judgment passes against him, as saying
nothing why it should not.

Nihil capiat per breve, Is the Judgment given against the Plaintiff, either in
bar of his Action, or in abatement of his Writ. Coke on Litt. fo. 363.

Nisi prius, Is a Writ Judicial, which lies in case, where the Enquest is
panelled, and returned before the Justices of the Bank, the one party or the
other desiring to have this Writ for the ease of the Country; whereby the
Sheriff is willed to bring the men empanel'd to Westminster at a certain day,
or before the Justices of the next Assizes; Nisi die lunae apud talem locum
prius venerint, etc. See the form of it in Old Not. Br. fo. 159. and see the
Statute 14 Edw. 3. ca. 15. and that of York, 12 Edw. 2. and West. 2. ca. 30.
See Justices of nisi prius, and 4 Inst. fo. 161.

Noctes and Noctem de firma. We often meet in Domesday with tot Noctes de
firma, or firma tot Noctium; which is to be understood of meat and drink, or
entertainment for so many nights.

Nobility, (Nobilitas) With us compriseth all Dignities above a Knight; so that
a Baron is the lowest degree of it. Smyth de Repub. Angl. lib. 1. ca. 17. v.
Coke, lib. 9. Count of Salops Case.

Nocumento. See Nuisance.

Nomination, (Nominatio) Is taken for a power, that a Man, by virtue of a
Manor, or otherwise, has, to appoint a Clerk to a Patron of a Benefice, by
him to be presented to the Ordinary.

Non-ability, Is an exception taken against the Plaintiff or Demandant, upon
some cause why he cannot commence any Suit in Law; as Praemuniri, Outlary,
Villenage, professed in Religion, Excommunication, or because he is a stranger
born; howbeit the last holds only in actions real or mixed, and not in personal,
except he be a stranger and an Enemy. The Civilians say, such a Man has not
Personam standi in judicio. See Brook, hoc tit. and Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 35. 65
and 77.

Non admittas. See Ne admittas.

Nonage, Is all the time of a Man's age, under one and twenty years in some
cases, or 14 in others, as Marriage. See Broke, tit. Age. See Age.

Non capiendo Clericum. See Clericum non capiendo.

Non-claim, Is an omission, or neglect of a Man, that claims not within the
time limited by Law; as within a year and day, where continual claim ought to
be made, or within five years after a Fine levied. Vide Coke, lib. 4. in
Proaem. and Continual Claim.

Non compos mentis, Is a Man of no sound Memory and understanding, of which
there are four sorts. 1. An Idiot, who from his Nativity, by a perpetual
infirmity, Is Non compos mentis. 2. He that by sickness, grief, or other
accident wholly loses his Memory and Understanding. 3. A Lunatic, that has
sometimes his understanding, and sometimes not, aliquando gaudet lucidis
intervallis. Lastly, He that by his own act for a time deprives himself of his
right mind, as a Drunkard; but that kind of Non compos mentis shall give no
privilege or benefit to him or his heirs; and a Descent takes away the Entry
of an Idiot, albeit the want of understanding was perpetual. Coke, lib. 4.
Beverly's Case.

Non di^^ringendo, Is a Writ comprizing diverse particulars, according to diverse
cases, which you may see in the Table of Reg. of Writs.

Non est culpabilis, Is the general Plea to an action of Trespass, whereby the
Defendant does absolutely deny the fact, charged on him by the Plaintiff,
whereas in other special Answers, the Defendant grants the fact to be done, but
alleages some reason in his defense, why he lawfully might do it. And, as this
is the general Answer in an Action of Trespass, that is, an Action criminal
civilly prosecuted; so is it also in all Actions criminally followed, either at
the Suit of the King, or other, wherein the Defendant denies the Crime objected
to him. See New Book of Entries, tit. non Culp. and Stamf. pl. Cor. lib. 2. ca.
62.

Non est factum, Is a Plea to a Declaration, whereby a Man denies that to be
his deed, whereupon he is impleaded. Brook, hoc titulo.

Non implacitando aliquem de libero tenemento fine brevi, Is a Writ to inhibit
Bailiffs, etc. from Distreming any Man, without the Kings Writ, touching his
Freehold. Reg. of Wrtis, 171. b.

Non intromittendo quando breve Praecipe in capite subdole impetratur, Is a
Writ which had dependence on the Court of Wards, and therefore now obsolete.
Reg. of Writs, fo. 4. b.

Non merchandizando victualia, Is a Writ directed to the Justices of Assise,
commanding them to enquire, whether the Officers of such a Town do sell
Victuals in gross, or by retain during their Office, contrary to the Statute,
and to punish them, if they find it true. Reg. of Writs, fo. 184.

Non molestando, Is a Writ that lies for him, who is molested contrary to the
Kings protection granted him. Reg. of Writs, fo. 24.

Non obstante, notwithstanding, Is a word or clause usual in Statutes and
Letters Patent.

-- All grants of such Pensio^ns, and every non obstante therein contained
shall be void. Stat. 14 Car. 2. ca. 11. v. 3 Part Crokes Rep. fo. 196. and
Plow. Com. fo. 501, 502. In Henry the Thirds time (says Sir Richard Baker) the
Clause non obstante (brought in first by the Pope) was taken up by the King in
his Grants and Writings. See Pryns Animadversions on fourth Inst. fo. 129.

Non omittas, Is a Writ lying, where the Sheriff delivers a former Writ to a
Bailiff of a Franchise, in which the party, on whom it is to be served, dwells,
and the Bailiff neglects to do it: In this case the Sheriff returning, that he
delivered it to the Bailiff, this shall be directed to the Sheriff, charging
him to execute the Kings command himself. Old. Not. Br. fo. 44. Of this the
Reg. of Writs has three sorts, fo. 82. b. 151.

Non ponendo in Assisis and Juratis, Is a Writ founded upon the Stat. Westminster. 2.
ca. 38. and the Stat. Articuli super Chartas, ca. 9. which is granted upon
diverse causes to Men, for the freeing them from serving upon Assizes and
Juries, as by reason of old age, etc. See Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 165. and Reg. fo.
179. 181.

Non procedendo ad Assisam Rege inconsulto, Is a Writ to stop the Trial of a
Cause appertaining to one, who is in the Kings service, etc. until the Kings
pleasure be farther known. Reg. fo. 220.

Non residentia pro Clericis Regis, Is a Writ directed to the Ordinary,
charging him not to molest a Clerk imployd in the Kings Service, by reason of
his Non-residence. Reg. of Writs, fol 58. b.

Non Residence (Anno 28 Hen. 8. cap. 13.) Is applied to those Spiritual
Persons, that are not Resident, but do absent themselves by the space of one
Month together, or two Months at several times in one year, from their
Dignities, Prebends, or Benefices. For Regularly, Personal Residence is
required of Ecclesiastical Persons upon their Cures. See 2 Part Instit. fol.
625.

Non solvendo pecuniam, ad quam Clericus mulctatur pro non Residentia, Is a
Writ prohibiting an Ordinary to take a pecuniary mulct, imposed upon a Clerk of
the Kings for Non-residency. Reg. of Writs, fol. 59.

Non-sute, (i Non est Prosecutus, etc.) Is a Renunciation of the Suit by the
Plaintiff or Demandant, most commonly upon the discovery of some Error or
Defect, when the Matter is so far proceeded in, as the Jury is ready at the
Bar, to deliver their Verdict. Anno 2 Hen. 4. cap. 7. See the New Book of
Entries, verbo, Nonsute. The Civilians term it Litis Renunciationem.

Non-tenure, Is an Exception to a Count, by saying, That he holds not the
Land mentioned in the Count, or at least some part of it. Anno 25 Edw. 3. stat.
4. cap. 16. West, par. 2. Symb. tit. Fines, sect. 138. Mentions Non-tenure
general, and Non-tenure special: This, is an Exception, alleging that he was
not Tenant the day whereon the Writ was purchased; General, is, where one
denies himself ever to have been Tenant to the Land in question. See New Book
of Entries, Aerbo, Non tenure.

Non sum informatus. See Informatus non sum.

Non sane memory (Non sanae memoriae) Is an Exception taken to any Act,
declared by the Plaintiff or Demandant to be done by another, and whereon he
grounds his Plaint or Demand: And the effect of it is, that the party that did
that Act, was mad or not well in his wits when he did it, or when he made his
last Will and Testament. See New Book of Entries, tit. Non sane memory. See
Non compos mentis.

Nones (Nonae) In March, May, July, and October, are the six days next
following the first day, or the Calends. In other Months they are the four
days next after the first; but the last of these days is properly called Nones,
and the other reckoned backward, according to the number distant from the
Nones, as the third, fourth, or fifth Nones. They are called Nones, because
they begin the ninth day before the Ides. Dates of Deeds by Nones, Ides, or
Calends is sufficient. 2 Inst. fol. 675.

Non-term (Non terminus) Is the time of Vacation between Term and Term. It was
anciently called The times or days of the Kings Peace. Lamb. Archa. fol. 126.
And what these were in the time of King Edward the Confessor, see there. See
Peace of God, and the Church. This time was called Justic^um or Feriae among
the Romans, or dies nefasti. Ferias appellari notum est tempus illud, quod
forensibus negotiis and jure dicendo vacabat. Brisson. de verb. signif. lib. 6.

Nook of Land (Noka terrae) -- Universis pateat, quod ego Johanna quae fui uxor
Walteri le Blount -- tradidi -- Henrico Adams unum Mes. and unam nokam terrae
cum pertin. in villa de Momele, etc. Dat. apud Sodyngton, 5 Edw. 3.

Norroy (Quasi, North-Roy, The Northern King) The third of the Three Kings at
Arms, whose Office lies on the Northside of Trent, as Clarentius on the South;
and is mentioned in the Stat. 14 Car. 2. cap. 33. See Herald.

Notary (Notarius) Anno 27 Edw. 3. cap. 1. Is a Scribe or Scrivener that takes
Notes, or makes a short draught of Contracts, Obligations, or other
Instruments. Claus. 13 Edw. 2. m. 6. Schedula consuta eidem memb. de Notariis
Imperialibus non admittendis.

Note of a Fine (Nota Finis) Is a Brief of a Fine made by the Chirographer,
before it be engrossed: The form whereof see in West. par. 2. Symbol. tit.
Fines, sect. 117.

Not guilty. See Non est culpabilis.

Novale (Ex Cartulario Abbathiae de Furnesse in Com. Lanc. in Officio Ducat.
Lanc. fol. 41. b.) -- Item nota quod Novale est ager nunc primum praecisus, ut
extra verborum significationibus innovatae, ubi Glossa dicitur Novale, terra de
Novo ad culturam redacta, cujus non extat memoria quod fuisset ibidem: Et quod
Novale semel fuit, semper erit Novale, quoad decimarum retentionem vel
solutionem. Land newly ploughed or converted into Tillage. -- Excepta decima
Novalium cujusdam terrae, quam de novo excoluerunt Pat. 6 Edw. 3. pa. 1. m. 19.

Novel Assignment (Nova Assignatio) Is in an Action of Trespass, an Assignment
of Time, Place, or such like, in a Declaration more particularly then it was in
the Writ. Broke, tit. Deputy, number. 12. And Trespass. 122. See Assignment.

Noyles (Anno 21 Jac. cap. 18) -- No person shall put any Flocks, Noyles,
Thrums, Hair, or other deceivable thing into any broad Woollen Cloth, etc.

Nude Contract (Nudum Pactum) Is a bare Contract or Promise of a thing, without
any consideration given therefore: Ex quo non oritur Actio.

Nude Matter. See Matter.

Nummata terrae, Is the same with Denariata terrae, by some taken to be an
A^re. Sciatis me (Will. Longespe) dedisse and concessisse Ecclesiae Sanctae
Mariae de Walsingham and Canonicis ibidem deo servientibus in perpetuam
Ele^mosinam 40 Nummatas terrae in Walsingham, etc. See Fardingdele.

Nuncupative Will. See Will.

Nunn (Nonna) Signifies a holy or consecrated Virgin, or a Woman that has by
vow bound her self to a single or chaste life, in some place, or company of
other Women, separad from the World, and devoted to a special Service of God,
by Prayer, Fasting, and such like holy Exercises. Cowel.

Nuper obiit, Is a Writ, that lies for a Coheir, being deforced by her
Coparcener of Lands or Tenements, whereof their Grandfather, Father, Uncle, or
Brother, or any other, their common Ancestor, died seized of an estate in
Fee-simple. See the form of the Writ in Reg. of Writs, fol. 226. and Fitz. Not.
Br. fol. 197. If the Ancestor died seized in Fee-tail, then the Coheir deforced
shall have a Formdon. Ibidem.

Nuisance (from the Fr. nuire, i. nocere) Signifies not only a thing done to
the annoyance of another in his free Lands or Tenements, but the Assize or Writ
lying for the same. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 183. And this Writ De Nocumento or of
Nuisance, is either simply, De Nocumento or De parvo Nocumento; and then it is
Vicountiel. Old Not. Br. fol. 108. Britton (cap. 61. and 62.) calls it Nosance.
Manwood (pa. 2. cap. 17.) makes three sorts of Nuisance in the Forest; the first
is, Nocumentum commune; the second, Nocumentum speciale; the third, Nocumentum
generale, of which, read there. See Cokes fifth Report, Williams Case. Writs of
Nusances, see the Stat. 6 Rich. 2. cap. 3. Now much turned into Trespasses and
Actions upon the Case.

O.
O. Ni. -- The course of the Exchequer is, That as soon as a Sheriff enters
into his account for Issues, Amerciaments, and Mean Profits, to mark upon his
Head. O. Ni. which signifies Oneratur, nisi habeat sufficientem exonerationem,
and presently he becomes the Kings debtor, and a Debet set upon his Head;
whereupon the parties peravaile are become debtors to the Sheriff, and
discharged against the King. 4 Inst. fol. 116.

Oale-gavel. See Gavelsester.

Oategavel. See Gavel.

Oath (Juramentum) Is a calling Almighty God to witness that the Testimony is
true; therefore it is aptly termed Sacramentum, a Holy Band, a Sacred Tie, or
Godly Vow. And it is called a Corporal Oath, because the party when he swears,
touches with his right hand the Holy Evangelists or Book of the New Testament.
Coke 3 Part. Inst. cap. 74. See the several Oaths of many of the Officers of
this Kingdom in the Book of Oaths lately Printed. In a Deed of William de
Elmham Knight, in French, Dat. 19 April, 49 Edw. 3. is this old fashioned Oath,
-- Promettant per la foye de mon Corpse and de Chivalerie, que si Dieu moy
voille mesnez en savete, etc. ieo delivera les avantditz sommez, etc. M S.
Penes Will. Dugdale, Ar.

Obedientia, Was a Rent, as appears by Hotedens Annals, part poster, fo. 430.
Ut ergo eis, (scil. Regularibus) adimatur opportunitas evagandi, prohibemus, ne
reditus quos obedientias vocant, ad firmam tencant -- In the Canon Law it is
used for an Office, or the administration of it. Whereupon the word
Obedientiales in the Provincial Constitutions is used for those who have the
execution of any Office under their Superiors, ca. 1. de statu Regular. It may
be some of these Offices called Obedientiae, consisted in the Collection of
Rents, or Pensions, and that therefore those Rents were by a Metonymy called
Obedientiae, quia colligebantur ab obedientialibus. Council. Eboracens. Anno
1195.

Obit, (Anno 1 Edw. 6. ca. 14. and 15 Car. 2. ca. 9. A Funeral Solemnity, or an
Office for the Dead, most commonly performed at the Funeral, when the Corpse lie
in the Church uninterr'd: Also the Anniversary-Office. Croke 2 Part, fo. 51.
Hollowayes Case. It was held 14 Eliz. Dyer 313. That the tenure of Obit, or
Chauntry Lands held of Subjects is extinct by the Act of 1 Edw. 6.

Oblata, Properly Offerings. But, in the Exchequer it signifies old Debts,
brought, as it were together from precedent years, and put to the present
Sheriffs charge. See the Practice of the Exchequer, pa. 78, Also Gifts or
Oblations made to the King by any of his Subjects; which were so carefully
heeded in the Reigns of King John and Henry the Third, that they were entered in
the Fine Rolls under the Title Oblata; and, if not paid, estreated, and put in
charge to the Sheriffs; concerning which, you may see Mr. Fabian Philips Book
of the Antiquity and legality of the Royal Purveyance, Sir Henry Spelmans
Glossary, and Mr. Prins Aurum Reginae.

Oblations, (Oblationes, in the Canon Law are thus defined, Dicuntur quacunque
pits fidelibusque Christianis offeruntur Deo and Ecclesiae, sive res solidae
sive mobiles sunt. See Spel. de Council. To. 1. fo. 393. Anno 12 Car. 2. ca. 11.

Obligation, (Obligatio) Is a Bond containing a penalty, with a condition
annexed for payment of Money, performance of Covenants, or the like; And a Bill
is commonly without penalty, and without condition; yet a Bill may be
Obligatory. Coke on Litt. fo. 172.

Obligor, Is he that enters into such an Obligation; and, Obligee is he to whom
it is entered into. Before the coming in of the Normans, (as we read in
Ingulphus) Writings Obligatory were made firm with golden Crosses, or other
small signs or marks; But, the Normans began the making such Bills and
Obligations with a Print, or Seal in Wax, set to with every ones special
Signet, under the express entituling of three or four Witnesses. In former time
many Houses and Lands thereto passed by Grant and Bargain without Script,
Charter, or Deed, only with the Landlords Sword or Helmet, with his Horn or
Cup: yea, and many Tenements were demised with a Spur or Currycomb, with a Bow,
or with an Arrow. See Wang.

Obolata terrae, Is (in the opinion of some Authors) half an Acre of Land; but
others hold it to be but half a Perch. Thomasius says, Obolum terrae contains
ten foot in length, and five in breadth. See Fardingdeal.

Obventions, (Obventiones) Offerings: 2 Inst. fo. 661. Also Rents, or Revenue,
properly of Spiritual Livings. Anno 12 Car. 2. ca. 11. -- Margeria Marescalla
Comitissa de Warewyke universis Sanctae matris Ecclesiae filiis, etc. dedi --
omnes obventiones, tam in decimis majoribus and minoribus, quam in aliis rebus
de assartis de Wigenoc and decimam pannagii and venationis de Wigenoc and de
Rinsell, etc. MS. penes Will. Dugdale Ar.

Occupant. If Tenant per term dauter vic dies, living cestuy que vie; he that
first enters shall hold the Land during that other man's life, and he is in Law
called an Occupant, because his title is by his first occupation. And so, if
Tenant for his own life grant over his Estate to another, if the Grantee dies,
there shall be an Occupant. Coke on Litt. ca. 6. Sect. 56. and Bulstrods Rep. 2
Part, fo. 11, 12.

Occupation, (Occupatio,) Signifies the putting a man out of his Freehold in
time of War, and is all one with Disseisin in time of peace, saving that it is
not so dangerous, Coke on Litt. fo. 249. b. Also Use, or Tenure, as we say,
such Land is in the Tenure or Occupation of such a Man, that is, in his
possession or management. See Terre Tenant. Also Trade or Occupation. 12 Car.
2. ca. 18. But, Occupationes, in the Stat. de Bigamis, ca. 4. are taken for
Usurpations upon the King; and, it is properly, when one usurpeth upon the
King, by using Liberties or Franchises, which he ought not to have; As an
unjust entry upon the King into Lands and Tenements, is called an Intrusion, so
an unlawful using of Franchises is an Usurpation; but, Occupationes in a large
sense, are taken for Purprestures, Intrusions, and Usurpations. 2 Inst. fo. 272.

Occupavit, Is a Writ that lies for him, who is ejected out of his Land or
Tenement in time of War; As, a Writ of Novel Dissesin lies for one ejected in
the time of Peace.

Octave, (Octavus) The eighth day after any Feast inclusively. See Utas.

Octo tales. See Tales, and Brook tit. Octo Tales.

Odio and atia, (Anno 3 Ed. 1. ca. 11.) anciently called Breve de bono and
malo, is a Writ sent to the Undersheriff, to enquire, whether a Man, being
committed to Prison, upon suspicion of Murder, be committed upon Malice, or
Ill Will, or upon just suspicion. Reg. of Writs, fo. 133. b. See Bracton, lib.
3. Part. 2. cap. 20. and Stat. 28 Edw. 3. ca. 9. Atia was anciently written
Hatia, or Hatya, for Hate, not Atia, quia Malitia est acida, as Sir Edw. Coke
has it in his 9 Rep. fo. 506. and in 2 Inst. fo. 42. See Spel. on Atia.

Office, (Officium) Signifies not only that Function, by virtue whereof a man
has some employment in the affairs of another, as of the King, or other person;
But also an Inquisition made to the Kings use of any thing by virtue of his
Office, who enquireth. Therefore we often read of an Office found, which is
such a thing found by Inquisition, made Ex Officio. In which signification it is
used Anno 33 Hen. 8. ca. 20. and in Stamf. Praerog. fo. 60, and 61. where to
Traverse an Office, is to Traverse an Inquisition taken of Office before an
Escheator. And in Kitchen, fo. 177. to return an Office, is to roturn that
which is found by virtue of the Office. See also the new Book of Entries,
verbo, Office pur le Roy; And this is by a Metonymy of the effect. In this
signification there are two sorts of Offices issuing out of the Exchequer by
Commission, viz. An Office to entitle the King in the thing enquired of, and an
Office of Instruction, which read in Cokes Rep. Pages Case.

Office in Fee, Is that, which a Man has to him and his heirs, Anno 13 Ed. 1.
ca. 25. Kitchen, fo. 152. See Clerk.

Oferhyrnesse and Overhernessa, -- Si autem post Excommunicationem and
satisfactionem venerint, forisfacturam suam, quae Anglice vocatur Oferhyrnesse
seu Cahstite, pro unaquaque vocatione Episcopo suo reddant. Council. Wintoniae
temp. Lanfranci Archiepis. Anno 1076. See Gloss. in x. Scriptores, verbo,
Overhernessa.

Official, (Officialis) Signifies him, whom the Archdeacon substitutes for the
executing his Jurisdiction, as appears by the Statute 32 Hen. 8. ca. 15. In the
Canon Law it is he, to whom any Bishop does generally commit the charge of his
Spiritual Jurisdiction; And, in this sense one in every Diocese is Officialis
principalis, whom our Statutes and Laws call Chancellor; the rest, if there be
more, are by the Canon Law called Officiales foranci, but by us Commissaries.
The word is also by some modern Civilians applied to such as have the sway of
temporal Justice.

Officiariis non faciendis vel amovendis, Is a Writ directed to the Magistrates
of a Corporation, willing them not to make such a man an Officer, and to put
him out of the Office he has, until enquiry be made of his Manners, according
to an Inquisition formerly ordained. Reg. of Writs, fo. 126. b.

Ofgangfordel. -- Eantque (rei) ad triplex Judicium, quod Angli Ofgangfordel
vocant. Constit. Canuti de Foresta, ca. 11.

Oleron Laws, or the Sea-Laws of Oleron, So called, because they were made by
King Richard the First when he was there, and relate to maritime affairs, Coke
on Litt. fo. 260. b. This Oleron is an Island, which lies in the Bay of
Aquitaine, at the Mouth of the River Charent, belonging now to the French King.
See Seldens Mare Clausum, fo. 222, and 254. And Pryns Animadversions on 4 Inst.
fo. 126.

Olympiad, (Olympias) The space of five years; by which King Ethelbert, in a
certain Charter of his computed the years of his Reign -- Consontiens, signo
sanctae Crucis subscripsi in Olympiade 4 Regni mei. Spelm.

Onerando pro rata portionis, Is a Writ that lies for a Joint-tenant, or Tenant
in Common, that is distreined for more Rent, then the proportion of his Land
comes to. Reg. of Writs, fo. 182. b.

Onus importandi. i. The burden, or charge of importing, mentioned in the Stat.
12 Car. 2. Art. 28.

Onus probandi, i. The burden or charge of proving, Anno 14 Car. 2. ca. 11.

Open Law, (Lex manifesta, lex apparens) Is making of Law, which (by Magna
Charta, ca. 28.) Bailiffs may not put men to, upon their own bare assertions,
except they have witnesses to prove their imputation. See Law.

Openthes, i. Open theft. Quaedam placita vel crimina emendari non possunt,
quae sunt Husbrech, Bernet, Openthef, Eberemord, and Lafordswic, etc. LL. Hen.
1. ca. 13.

Ora -- Egofrater Nigellus Dei gratia Abbas Bertoniae, dedi, in Capitulo nostro
and omnes fratres mei mecum, terram de Ocovere, Ormae, hac conventione, ut
unoquoque anno nobis xx oras persolvat, and proinde factus est homo noster, etc
sine dat. This was Saxon-Money, or Coin, which valued xvi d. a piece, and often
found in Domesday.

Orchel, (Anno 1 Rich. 3. ca. 8.) Orchal, (Anno 24 Hen. 8. ca. 2. and 3 and 4
Edw. 6. ca. 2.) Seems to be a kind of Cork.

Ordeff, or Oredelf, (Effossio materiei metallicae vel ipsius metalli) from the
Sax. Ore, Metallum and delfan, Effodere, Is a word often found in Charters of
Privileges, and is taken for a liberty, whereby a Man claims the Ore found in
his own ground. It properly signifies Ore, lying underground; As a Delf of
Coal is Coal lying in veins underground, before it is dug up.

Ordel, (Sax. Ordoel. Lat. Ordalium,) Signifies great Judgment, from the Sax.
Or, Magnum and deal, Judicium. It was used for a kind of Purgation practiced in
the time of Edward the Confessor, and since even to King John and Henry the
Thirds time, whereby the party purged was judged, Expers criminis, called in
the Canon Law, Purgatio vulgaris. LL. Edw. Conf. ca. 9. There were two sorts of
it, one by Fire, another by Water; Liber per ferrum candens, rusticus per
aquam. Glanv. lib. 14. ca. 1. pa. 114. This Ordalian Law was condemned by Pope
Stephen the Second, and (to use Sir Edward Cokes words) Fuit ouste per
Parliament, come appiert Rot. Paten. de Anno 3 Hen. 3. Membr. 5.

HEnricus (3) Dei Gratia Rex, etc. dilectis and fidelibus suis Philippo de
Ulecot and Sociis suis Justiciariis itinerantibus in Comitatibus Cumberland,
Westmerland, and Lancaster, Salutem. Quia dubitatum fuit and non determinatum
ante inceptionem itineris vestri, quo Judicio deducendi sunt illi qui rectati
sunt de Latrocinio, Murdro, incendio and hiis similibus, cum prohibitum sit per
Ecclesiam Romanam Judicium Ignis and Aquae; Pro^isum est a Concilio nostro, ad
praesens, at in hac Itinere, sic fiat de rectatis de hujusmodi excessibus, viz.
Quod illi qui rectati sunt de criminibus praedictis majoribus, and de eis
habeatur suspicio quod culpabiles sint de eo unde rectati sunt (de quibus etiam
licet Regnum nostrum abjurarent adhuc suspicio esset quod postea malefacerent)
teneantur in Prisona nostra, and salvo custodiantur, ita quod non incurrant
periculum vitae vel membrorum occasion prisonae nostrae. Illi vero qui mediis
criminibus rectati fuerint and quibus competeret Iudicium Ignis vel Aquae, si
non esset prohibitum, and de quibus, si regnum nostrum abjurarent, nulla fuerit
postea male faciendi suspitio, Regnum nostrum abjurent. Illi vero qui minoribus
rectati fuerint criminibus, nec de eis fuerit mali suspitio, salvos and securos
plegios inveniant de fidelitate and pace nostra conservanda, and sic
dimittantur in terra nostra. Cum igitur nihil certius providerit in hac part
Consilium nostrum ad praesens, relinquimus discretioni vestrae hunc Ordinem
praedictum observandum in hoc itinere vestro, ut qui personas hominum, formam
delicti, and ipsarum rerum veritatem melius cognoscere poteritis, hoc Ordine
secundum discretiones and Conscientias vestras in hujusmodi procedatis. Et in
cujus Rei Testimonium, etc. Test Domino P. Wintoniensi Episcopo apud West. 26
die Ian. Anno regni nostri tertio. Per eundem and H. de Burgo Iusticiarium. See
Spelman at large upon this subject, fo. 436. Coke, lib. 9. de Strata Marcella.
and Sax. Dict.

Ordinance of the Forest, (Ordinatio Forestae) Is a Statute made in the 34 year
of Ed. 1. touching Forest-matters. See Assise.

Ordinary, (Ordinarius) Though in the Civil Law, whence the word is taken, it
signifies any Judge that has authority to take Cognizance of Causes in his own
right, as he is a Magistrate, and not by deputation; yet in our Common Law it
is properly taken for the Bishop of the Diocese, or he that has ordinary
Jurisdiction in Causes Ecclesiastical, immediate to the King and his Courts of
Common Law, for the better execution of Justice. Coke on Litt. fo. 344. West.
2. ca. 19. -- 31 Edw. 3. ca. 11. and 21 Hen. 8. ca. 5.

Ordinatione contra servientes, Is a Writ that lies against a Servant, for
leaving his Master against the Statute, Reg. of Writs, fo. 189.

Orfgild, (from the Sax. Orf, Pecus, and gild. Solutio vel redditio) A delivery
or restitution of Cattle: But Lambert says, it is a restitution made by the
Hundred or County, of any wrong done by one that was in pledge. Archa. pa. 125.
or rather a penalty for taking away of Cattle.

Orfraies, (Aurifrisium) Frizled Cloth of Gold, made and used in England, both
before and since the Conquest, worn by our Kings and Nobility, as appears by a
Record in the Tower, where the King commands the Templers to deliver such
Jewels, Garments, and Ornaments as they had of His in keeping, among which he
names Dalmaticum velatum de Orefreis. i. A Dalmatick, or Garment, guarded with
Orfraies. And of old the Jacquets, or Coat-armors of the Kings Guard were also
termed Orfraies; because adorned with Goldsmiths work.

Orgallous, Rectius, Orguillous, (from the French Orgueil, i. Pride) Proud,
Haughty, Lofty-minded. Art. against Card. Woolsey. 4 Inst. fo. 89.

Orgeis, (Anno 31 Edw. 3. Stat. 3. ca. 2.) Is the greatest sort of
North-sea-fish; (for the Statute says, They are greater then Lob-fish) In these
days called Organ Ling, which is a corruption from Orchney, the best being
taken near that Island.

Originalia, In the Treasurers Remembrancers Office in the Exchequer, are
Records, or Transcripts sent thither out of the Chancery; and are distinguished
from Recorda, which contain the Judgments and Pleadings in Suits tried before
the Barons.

Ortelli, Signifies the Claws of a Dogs foot, from the Fr. Orteils des peids,
i. Digiti pedum, the Toes. It Is used in Pupilla oculi, Chap. de Char. Forest.
par. 5. ca. 22.

Osmonds, (Anno 32 Hen. 8. ca. 14. and I find in Spelmans Gloss. mention of a
last of Osmonds;) Is that Oar, or Iron-Stone, of which Iron is made, and it
seems was anciently brought into England.

Ouch, (Anno 24 Hen. 8. ca. 13.) A kind of Collar, or Neck-lace of Gold, or
such like ornament, worn by women about their necks: Sometimes used for a boss
or button of Gold.

Ouersamessa Si quis furi obviaverit, and sine vociferatione gratis eum
dimiserit, emendet secundum Weram ipsius furis, vel plena lada se adlegiet,
quod cum eo falsum nescivit: si quis audito clamore supersedit, reddat
Ouersamessa regis, aut plene se laidiet. Lib. rub. ca. 36. This seems to have
been an ancient Penalty or Fine (before the Statute for Hue and Cry) laid upon
those, who, hearing of a Murder or Robbery, did not pursue the Malefactor. 3
Inst. fo. 116. and to be the same, which is elsewhere written Oversegenesse,
and Ouersenesse. See Gyltwite.

Ouelty of services, Is equality of services; as, when the Tenant paravail owes
as much to the Mesn, as the Mesn does to the Lord Paramount. Fitz. Not. Br. fo.
136. So Owelty of partition. Coke on Litt. fo. 169.

Overt Act, (Apertum factum) An open, plain, evident act, 3 Inst. fo. 12. which
must be manifestly proved.

Overt word, (An. 1 Mar. Sess. 2. ca. 3.) An open, plain word; from the Fr.
Ouvert:

Ouster le main, (Fr. Oster la main, i. To take off the hand) Signifies a
Livery of Lands out of the Kings hands, or a Judgment given for him that
Traversed, or sued a Monstrance le droit; For, when it appeared, upon the
matter discussed, that the King had no right nor title to the Land he seized,
Judgment was given in Chancery, that the Kings hands be amoved, or taken off,
and thereupon Amoveas manum was awarded to the Escheator, to restore the Land,
etc. Stamf. Praerog. ca. 24. It is written Oter le maine, 25 Hen. 8. ca. 22.
But now all Wardships, Liveries, Primerseisins, and Ouster lemains, etc. are
taken away and discharged by 12 Car. 2. ca. 24.

Ouster le mer, (Fr. Oultre. i. Ultra, and le mer, mare,) Is a cause of excuse,
or essoin, if a man appear noti in Court upon Summons, for that he was then
beyond the Seas. See Essoin.

Ousted, (From the Fr. Oster, to remove, or put out) As, ousted of the
possession, (Pecks Case. Mich. 9. Car. 1. 3 Part Crokes Rep. fo. 349.) that is,
removed, or put out of possession.

Outfangthef, (from the Sax. Ut, i. Extra, Fang, i. Capio vel Captus and theof,
i. Fur, quasi fur extra captus,) Is a liberty or privilege, whereby a Lord is
enabled to call any man (dwelling in his Fee, and taken for Felony in another
place,) to Judgment in his own Court. Rastals Expos. of Words. Anno 1 and 2 Ph.
and Ma. ca. 15. Per Outfangthef Edwardus Sutton miles Dominus de Dudley, etc.
clamat quod quandoque aliquis latro, qui est homo ipsius Edwardi de Dominio suo
praedicto, de aliqua felonia convictus fuerit, pro qua suspendi debeat, in
quacunque Curia idem felo sit convictus; ducatur ad furcas ipsius Edwardi per
Ministros suos, and ibidem suspendatur. Pl. in Itin. apud Cestriam. 14 Hen. 7.

Outlaw, (Sax. Utlaghe. Lat. Utlagatus.) Significat bannitum extra legem.
Fleta, lib. 1. ca. 47. one deprived of the benefit of the Law, and out of the
Kings protection. Forisfacit utlagatus omnia quae pacis sunt; quia a tempore
quo utlagatus est caput gerit lupinum, ita quod ab omnibus intersici possit and
impune; maxim si se defenderit vel fugerit, etc. Bracton, lib. 3. Tract. 2.
ca. 11. number. 1, and 3. see Utlary. But, in the beginning of Edward the Thirds
Reign, it was resolved by the Judges, that it should not be lawful for any man,
but the Sheriff only, (having lawful warrant therefore) to put to death any
man Outlawed. Coke on Litt. fo. 128. b. See Capias utlagatum.

Outparters, (Anno 9 Hen. 5. ca. 8.) A kind of Thieves in Ridesdale, that took
Cattle or other Booty without that liberty: Others think they were such as lay
in wait for robbing any Man or House. See Intakers.

Out-riders, Are Bailiffs errant, employed by Sheriffs, or their Deputies, to
ride to the farthest places of their Counties or Hundreds, with the more speed
to Summon persons into their County, or Hundred Courts. Anno 14 Edw. 3. Stat.
1. ca. 9.

Owelty. See Ouelty.

Oxgang of Land, (Bovata terrae) is commonly taken for fifteen Acres; Six
Oxgangs of Land are as much as six Oxen will Plough. Cromp. Jurisd. fo. 220.
Bovatus terrae, i. Quantum sufficit ad iter vel actum unius bovis. Ox enim est
bos: gang vel gate, iter, See Coke on Litt. fo. 69. a.

Oyer and Terminer, (Fr. Ouir and Terminer) Is a Commission especially granted
to certain persons, for the hearing and determining one or more causes. This
was wont in former times to be only in use upon some sudden Outrage or
Insurrection in any place. See Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 131. and Westminster. 2. cap. 29.
who might grant this Commission. And Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 100. for the form and
occasion of the Writ, and to whom it is to be granted. And Brook hoc titulo. A
Commission of Oyer and Terminer is the first and largest of the five
Commissions, by which our Judges of Assise do sit in their several Circuits.
See Assise. In our Statues it is often Printed Oyer and Determiner. See 4 Inst.
fol. 162.

Oyer de Record (Audire Recordum) Is a Petition made in Court, that the Judges
for better proof sake, will be pleased to hear or look upon any Record. So
likewise to demand Oyer of a. Bond, Deed, or Covenant.

O Yes (a corruption from the Fr. Oyez, i. Hear ye) Is well known to be used by
the Cryers in our Courts, when they make Proclamation of any thing.

P.
PAagium. Matthew. Paris, fol. 769. Fecit equos meos and homines restare donec
Paagium extorsisset. Passagium, scil. sive telonium exactum pro transitu per
alterius ditionem, says the Glos.

Pack of Wool is a Horse-load, Which consists of Seventeen Stone, and two
pound. Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 12. See Sarplar.

Packers (Anno 15 Car. 2. cap. 14.) Are those that barrel or pack up Herrings,
and they are to be sworn to do it according to the said Statute.

Packing Whites (Anno 1 Rich. 3. cap. 8.) A kind of Cloth so called.

Pacification (Pacificatio) Anno 17 Car. 1. cap. 17. A peacemaking, quieting,
or appeasing; relating to the Wars betwixt England and Scotland, Anno 1638.

Padnage. The same with Pannage. In Charta Regis Hen. 1. Ecclesiae S. Martini
de Bello.

Pagaments. A sort of Frize-cloth so called; I find it in the Journal Book of
the Lords House of Parliament, in a Statute of 1 Eliz. not Printed.

Pain fort and dur (Fr. Peine fort and dure) Signifies an especial punishment
for those, that being arraigned of Felony, refuse to put themselves upon the
ordinary trial of God and the Country, and thereby are mute, or such in
Interpretation of Law. This is founded upon Westminster. 1. cap. 12. Note, that this
strong and hard pain shall be in this manner inflicted.

HE shall be sent back to the Prison whence he came, and laid in some low, dark
House, where he shall lie naked on the Earth, without any Litter, Rushes, or
other Clothing, and without any Raiment about him, but only something to cover
his Privy-members; and he shall lie upon his Back with his Head covered and his
Feet; and one Arm shall be drawn to one quarter of the House with a Cord, and
the other Arm to another quarter; and in the same manner it is to be done with
his Legs, and then there is to be laid upon his Body Iron and Stone, so much as
he may bear or more; and the next day following, he is to have three Morsels of
Barley-bread without Drink, and the second day Drink three times, and as much
at each time as he can drink of the Water, next to the Prison door, except it
be Running Water, without any Bread: And this is to be his Diet until he die.
Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 2. cap. 60.

Pais. (Fr.) A Country or Region. Trial per pais, quod non intelligendum est
de quovis populo, sed de Compagensibus, hoc est, eorum qui ex eodem sunt
Comitatu, quem majores nostri pagum dixere, and incolas ind^ Pais; g in i vel y
converso. Spelmans Glossar.

Palatin. See County Palatine.

Palfrey (Palfredus, Palafredus, and Palefridus, Fr. Palefray) Insignioris equi
genus, nempe qui ad pompam aut honorem vectorum manu ducitur, vulgo Palfrey, ex
Gal. Par le frain. And sometimes of old taken for a Horse for a Woman's Saddle.
W. Fauconberge tenebat Manerium de Cukeney in Com. Not. in Sergientia, per
servitium ferrandi (of shooing) Palefredum Regis, quando Rex venerit ad
Mansfeld; says Camden, out of an ancient Inquisition. See Coke on Litt. fol.
149.

Palfrey-silber. -- Custumam ibidem (i. at Belvoir Castle) vocat.
Palfrey-silber, quae levari debet annuatim de Villis de Bot^lc^ford Normanton,
Herdeby, etc. and aliis Hamlettis. Eschaet. 23 Edw. 3. Post mortem Gul. de Roos
de Hamlake.

Palingman. (Anno 22 Edw. 4. cap. 23. and 11 Hen. 7. cap. 23.) Seems to be a
Merchant Denizen; one born within the English Pale.

Palls (Anno 25 Hen. 8. cap. 20.) Are Pontificial Vestures made of Lambs Wool,
in breadth not exceeding three Fingers, and having two Labels hanging down
before and behind, which the Pope gives or sends to Archbishops and
Metropolitans, who wear them about their necks at the Altar, above their other
Ornaments. The Pall was first given to the Bishop of Ostia by P. Marcus the
Second, Anno 336. And the Preface to an ancient Synod here in England, wherein
Odo, Archbishop of Canterbury presided, begins thus -- Ego Odo humilis and
extremus, divina largiente clementia, almi Praesulis and Pallii honor ditatus,
etc. Seldens Hist. of Tithes, p. 217.

Palmestry (Anno 1 and 2 Phil. and Ma. cap. 4.) A kind of Divination practiced
by looking on the Lines and Marks of the Fingers and Hands; a deceitful art
used by Egyptians, mentioned in the said Statute, and there misprinted
Palmystry.

Palmata. A handful Johannes Dei gratia, Rex Angliae. Sciatis no^ pro amore Dei
concessisse -- Leprosis S. Egidii de Salopesbirid, quod habeant Palmatas bladi
and farin^ de omnibus saccis, qui cum blado and farina exponuntur ad vendendum
in morcato Salopeshiriae, tam diebus mercati quam aliis, sicut eas habuerunt
tempore Hen. Regis, Patris nostri, de dono and elemosyna ejusdem Regis, sc. de
unoquoque sacco bladi Palmatam duarum manuum, and de sacco farinae, palmatam
unius manus, sicut eas habuerunt de dono and elemosyna praedicti Regis, dicbus
suis, and sicut eas modohabent and habore debent. Quare volumus, etc. Dat. per
manum S. Praepositi Beverlaci and Archid. Wellensis apud Wudestoke xix. die
Marcii anno Regni nostri quinto.

Pandoxatrix. -- Item utimur de Pandoxatricibus, quod nemo potest brasiare sive
pandoxare in Villa and Burgo nostro, nisi per redemptionem aliquam factam ad
voluntatem Comburgensium nostrorum, and si talis Pandoxatrix brasiaverit and
Assisam Domini nostri Regis in Burgo and Villa positam and Proclamatam
fregerit; Tunc debet per Balivos amerciari ad voluntatem Balivorum nostrorum,
and non per pares suos primo and secundo, and si tercia Vice Assisam fregerit,
debet capi per Balivos Capitales, and public Duci ad locum ubi situatur le
Gogingstole, and ibi debet eligere unum de duobus, viz. An velit le Gogingstole
ascendere, an illud judicium redimere ad voluntatem Balivorum. Ex Codice MS. de
Legibus, Statutis and Consuetudinibus liberi Burgi Villae de Mountgomery, a
tempore Hen. 2. fol. 12. b. In Goldmans Dictionary, I find Pandox, for a
Drunkard, or Swilbowl, and Pandoxatorium, a Brew House: But Pandoxatrix here
seems to signify an Ale-wife, that both brews and sells Ale or Beer.

Panel. (Fortescu de legibus Angl. cap. 25. And Coke on Littl. page 158. b.
write it Panellum in Latin; but Sir H. Spelman says, Hoc minus congrue, and
deduces it from Pagella, g in n transeunte, sic veteres quidam mannificat pro
magnificat) A Schedule or Page; as a Panel of Parchment, or a Counterpane of an
Indenture: But it is used more particularly for a Schedule or Roll containing
the names of such Jurors, as the Sheriff returns, to pass upon any Trial. Reg.
of Writs, fol. 223. a. Kitchen, fol. 226. And the Empanelling a Jury, is the
entering their names by the Sheriff into a Panel, or little Schedule of
Parchment, in Panello Assizae. Anno 8 Hen. 6. cap. 12.

Haud recte D. Coke in Gloss. ad Littl. sect. 234. who says, Panel is an
English word, and signifies a little part; for a Pane is a part, and a Panel is
a little part, etc. Thus Spelman on the word Panella.

Pannage or Pawnage (Pannagium, Fr. Panage and Pasnage) Signifies alimentum,
quod in Sylvis Colligunt pecora, ab arboribus dilapsum, as Mast of Beech,
Acorns, etc. Also the Money taken by the Agistors for the Food of Hogs, with
the Mast of the Kings Forest. Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 155. Westminster. 2. cap. 25.
Pawnage (says Manwood, is most properly the Mast of the Woods or Hedg-rows, or
the Money due to the owner of the same for it. And Linwood defines it thus,
Pannagium est pasius pecorum in nemoribus and in sylvis, utpote de glandibus
and aliis fructibus arborum sylvestrium, quarum fructus aliter non solent
colligi. Tit. de Decimis. Mentioned also Anno 20 Car. 2. cap. 3. Quisque
Villanus habens 10 porcos, eat unum porcum de Pasnagio. Domesday, tit.
Leominstre in heresscire. This word in ancient Charters, is thus variously
written, Pannagium, Panagium, Pasnagium, Pathnagium, Patnagium, and Paunagium.

Pape (Papa, from the old Gr. (...), signifying a Father) Was anciently applied
to some Clergymen in the Greek Church; but by usage is particularly
appropriated in the Latin Church to the Bishop of Rome, otherwise called the
Pope. A name very frequent in our ancient Year Books, especially in the times
of those Kings, who, too much abandoning their Imperial Authority, suffered an
Outlandish Bishop, that dwelt. One thousand miles off, to take from them the
disposition of many Spiritual Preferments, sometimes by Lapse, sometimes by
Provision, or otherwise. For redress whereof diverse Statutes were made, whilst
this Kingdom was of the Roman Communion; but his whole power was not taken away
here, till toward the later end of Henry the Eighth's Reign.

Parage (Paragium.) See Parcinerie.

Paramount (Compounded of two French words, Par, i. per, and monter, ascendere)
Signifies the highest Lord of the Fee. For there may be a Tenant to a Lord,
that holds over of another Lord; the first is called Lord Mesn, the second
Paramount. Fitz. Not. Br. 135. M. Some hold that no Man can simply be Lord
Paramount, but only the King; for he is Patron Paramount to all the Benefices
in England. Doctor and Student, cap. 36. See Mesn.

Paraphanalia (in the Civil Law Paraphernalia) Are those Goods which a Wife,
besides her Dower or Jointure, is after her Husbands death, allowed to have; as
furniture for her Chamber, wearing Apparel, and Jewels, if she be of quality:
Which are not to be put into her Husbands Inventary, especially in the Province
of York. See Touchstone of Wills, fol. 201.

Parabail (quasi, per-availe) Signifies the lowest Tenant, or him that is
immediate Tenant to the Land; and he is called Tenant Paravail, because it is
presumed he has prosit and avail by the Land. 2 Inst. fol. 296. See 9 Rep.
Cony's Case.

Parcella terrae, A parcel or small piece of Land. Sciant -- quod ego Stephanus
Wington de Bromyord Dedi -- Roberto de Donampton, pro triginta solidis argenti
unam parcellam terrae meae cum pertinen: jacen: in Bromyord, etc. Sine Dat.

Parcel-maker. Is an Officer in the Exchequer that makes the parcels of the
Escheators accounts, wherein the Escheators charge themselves with every thing
they have levied for the Kings use, since they came in Office, and deliver the
same to one of the Auditors of the Court, to make up the Escheators account
therewith. See Practice of the Exchequer, page 99.

Parceners (quasi, Parcellers, i. Rom in Parcellas dividens. See Coparceners.

Parcinerie (Participatio, from the Fr. Partir, i. Dividuum facere.) Signifies
a holding of Land Pro indiviso, or by Joyntenants, otherwise called
Coparceners: For, if they refuse to divide their common inheritance, and choose
rather to hold it jointly, they are said to hold in Parcinery. Littl. fol. 56
and 57. In Domesday it is thus said, Duo fratres tenuerunt in Paragio, quisque
habuit aulam suam, and potuerint ire quo voluerint.

Pardon (Fr.) Is most commonly used for the remitting or forgiving a Felonious,
or other offense committed against the King, and is twofold; one Ex gratia
Regis, the other, Per course de ley. Stamf. Pl. Cor. fol. 47. The first is that,
which the King, in some special regard of the person, or other circumstance,
gives, by his absolute Prerogative or Power. The other is that which the King
grants, as the Law and Equity persuades, for a light offense; as Homicide
casual, when one kills a Man, having no such intent. See New book of Entries,
verbo, Pardon.

Park, (Parcus) Fr. Parc.) Is a quantity of ground enclosed, and stored with
wild beasts, tam sylvestres, quam campestres; which a man may have by
prescription, or the Kings Grant. Crom. Juris. fo. 148. A Park differs from a
Chase or a Warren; for, a Park must be enclosed: if it lie open, it is a good
cause of seizure of it into the Kings hands, as a free Chase may be if it be
enclosed; and, the owner cannot have an Action against such as hunt in his
Park, if it lie open. See Forest. -- Guliel. Conq. liberam fecit Ecclesiam de
Bello de opere Parcorum. Spel. vide 13 Car. 2. ca. 10.

Parco fracto, Is a Writ that lies against him, who violently breaks a Pound,
and takes out Beasts thence, which for some trespass done were lawfully
impounded. Reg. of Writs, fo. 166. and Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 100.

Park-bote, Is to be quit of enclosing a Park, or any part thereof. 4 Inst. fo.
308.

Parish, (Parochia) Signifies the precinct, or territory of a Parish Church,
and the particular charge of a secular-Priest; For, every Church is either
Cathedral, Conventual or Parochial. Cathedral is, where there is a Bishop
seated, so called a Cathedra; Conventual consists of Regular Clerks, professing
some Order of Religion, or of Dean and Chapter, or other Society of Spiritual
men; Parochial is that, which is instituted for the saying of Divine-Service,
and Ministering the Holy-Sacraments to the People dwelling within the Parish, or
a certain compass of ground, and certain Inhabitants belonging to it. Our Realm
was first divided into Parishes by Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury, in the
year of our Lord 63^. Came. Brit. pa. 160. who reckons 9284 Parish-Churches
under Bishops in England, but other Authors differ in the number.

Parle-hill. Collis vallo plerunque munitus in loco campestri, ne insidiis
exponatur, ubi convenire olim solebant Centuriae aut viciniae incolae ad lites
inter se tractandas and terminandas. Scotis reor Grith-hail. q. Mons
pacificationis, cui Asyli privilegia concedebantur. Vide Stat. Will. Regis
Scot. ca. 5. Sect. 1. Et in Hibernia frequentes vidimus, the Parle and
Parling-hills. Spel.

Parliament, (Parliamentum, from the Fr. Parler, loqui) Is the great Assembly
of this Kingdom, consisting of the King and the three Estates of the Realm,
viz. The Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal, and the Commons, for the Debating
of Matters touching the Commonwealth, and especially the making and correcting
Laws; which Assembly or Court is of all other the highest, and of greatest
Authority, as you may read in Sir Tho. Smith de Repub. Angl. and Came. Britan.
pa. 112. Si vetustatem spectes, est antiquissima, si dignitatem, est
honoratissima, si jurisdictionem, est capacissima. Coke on Litt. lib 2. ca. 10.
Sect. 164. And see his fourth Part Inst. ca. 1. This great Assembly was
anciently called Commune Concilium Regni Angliae. As in an ancient Charter of
King John -- Nullum Scutagium vel auxilium ponam in regno nostro, nisi per
Commune Consilium regni nostri, etc. The first Parliament in England,
(according to Sir Richard Baker,) was held at Salisbury 19 April, 16 Hen. 1.
But see Cottoni Post^um^, fo. 15. and 2 Inst. fo. 268. where there is mention
of Parliaments held long before that time.

The Abbot of Croyland was wont to call a Parliament of his Monks to consult
about the affairs of his Monastery. Croylandensis libri haec sunt verba, --
Concessimus etiam tunc Scrientium nostrae Ecclesiae Semanno de Lek; qui veniens
coram Conventu, in nostro publico Parliamento, similiter juramentum prestitit,
quod fidus and fidelis nobis existerit, and Officium, etc. And at this day the
Community of the two Temples, or Inns of Court, do call that Assembly, A
Parliament, wherein they consult of the common affairs of their several Houses.
See Crom. Jurisd. fo. 1. See Royal assent.

Parliamentum insanum, (so called in History) was a Parliament held at Oxford,
Anno 41 H. 3. MS. in Bibl. Cotton sub tit. Vitellius. C. 9.

Parliamentum indoctorum, Was a Parliament held at Coventry, 6 Hen. 4.
Whereunto, by special precept to the Sheriffs, in their several Counties, no
Lawyer, or person skilled in the Law, was to come; and therefore it was so
called: Walfingh. pa. 412. n. 30. Rot. Parl. 6 Hen. 4.

Parol, (Fr.) Is used in Kitchen, fo. 193. for a Plea in Court; and being
joined with Lease, as Lease parol, or Lease per parol, is, a Lease by word of
mouth, contradistinguish'd from one in writing.

Parson, (Persona) Signifies the Rector of a Church; because he for his time
represents the Church, and susteins the person thereof, as well in suing, as
being sued in any action touching the same. See Fleta, lib. 9. ca. 18. Charta
Hugonis Pusac, (alias Pudsey and de Puteaco) tempore Hen. 2. Hugo dei Gratia
Dunelmensis Episcopus omnibus Archidiaconis suis Clericis and laicis
Episcopatus sui salutem. Sciatis nos ad Praesentationem Roberti Capellani in
Ecclesiam de Witefield, quae in feudo suo sita est, Canonice impersonasse
Robertum nepotem suum. Quare volumus and praecipimus quatenus idem Robertus
habeat and teneat Ecclesiam praenominatam libere and quiet, tam in decimis
quam in caeteris obventionibus, sicut aliqui Clerici liberius and quietius in
Episcopatu nostro Ecclesias suas teneant; Salvis in omnibus Episcopalibus
consuetudinibus. Testibus, etc. Endorsed thus, Praesentatio Roberti de
Quitefeld.

Parson imparsonee, (Persona impersonata) Is the Rector that is in possession
of a Church Parochial, be it presentative or impropriate, and with whom the
Church is full; For, in the New Book of Entries, verbo, Aid in Annuity, you
have these words, Et praedictus A. dicit quod ipse est Persona praedictae
Ecclesiae de S. impersonata in eadem ad praesentationem F. Patronissae, etc. So
that Persona seems to be the Patron, or he that has right to give the Benefice,
by reason, that before the Later an Council, he had right to the Tithes in
respect of his liberality in erecting or endowing the Church, Quasi sustineret
personam Ecclesiae; and Persona impersonata, he to whom the Benefice is given
in the Patrons right. For, in the Reg of Writs judicial, fo. 34. b. Persona
impersonata is used for the Rector of a Benefice presentative and not
appropriated; and Dyer, fo. 40. number. 72. says a Dean and Chapter, are Parsons
impersonees, of a Benefice appropriated to them; who also (fo. 221. number. 19.)
plainly shows, that persona impersonata is he that is inducted, and in
possession of a Benefice. So that Persona seems to be termed impersonata, only
in respect of the possession he has of the Benefice or Rectory, be it
appropriate or otherwise, by the act of another, Coke on Litt. fo. 300. b.

Parters of Gold and Silver. See Finors.

Parts Finis nihil habuerunt, etc. Is an Exception taken against a Fine
levied. Cokes Rep. lib. 3. Case of Fines.

Particata terrae. See Perticata terrae.

Partitione facienda, (Anno 31 Hen. 8. ca. 1.) Is a Writ that lies for those,
who hold Lands or Tenements pro indiviso, and would sever to every one his
part, against him or them that refuse to join in partition, as Coparceners, or
Tenants in Gavelkind. Old Not. Br. fo. 142. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 61. and New Book
of Entries, verbo Partition.

Dorset. Placita de Juratis and Assis. Anno 16 Edw. 1. Motingh.
EDwardus Kaynel, Maria filia Roberti de Camma, Johannes Bereset and Matilda
uxor ejus and Johanna soror ejusdem Matildae petunt versus Johannem Alfrith de
Warham unum Toftum cum pertin in Warham, de quo Johannes Gerard, consanguineus
predictorum Edwardi, Mariae, Matildae and Johannae cujus heredes ipsi sunt,
fuit scifitus in dominico suo, ut de feodo, dic quo obiit, etc. unde dicunt,
etc.

Et Johannes venit and dicit, quod tenementa in Warham sunt partibilia inter
masculos and femellas, and dicit quod praedictus Edwardus habet quasdam
Gunnoram, Matildam, Christianam, Albredam and Eufemiam sorores and participes
ipsius Edwardi and aliorum petentium, and quae tantum jus habent in re petita
sicut, etc. and quae non nominantur in brevi, etc. and Edwardus and alii non
possunt hoc dedicere: Ideo consideratum est quod praedictus Johannes eat inde
sine die, etc.

Partie-Jury, (Anno 14 Car. 2. ca. 11.) See Medictas linguae.

Partlet, (Anno 24 Hen. 8. ca. 13.) Was a kind of Band to wear about the necks
both of Men and Women, now out of use.

Parvise. See Pervise.

Parvo nocumento, Is a Writ. See Nuisance.

Paschal Rents, Are rents or yearly tributes paid by the inferior Clergy to the
Bishop or Archdeacon at their Easter-Visitation; called also Synodals, which
vide.

Passage, (Passagium) Is a French word signifying transitum, meatum. In the
Statutes 4 Edw. 3. ca. 7. and Westminster. 2. ca. 25. It signifies the hire that a
man pays for being transported over-Sea, or over any River. Charta, Hen. 1. de
libertat. London. -- Et omnes res little per totam Angliam, and per portus maris
de Theolonio and Passagio and Lastagio, and omnibus aliis consuetudinibus. Per
Passagium clamat esse quiet. de omnibus passagiis in Com. Cestriae and Flint
pro omnibus carectis, cariag. equis, servientibus and summagiis suis oneratis.
Pl. in Itin. apud Cestriam, 14 Hen. 7.

Pascua. See Pasture.

Pascuage, (Pascuagium, Fr. Pascage,) Grasing, Feeding, or Pasturing of Cattle.
-- Et habere viginti porcos quietus de pascuagio, and fualium ad panem suum and
ad cibos coquendos, etc. Carta Ric. de Muntfichet Priorat^ de Tremhale in Mon.
Angl. 2 par. fo. 23. 2. Also the same with Pannage.

Passagio, Is a Writ directed to the Keepers of the Ports, to permit a man to
pass over Sea, who has the Kings License. Reg. of Writs, fo. 193. b.

Passe-port, (compounded of two French words, Passer, i. Transire; and Port, i.
Portus,) Signifies a License granted by any person in Authority, for the safe
passage of any Man. from one place to another. Anno 2 Ed. 6. ca. 2

Pasture, (Pastura) -- Differunt Pascua and Pastura; nam Pastura omne genus
pascendi significat, sive fiat in pratis, sive in stipula, sive in agris, sive
in campis; sed pascua est locus principaliter deputatus pecoribus pascendis, ut
puta in montibus, moris, mariscis and planis non cultis nec aratis. Lindewode,
lib. 3. Provin. Angl. tit de Decimis, cap. 1. Quoniam.

Patents, (Literae patentes,) Differ from Writs, Crom. Jur. fo. 126. The
Coroner is made by Writ, not by Patent. See Letters Patent in the Table of the
Register, where you shall find the form of diverse.

Patentee, Is he, to whom the King grants his Letters-Patent, Anno 7 Ed. 6. ca.
3.

Patria, Pro Compagensibus. Sic in Legum formulis, ubi dicitur inquiratur per
Patriam. Et Assisa vel recognitio per Assisam, idem est quod recognitio
Patriae. See Bona patria.

Patron, (Patronus,) Both in the Canon and Common Law, signifies him that has
the gift of a Benefice; because the gift of Churches and Benefices originally
belonged to such good men, as either built them, or endowed them with some
great part of their revenue. Patroni in Jure Pontificio dicuntur qui alicujus
Ecclesiae extruendae, aut alterius cujuscunque fundationis Ecclesiasticae
Authors fuerunt, ideoque praesentandi and offerendi Clericum jus habent, quem
Ecclesiae vacanti praeesse, and in ea collatis redditibus frui velint, etc.
Corasius in Paraphr. ad Sacerdot. Materiam. Par. 1. cap. 2. and Par. 4. cap. 6.
Patron in the Civil Law is used for him that has manumitted a servant; and
with the Feudists it is used pro authore feudi. Hottoman, verbo, Patronus.

Paviage (Rot. Pat. 10 Edw. 3. m. 32.) Money paid toward the Paving of Streets
or Highways.

Pawnage. See Pannage.

Pax Dei. See Peace of God.

Pax Ecclesiae, Dicitur, cum salva sunt Ecclesiae omnia Privilegia and
immunitates, servi, famuli, ministri, etc. Vide LL. Edw. Confess. cap. 8.

Pax Regis, The Kings Peace. -- Nam long dehet esse Pax Regis a part sua, ubi
residens fuerit a quatuor partibus loci illius, hoc est quatuor miliaria and
tres quarentenae, and novem acrae latitudine, and novem pedes, and novem
palmae, and novem grana hordei. Multus, etc. LL. Edw. Confess. cap. 12. and LL.
Hen. 1. See Peace of the King.

Peace (Pax) In the general signification is opposite to War or Strife; but
particularly with us, it signifies a quiet and inoffensive carriage or behavior
toward the King and His people. Lamb. Eiren. lib. 1. cap. 2. page 7. Where any
Man goes in danger of harm from another, and makes oath of it before a Justice
of Peace; he must be secured by good Bond, which is called Binding to the
Peace. See Cromptons Just. of Peace, fol. 118. usque 129. And see Frank-pledge
and Conservator of the Peace Time of Peace, is when the Courts of Justice are
open, and the Judges and Ministers of the same may by Law protect Men from
wrong and violence, and distribute Justice to all. Coke on Littl. fol. 249. b.

Peace of God, and the Church (Pax Dei and Ecclesiae) Was anciently used for
that rest and cessation, which the Kings Subjects had from trouble and suit of
Law between the Terms. See Vacation. Pax Dei, Tempus dicitur cultui divino
adhibitum, eaque appellatione omnes Dies Dominici festa and Vigiliae censentur.
Spel.

Peace of the King (Pax Regis) Anno 6 Rich. 2. stat. 1. cap. 17. Is that Peace
and Security, both for Life and Goods, which the King promises to all His
Subjects, or others, taken to his Protection. See Suit of the Kings Peace.
There is also the Peace of the Church, for which see Sanctuary, and the Peace
of the Kings Highway, which is the immunity that the Kings Highway has from
annoyance or molestation. See Watling-street. The Peace of the Plough, whereby
the Plough and Plough-Cattle are secured from Distresses; for which, see Fitz.
Not. Br. fol. 90. So Fairs may be said to have their Peace; because no Man may
in them be troubled for any Debt, elsewhere contracted.

Pectorel (14 Car. 2. cap. 3.) Armor for the Breast, a Breast Plate, or Petrel;
from the Lat. Pectus, a Breast.

Peculiar (Fr. Peculier, i. private, proper, ones own) Is a particular Parish,
or Church, that has jurisdiction within it self, for Probat of Wills, etc.
exempt from the Ordinary and Bishops Courts. The Kings Chapel is a Regal
Peculiar, exempt from all Spiritual Jurisdiction, and reserved to the
Visitation, and immediate Government of the King himself, who is supreme
Ordinary. It is an ancient Privilege of the Sea of Canterbury, that
wheresoever any Manors or Advowsons do belong to it, they forthwith become
exempt from the Ordinary, and are reputed Peculiars, and of the Diocese of
Canterbury.

Pecunia was anciently used for Cattle, and sometime for other Goods, as well
as Money. -- Interdicimus etiam ut nulla viva Pecunia vendantur aut emantur,
nisi infra civitates, and hoc ante tres fide les testes. Emendat. Will. 1. ad
Leges Edw. Confess. -- Qui habuerit 30 denariatus vivae Pecuniae. And in
Domesday, Pecunia is often used pro Pecude.

Pedage (Pedagium and Pedaticum) Signifies Money given for the passing by Foot
or Horse through any Country. Pupilla Oculi part 9. cap. 7. Pedagium a pede
dictum est, quod a transeuntibus solvitur, etc. Cassan. de Cons. Burgun. page
118. Pedagia dicuntur quae dantur a transeuntibus in locum constitutum a
Principe. Spel.

Peer (Pera, Fr. Pierre, Saxum, quod e saxis fieri solebat) Is a Fortress made
against the force of the Sea, or great Rivers, for the better security of Ships
that lie at Harbor in any Haven. So is the Peer of Dover described in Came.
Britan, page 259. Anno 14 Car. 2. cap. 27.

Peerage, The Dignity of the Lords or Peers of the Realm; also, An Imposition
for maintenance of a Sea-Peer.

Peers (Pares) Are those that are empanelled in an Enquest upon any Man, for
the convicting or clearing him of any offense, for which he is called in
question. And the reason is, because the custom of our Nation is, to try every
Man in this case by his equals or Peers. Westminster. 1. cap. 6. So Kitchen uses it
fol. 78. in these words -- Mais si le amerciament soit affirre per pares --.
But this word is chiefly used for those that are of the Nobility of the Realm,
and Lords of the Parliament. Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 3. cap. Trial per les Peers.
The reason whereof is, because, though there be a distinction of degrees among
our Nobility, yet in all public actions they are equal, as in their voices in
Parliament, and in passing upon the trial of any Nobleman.

Pegen. See Forathe.

Pein fort and dure. See Pain fort and dure.

Pelf (Pelfra) -- Tho. Venables Arm. Clamat (quod si aliquis tenent. sive
resident. infra Dominium sive Manerium de Kinderton feloniam fecerit, and
corpus ejus per ipsum Thomam super factum illud captum, and convict. fuerit)
habere Pelfram: Viz. Omnia bona and cattalla bujusmodi seisire: Et ea quae
Domino Comiti pertinent ad Castrum Cestriae praesentare, and habere omnia
invent. domestica, and de omni genere boum, vaccarum, boviculorum, juvencarum,
porcorum, bidentium unum viz. melius: Et si de aliquo genere non habuerit nisi
unum, clamat habere illud unum, cum aliis minutis animalibus, ut gallis,
gallinis, aucis and hujusmodi, and omnes pannos talliat. and attaniatos, and
omnes carnes attaniat. and totum brasium infra unum quarterium, and omnia blada
inventa infra unum quarterium; and de quolibet tasso bladi clamat habere
Groundstal integrum cujuscunque tassi, and totum plumbum extra fornacem, and
omnia vasa lignea, omnes mappas, manutergia, and omnia ad lectum pertin. linea
and lanea, and omnes carrectas ferro non ligatas, and omnes carrucas cum tota
apparura, etc. Plac. in Itin. apud Cestriam 14 Hen. 7.

Pellota (Fr. Pelote) The Ball of the Foot. Talis autem expeditatio (viz.
canum) fiat per assisam communiter usitatam, viz. quod tres ortelli
abscindantur, sive pellota de pede anteriori. Char. de Foresta, cap. 7. See
Cokes Instit. 4 part. fol. 308.

Peltwool, Is the Wool pulled off the Skin or Pelt of a dead Sheep. Anno 8 Hen.
6. cap. 22.

Penigeldum, Denarii alicujus ex quavis consuetudine pro facultate aliqua, vel
privilegio habendo, puta in foresta aut alibs Spel.

Penistons, A certain course Woollen Cloth, mentioned Anno 43 Eliz. cap. 10.

Pen. See Bay.

Penon (Fr. Pennon) A Standard, Banner, or Ensign carried in War. Anno 11 Rich.
2. cap. 1.

Pension (Pensio) That which in the Two Temples, is called a Parliament, in
Lincoln's Inn, a Council; in Greys-Inn, is called a Pension; that is, an
Assembly of the Members of the Society, to consult of the Affairs of the House.
And Pensions are in the Inns of Court, certain annual payments of each Member
to the House.

Pension-Writ. When a Pension-Writ is once issued, none, sued thereby in an
Inns of Court, shall be discharged or permitted to come in Commons, till all
duties be paid. Order in Greys-Inn. Whereby it seems to be a Writ issued out
against those of the Society, who are in arrear for Pensions, and other duties.

Pentecostals (Pentecostalia) Were certain pious Oblations made at the Feast of
Pentecost, by Parishioners to their Parish Priest, and sometimes by Inferior
Churches or Parishes, to the Principal Mother Church. Which Oblations were also
called Whitson Farthings, and were divided into four parts; one to the Parish
Priest, a second to the poor, a third for repair of the Church, and the fourth
to the Bishop. Stephens of Procurations and Pentecostals.

Penny (Sax. Penig) Was our ancient current Silver. 2 Inst. fol. 575. -- Et quod
sint quieti de omnibus misericordiis, and Warda, and Ward-peny, Averpeny, and
Hundred-peny, ^ithing-peny, and Borthal-peny, and de omnibus operibus
Castellorum, Pontium, etc. Char. Hen. 7. Ab. and Convent. Eccles. S. Petri
Westminster. Anno 19 Regni.

Per, cui and Post. See Entry.

Perambulation of the Forest, Is the Surveying or walking about the Forest, or
the utmost limits of it, by certain Justices or other Officers thereto
assigned, to set down the Metes and Bounds thereof, and what is within the
Forest, and what without. Anno 17 Car. 1. cap. 16. And 20 Car. 2. cap. 3. See 4
Inst. fol. 30. And see Purlue.

Perambulatione Facienda, Is a Writ, that is sued out by two, or more Lords of
Manors, lying near one another, and consenting to have their bounds severally
known; and is directed to the Sheriff, commanding him to make Perambulation,
and to set down their certain limits. See Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 133. And the New
Book of Entries, verbo, Perambulatione facienda.

Peravail. See Paravail.

Perch (Pertica) Is used with us for a Rod or Pole of Sixteen foot and a half
in length, whereof Forty in length, and four in breadth, make an Acre of Ground.
Cromp. Juris. fol. 222. But several Counties differ herein, as in Staffordshire
Twenty four foot; in the Forest of Sherwood Twenty five foot go to the Perch.
In Herefordshire a Perch of Walling is Sixteen foot and a half; a Perch of
Ditching Twenty one foot, etc. See Skene, verbo, Perticata terrae. In Honor de
Montgomeri terrae assartandae per Perticam Regis 24 Pedum. Claus. 11 Hen. 3. m.
6. In Foresta de Cank Pertica 25 Pedum. Int. Plac. Hill. 10 Edw. 2. Staff. 36.
See Pes Forestae. -- Per Perticam 20 Pedum in Foresta nostra de Clarendon. Mon.
Angl. 2 Par. fol. 273. b.

Perdonatio utlagariae, Is a pardon for him, who, for contempts in not coming
to the Kings Court, upon His Command and Process, is outlawed, and afterward
of his own accord yields himself to Prison. Reg. of Writs, fol. 28. LL. Edw.
Conf. cap. 18. and 19.

Pere and Pite. Si quis autem contra primarium pugnaverit, in placito emendet
secundum pretium sui ipsius, quod Angli Pere and Pite dicunt, and solvat
primario 40 sol. Constitut. Canuti de Foresta, cap. 17. Rectius autem Were and
Wite, Saxonice ere and ite. See Were.

Peremptory (Peremptorius) Joined with a Substantive, as Action or Exception,
signifies a Final and Determinate Act, without hope of renewing or altering. So
Fitzherbert calls a Peremptory Action. Not. Br. fol. 35. and 38. And Nonsute
Peremptory, fol. 5. A Peremptory Exception. Bracton, lib. 4. cap. 20. Smith de
Repub. Angl. calls that a Peremptory Exception, which makes the State and
Issue in a Cause.

Perinde valere, Is a Dispensation granted to a Clerk, who being defective in
his capacity to a Benefice, or other Ecclesiastical Function, is De Facto,
admitted to it. And it takes appellation from the words, which make the faculty
as effectual to the party dispensed with, as if he had been actually capable of
the thing, for which he is dispensed with, at the time of his admission. Anno
25 Hen. 8. cap. 21. it is called a Writ.

Perjury (Perjurium) Est mendacium cum juramento firmatum; Is a crime
committed, when a lawful Oath is ministered, by any that has authority, to any
person in any Judicial proceeding, who swears absolutely and falsely in a
matter material to the Issue or Cause in question, by their own act, or by the
subornation of others. And if a Man call me Perjured Man, I may have my Action
upon the Case; because it must be intended contrary to my Oath, in a Judicial
proceeding; but for calling me a Forsworn Man, no Action lies, because the
forswearing may be Extra judicial. Cokes Inst. 3 Part. fol. 163. 23 Hen. 8.
cap. 3. Excepted out of the Act of General Pardon, 12 Car. 2. cap. 8. How
punished in Wales. Anno 26 Hen. 8. cap. 4. And 5 Eliz. cap. 9.

Per my and per tout, A Joynt-tenant is said to be seized of the Land he holds
jointly Per my and per tout. i. He is seized by every parcel, and by the whole.
Littl. sect. 288. Totum tenet and nihil tenet, sc. totum conjunctim and nihil
per se separatim. Bract. lib. 5. 430.

Permutatione Archiodecanatus and Ecclesiae eidem annexae cum Ecclesia et
Prebenda, Is a Writ to an Ordinary, commanding him to admit a Clerk to a
Benefice, upon exchange made with another. Reg. of Writs, fol. 307.

Pernor of Profits (From the Fr. Preneur, a Taker or Receiver) Is he that takes
or receives the Profits. Anno 1 Hen. 7. cap. 1. Pernour de profits, and cesti
que use, is all one. Coke, lib. 1. Casu Chudley, fol. 123. See the Statute 21
Rich. 2. cap. 15. And Coke on Littl. fol. 589. b.

Pernancy (from the Fr. Prendre, to take) A taking or receiving. Tithes in
Pernancy, i. Tithes taken, or that may be taken in kind.

Per quae servitia, Is a Writ Judicial, issuing from the Note of a Fine, and
lies for the Cognizee of a Manor, Seigniory, Chief Rent, or other Services, to
compel him that is Tenant of the Land at the time of the Note of the Fine
levied, to atturn to him. West, part 2. Symbol. tit. Fines, sect. 126. See the
New Book of Entries.

Perquisite (Perquisitum) Signifies any thing gained by ones own industry, or
purchased with ones own Money; contradistinguished from that which descends to
one, from Father, or other Ancestor; as Perquisitum facere, in Bracton, lib. 2.
cap. 30. number. 3.

Perquisites of Court, Are those profits that arise to the Lord of a Manor, by
virtue of his Court Baron, over and above the certain and yearly profits of his
Land, as Fines of Copiholds, Hariots, Amerciaments, Waiffs, Estrayes, etc.
Perkins, fol. 20. and 21.

Personable (Personabilis) Signifies as much as enabled to hold or maintain
Plea in a Court: As, the Demandant was judged Personably to maintain this
Action. Old Not. Br. fol. 142. And in Kitchen, fol. 214. The Tenant pleaded,
that the Wife was an alien born in Portugal, without the ligeance of the King,
and Judgment was asked, Whether she should be answered. The Plaintiff says,
she was made Personable by Parliament, that is, as the Civilians would speak
it, Habere personam standi in judicio. Personable is also as much as to be of
capacity to take any thing granted or given. Plowden, Casu, Colthirst, fol. 27.
b.

Personal (Personalis) Being joined with things, Goods, or Chattels, as Things
personal, Goods personal, Chattels personal, signifies any moveable thing
belonging to any Man, be it quick or dead. So it is used in West, par. 2.
Symbol. tit. Indictments, sect. 58. in these words. Theft is an unlawful
Felonious taking away another Man's moveable personal Goods. And Stamf. Pl. Cor.
fol. 25. Contrectatio rei alienae is to be understood of things personal, for
in things real it is not felony, as the cutting a Tree is not Felony. See
Chattels.

Personal Tithes, Are Tithes paid of such Profits as come by the Labor and
Industry of a Man's person; as by buying and selling, gains of Merchandise and
Handicrafts men, etc. See Tithes.

Personalty (Personalitas) Is an abstract of Personal. The Action is in the
Personalty (Old Not. Br. fol. 92.) That is, brought against the right person,
or the person against whom in Law it lies.

Persons ne Praebendaries ne seront charges as Quinsimes, etc. Is a Writ that
lies for Prebendaries, or other Spiritual Persons, being distrained by the
Sheriff or Collectors of Fifteenths, for the Fifteenth of their Goods, or to be
contributory to Taxes. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 1. 76.

Perticata terrae, Is the fourth part of an Acre; Continet in integra
superficie 40 Perticas. See Perch.

Perticulas. The King granted to Luke Macgnin de Insula de Man Scholari,
quandam Eleemosinam vocatam Perticulas, ad sustentationem cujusdam pauperis
Scholaris de Insula praedicta ad exercend. Scholas, per Progenitores nostros,
quondam Reges Angliae datam and concessam. Pat. 5 Hen. 4. m. 16.

Pertinens, Was anciently used Pro cognato vel consanguineo. -- Si quis cum
pertinente sua jaceat, emendet hoc secundum cognationis modum; sit wera, sit
wita, sit omni pecunia. LL. Canuti. MS. ca. 48.

Pervise, or Parvise. (Pervisus, Parvisia) non a parvus adiect sed a Gal. le
parvis, -- Sed tunc placitantes (i. Post meridiem) Se devertunt ad Pervisum,
and alibi consulentes cum Servientibus ad legem and aliis Consiliariis suis.
Fortescu de laudibus LL. Angl. ca. 51. pa. 124. of which thus Chaucer. Prolog.
9. A Sergeant at Law, ware and wise,
That often had been at the Parvise.


Nam ibi Legis-periti convenere, ut Clientibus occurrerent, non ad tyrocinia
Juris, quas Motas vocant, exercenda, says Spelman. Seldom (in his Notes on
Fortescu, pa. 56.) says, It signifies an afternoons Exercise, or Moot for the
instruction of young Students, bearing the same name originally with the
Parvisiae in Oxford. Mr. Somner says Pervise signifies Palatii atrium vel area
illa, a front Aulae Westminster. hodie the Palace-yard, vulgo nuncupata. See his
Gloss. in x. Scriptores, verbo, Triforium.

Pes forestae. Notandum est quod Pes Forestae usitatus tempore Ric. Oysell in
arrentatione vastorum, factus est, signatus and sculptus in pariete Cancellae
Ecclesiae de Edwynstone and in Ecclesia B. Mariae de Nottingham; Et dictus Pes
continet in longitudine octodecim Pollices. Et in arrentatione quorundam
vastorum, Pertica 20, 21 and 24 pedum usa fuit, etc. Ex Regist. Abb. de
novoloco in Com. Not.

Pesage, (Pesagium) Custom paid for weighing Wares or Merchandise. MS. temp. E.
3. For Peisa we find used for Pondus; hence to Peise or Poise, Ponderare.

Pessona, Mast. Md. quod anno regni Regis Hen. filii Regis Joh. 37. Dominus de
Fretchevil and homines sui in bosco de Derley, apud Cruche, Pessonam, scil.
glandes and nuces, virgis and cortis excussisset; and querela inde deducta in
Comitatu, etc Anno gratiae. MCCLXIII. Mon. Angl. 2 Par. fo. 231. b. So tempore
Pessonae often occurs, for Mast-time, or the season when Mast is ripe; which,
in Norfolk, they call Shacking-time. -- Quod habeat december porcos in tempore de
Pesson in boscomeo, etc. fo. 113. 10.

Pestarable wares, Seem to be such Wares or Merchandise as pester, and take up
much room in a Ship. Anno 32 Hen. 8. ca. 14.

Peter-Corne -- Rex Athelstanus concessit Deo and beato Petro Ebor. and
Colideis praedictis de qualibet Caruca arante in Episcopatu Eboraci unam Travam
bladi, Anno Domini 936; quae usque in praesentem diem dicitur Peter-corne. Ex
Reg. S. Leonardi Ebor. in Bibl. Cottoniana. fo. 5. a.

Peter Pence, (Denarii Sancti Petri) otherwise called in the Saxon Romefeoh, i.
The Fee of Rome, also Rome-scot, and Romepennyng,) was a Tribute given by Inas
King of the West Saxons, being in Pilgrimage at Rome in the year of our Lord
720, toward the maintenance of a Saxon-School, which was a Penny for every
house. Lamb. Expl. of Saxon words, verbo Nummus. And fo. 128. in St. Edwards
Laws, number. 10. thus -- Omnes qui habent 30 denariatus vivae pecuniae in domo
sua, de suo proprio, Anglorum lege dabit Denarium Sancti Petri, and lege
danorum, dimidiam markam: Iste vero denarius debet summoniri in solemnitate
Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, and colligi ad festivitatem, quae dicitur ad
Vincula, ita ut ultra illum diem non detineatur, etc. King Edgars Laws, fo.
78. ca. 4. contain also a sharp constitution touching this matter. See Romescot.

St. Peter ad vincula, (Anno 4 Edw. 4. ca. 1. and 17 Ed. 4. ca. 5.) See Gule of
August.

Petit cape. See Cape.

Petit larceny, (Parvum latrocinium.) See Larceny.

Petit-treason, (Fr. Petit trahizon. i. Proditio minor,) Is Treason of a lesser
or lower kind; For, whereas High Treason is an offense committed against the
person of the King, and the security of the King and Commonwealth:
Petit-Treason is, where a Servant kills his Master, a Wife her Husband, a
Secular, or Religious Man his Prelate, Anno 25 Edw. 3. ca. 2. whereof see
Cromptons Just. of P. fo. 2. And, for the punishment of it, the Stat. 22 Hen.
8. ca. 14.

Petition, (Petitio) Signifies in general a Supplication made by an Inferior to
a Superior, and especially to one having Jurisdiction, Anno 13 Car. 2. ca. 5.

Petra lanae, A Stone of Wool. See Stone.

Petty-fogger, (from the Fr. Petite, Small; and Sax. Fogere, A Wooer, Suitor,
or Solliciter) A silly Advocate, a petty Attorney, or Lawyer; or rather a
trouble-Town, having neither Law nor Conscience.

Pharos, A Watchtower. -- No man can build or erect Light-houses, Pharos,
Sea-marks, or Beacons, without lawful warrant and authority. 3 Inst. fo. 204.

Philiser. See Filazer.

Picards, A kind of great Boats of fifteen Tun or upwards, on the River
Severne, mentioned 34 and 35 Hen. 8. ca. 9. Also a Fishers boat, Anno 13 Eliz.
ca. 11.

Piccage, (Piccagium, from the Fr. Piquer, i. Effringere, Effodere) Money paid
in Fairs to the Lord of the Soil, for leave to break the ground to set up
Booths, Stalls or Standings.

Piccage. i. Aliquis veniens ad forum nostrum de Rudham cum rebus suis, and
frangendo vel pictando aliquam placcam in dicto foro, Prior habebit inde
redemptionem. Ex registro Priorat. de Cokesford.

Pickards, -- No Person shall use any Iron Cards, or Pickards, in rowing any
Woollen Cloth, upon pain to forfeit the same, and xx s. for every offense. Anno
3 and 4 Edw. 6. ca. 2.

Picle, alias Pightel, (Pictellum and Pightellum) A small parcel of Land
enclosed with a hedge, a little Close; perhaps from the Italian Picciola, i.
Minutus; which the common people in some parts of England do usually call a
Pingle.

Piepowder Court, (Curia pedis pulverizati,) From the Fr. Pied* i. Pes, and
Pouldreux. i. Pulverulentus) Is a Court held in Fairs, to yield Justice to
Buyers and Sellers, and for redress of all disorders committed in them. So
called, because they are most usual in Summer, and Suitors to this Court are
commonly Country Clownes with dusty feet; or, from the expedition intended in
the hearing of Causes proper thereunto, before the dust goes off the Plaintiffs
and Defendants feet. Of this Court read the Statute 17 Edw. 4. ca. 2. 4 Inst.
fo. 272. and Cromp. Jur. fo. 221. This among our old Saxons was called
Ceapung-gemot, i. A Court for Merchandise, or handling matters of buying and
selling. See Justices of the Pavilion.

Pig of Lead. See Fother.

Pike or Pick. See Polein.

Pille of Foddray, or Fouldrey, In the County of Lancaster, Anno 2 Hen. 6. ca.
5. seems to be a defense built on a Creek of the Sea, and called Pille, by the
Idiom of the Country, for a Pile or Fort, built for the safeguard or protection
of any place. This Pile was erected there by the Abbot of Fornesse in the first
year of Edw. 3. Came. Brit. Rex -- Dedimus Henrico Comiti Northumb. Insulam,
Castram, Pelam and Dominium de Man, etc. Ror. Pat. 1 Hen. 4. m. 36.

Pillory, (Collistrigium, q. Collum stringens. Pilloria, from the Fr. Pilleur,
i. Depeculator) Is an Engine made of Wood to punish Offenders, well known. By
the Statute of 51 Hen. 3. you may see who were then subject to this punishment.
In the Laws of Canutus, ca. 42. it is called Halsfange. Sir Henry Spelman says,
it is supplicii Machina ad ludibrium, magis quam paenam. -- Item utimur tenere
Statuta Pistorum omnino sicut antecessores nostri tenuerunt, viz. Quod si
Pistor in male agendo puniatur per tres vices, and si post terciam monicionem
culpabilis inveniatur, Balivi Capitales, si ipsum poterint invenire, ipsum
capiant and pro toto puniant, and habebit vile and odibile Judicium de
Collistrigio, i. the Pillory. MS. Codex de LL. and Consuetud. Burgi-villae
Montgom. a temp. Hen. 2. fo. 12. b. See Healfange.

Pioneers, (Fr. Pionniers, i. Fossores) Such Laborers as are taken up for the
Kings Army, to east up Trenches, or undermine Forts. Anno 2 and 3 Ed. 6. ca. 20.

Pipe, (Pipa) Is a Roll in the Exchequer, otherwise called the great Roll, Anno
37 Ed. 3. ca. 4. See Clerk of the Pipe. It is also a Measure of Wine or Oil,
containing half a Tun, that is, six score and six Gallons, An. 1 R. 3. ca. 3.

Pirate, (Pirata) Is now generally taken for one who supports himself by
Pillage and Depredation at Sea, a Sea-rover. But, in former times the word was
sometimes attributed to such person to whose care the Mole or Peer of any
Haven, (in Latin Pera) was entrusted; and sometimes also taken pro milite
maritimo, according to the learned Spelman; mentioned 13 Car. 2. ca. 6. and the
punishment of them, Anno 28 Hen. 8. ca. 15.

Piscary, (Piscaria) From the Fr. Pescharie, i. Piscatio) Is a liberty of
fishing in another Man's waters.

UNiversis persentes literas inspecturis Edmundus filius inclitae recordationis
Henr. Regis Angliae salutem. Sciatis nos dedisse and concessisse Henrico Howeyn
de Huttokeshather totam Piscariam nostram in stagno nostro supra molendinum
suum de Huttokeshather. Habendum, etc. In cujus rei Testimonium praesenti
scripto, in modum Cyrographi confecto, nos and dictus Henr. sigilla nostra
alternatim^ apposuimus. Dat. apud Tuttebir. per manum Hugonis de Gien Clerici
nostri octavo die Julii, Anno regni Regis Edwardi germani charissimi xi. Penes
Walterum Kirkham-Blount Bar.

Pitance, (Pitancia) A small repast, or a little refection of Fish or Flesh.
Joannes dei gratia, etc. Noverit, etc. nos assensum nostrum praebuisse, etc. de
manerio de Mildenhall, quod manerium Sancto Edmundo, sicut jus suum
concessimus, etc. ita quod qui, pro tempore sacrista fuerit, 12 (...). de
redditu Altaris annuatim persolvat Hospitali S. Salvatoris quod est extra muros
Sancti Edmundi, etc. in usus pauperum, etc. and 40 s. ad refectionem
monachorum, qui illis diebus Officia divina pro defunctis celebrabunt, quae
refectio Pitancia vocatur. Rot. Cart. de Anno 1. Regis Joh. pa. 2. Number. 115.

Pitching-pence, Is that Money, commonly a Penny, which is paid for pitching, or
setting down every bag of Corn, or pack of any other Merchandise in Fairs or
Markets.

Placard, (Fr. Anno 2 and 3 Ph. and Ma. ca. 7.) Is a License whereby a man is
permitted to shoot in a Gun, or to use unlawful Games; In French it signifies a
Table, wherein Laws, Orders, etc. are written and hung up. And Placcaert in the
Low Dutch is an Edict or Proclamation.

Placeta, I have seen in several Deeds of Edward the Thirds days, Grants of
Placeta Messuagii, Placeta prati, and Placeta pasturae; and seems to signify a
Piece or Parcel, if of Lands; and a Place, if a House or Message.

Plaint, (Fr. Plainte, Lat. Querela) Is the propounding or exhibiting any
action real or personal, in Writing: So it is used in Brook, tit. Plaint in
Assize. And the party making this Plaint is called Plaintiff; Kitchen, fo. ^31.

Plate, A Hoy, or Water-Vessel so called Anno 13 Eliz. ca. 15.

Plea, (From the Sax. Pleo, or Pleoh, i. Juris actio) Signifies that which
either party alleges for himself in Court, which from the Conquest was done in
French, till Edward the Third ordained them to be pleaded in English, but to be
entered and recorded in Latin, Anno 36. ca. 15. They are divided into Pleas of
the Crown, and Common Pleas; Pleas of the Crown are all Suits in the Kings name
against offenses committed against his Crown and Dignity. Stamf. Pl. Cor. ca.
1. or against His Crown and Peace. Smith de Repub. Ang. lib. 2. ca. 9. And
those seem to be Treasons, Felonies, Misprisions of either, and Mayhem, Cokes 4
Part Inst. ca. 10. -- Edward the First enfcossed Walter de Burgo in the Land of
Ulster in Ireland, etc. excepting the Pleas of the Crown, to wit, Rape,
Forstal, willful Firing, and Treasure trove. Came. tit. Ireland. Common Pleas
are those that are agitated between common persons; yet, by the former
definitions those must comprize all other, though the King be a party. Plea may
farther be divided into as many branches as Action, for they signify all one.
Then is there a Foreign Plea, whereby matter is alleged in any Court that
ought to be tried in another. As if one lay Bastardy to another in a Court
Baron, Kitchen, fo. 75. By the Law of Scotland four Crimes are called the four
Points or Pleas of the Crown; Willful Firing, Ravishing of Women, Murder and
Robbery, or Riefe. Skene.

Pleas of the Sword, (Placita ad gladium) Ranulph the Third, Earl of Chester (2
Hen. 3.) granted to his Barons of Cheshire an ample Charter of liberties,
Exceptis placitis ad gladium meum pertinentibus, etc. Rot. Pat. in archivis
regiis infra Castellum Cestriae, 3 Ed. 4. m. 9. The reason was, because King
William the First gave the Earldom of Chester to his Kinsman Hugh, commonly
called Lupus, ancestor to this Earl Ranulph, tenere ita libere per gladium,
sicut ipse Rex Willielmus tenuit Angliam per Coronam. And consonant thereunto,
in all Inditements for Felony, Murder, etc. in that County-Palatine, the Form
was anciently -- Contra pacem Domini Comitis, Gladium and dignitates suas.

Pledge, (Plegius) Fr. Pleige, i. Fidejussor) A Surety or Gage; and Plegiatio
was used for the act of suretiship. Pleiger aucun, i. Fide jubere pro aliquo.
Glanvile, lib. 10. ca. 5. Plegii dicuntur personae qui se obligant ad hoc, ad
quod qui cos mittit tenebatur. Grand Gust. Norm. ca. 60. This word Plegius is
sometimes used also for Frankpledge, as in the end of William the Conquerors
Laws. Omnis homo qui voluerit se teneri pro libero, sit in Plegio, ut plegius
eum habeat ad justiciam, si quid offenderit, etc. And these are called capital
pledges. Kitchen, fo. 10. See Frankpledge, and 4 Inst. fo. 180.

Plegiis acquietandis, Is a Writ that lies for a Surety against him for whom he
is Surety, if he pay not the Money at the day, Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 137. Reg. of
Writs, 158.

Plena forisfactura, And Plena ^^ita. See For feiture.

Plenarty, Is an abstract o^ the adjective plenus, and is used in matters of
Benefices; wherein Plenarty and Vacation are directly contrary. Stamf. Praerog.
ca. 8. fo. 32. Westminster. 2. ca. 5. Institution is a good plenarty against a common
person, but not against the King, without induction. Coke on Litt. fo. 344.

Plevin, (Plevina, From the Fr. Pleuvine, i. A warrant, or assurance.) See
Replevin.

Plite of Lawn, (Anno 3 Ed. 4. ca. 5.) Seems to be a Measure then in use, as
Yard or Ell now.

Plonkets, (Anno 1 Rich. 3. ca. 8.) A kind of course Woollen Cloth, otherwise
called Vervise.

Plow-almes, (Eleemosinae araetrales) Which was anciently 1 d. paid to the
Church for every Plow-land. -- De qualibet Caruca juncta inter Pascha and
Pentecostem unum donarium, qui dicitur Plou-almes, 1. Par. Mon. Ang. fo. 256.

Plow-land, (Carucata terrae) The same with a Hide of Land, which vide.

Plurality, (Pluralitas) Anno 21 Hen. 8. ca. 13. Morenesse, or the having more
then one; most applied to such Churchmen, who have more Benefices then one.
Seldom in his Titles of Honor, fo. (...). mentions also Trialities and
Quadralities.

Pluries, Is a Writ that issues in the third place, after two former Writs
neglected or disobeyed. For, first goes out the Original Writ, which, if it
speed not, then the sicut alias; and, if that fail, then the Pluries. See Old
Not. Br. fo. 33. in the Writ de Excom. capiendo. See in what diversity of cases
it is used in the Table of the Reg. of Writs.

Pocket of Wool, Is half a Sack. 3 Inst. fo. 96. See Sack of Wool.

Pole, See Perch.

Poledavies, A kind of Canvas, wherewith Sail-ware is made, Anno 1 Jac. ca. 24.

Polein, (Anno 4 Edw. 4. ca. 7.) Was a sharp or picked top set in the forepart
of the Shoe or Boot. This fashion was first taken up in the time of King
William Rufus, the Picks being made so long, as they were tied up to the knees
with silver or golden chains, and forbidden by Ed. 4. -- Tunc fluxus crinium,
tunc luxus vestium, tunc usus calceorum cum arcuatis aculeis inventus est.
Malms. in Will. 2.

Policy of assurance, (Assecuratio) Is a course taken by those, who adventure
Wares or Merchandise by Sea; whereby they, unwilling to hazard their whole
adventure, do give some other person a certain rate or proportion, as 6, 8, or
10 in the hundred, or such like, to secure the safe arrival of the Ship, and so
much Wares at the place agreed on. So that, if the Ship and Wares miscarry, the
Assurers or Insurers make good to the Venturer so much as they undertook to
secure; if the Ship arrive safely; he gains that clear, which the Venturer
agrees to Pay him. And for the more certain dealing between them in this case,
there is a Clerk or Officer ordained to set down in Writing the effect of their
agreement, called Policy, to prevent any difference that might afterward
happen between them. This term is mentioned Anno (...) Eliz. ca. 12, and
thereby allowed and established; And 14 Car. 2. ca. 23. and is now many times
used to Insure men's lives in Offices, who have paid great sums of Money for
the purchase thereof, and are Insured from that adventure by a certain Company
of Merchants, or Citizens, for three or four per Cent, subscribing, or
under-writing the agreement Policy, or Insurance, who do among them share the
Praemium, or Money given by the Party Insured, and run the hazard of it: such
Assurance or Polices being not seldom also used in other matters, where loss or
damage is feared.

Poll-money, (Capitatio) Was a Tax or Imposition ordained by Stat. 18 Car. 2.
ca. 1. and 19 ejusdem, ca. 6. by the first of which every Subject in this
Kingdom was assessed by the Head or Poll, according to his degree; As every
Duke 100 l. Marquess 80 l, etc. Baronet 30 l. Knight 20 l. Esquire 10 l, etc.
and every single person 12 d, etc. And, that this is no new Tax appears by
former Acts of Parliament, where, Quilibet tam coniugatus quam solutus
utriusque sexus pro capite suo solvere cogebatur. Parliam. Anno 1380.
Walsingham. Ypod. 534. l. 37. There was anciently (says Camden) a personal
tribute, called Capitatio (Pol-silver) imposed upon the Poll or Person of every
one, of Women from the 12th, of Men from the 14th year of their age, In his
Notes upon Coins.

Pollard, Was a sort of Money heretofore current in England, which with
Crocards are long since prohibited. Math. Westminster. in Anno 1299. pa. 413.
Pollards, Crocards, Staldings, Eagles, Leonines, and Steepings, were ancient
Coins in England, but now disused and forgotten. 2 Inst. fo. 577. We also call
those Trees Pollards, or Pollengers, which have been usually crop'd, and
therefore distinguished from Timber Trees. See Plowden, fo. 469. b.

Polygamus, Is he that is married to two or more Wives together, or at the same
time. 3 Inst. fo. 88.

Pone, Is a Writ, whereby a Cause, depending in the County, or other inferior
Court, is removed to the Common Bench. Old Not. Br. fo. 2. See the Table of the
Reg. of Writs.

Pone per vadium, Is a Writ, commanding the Sheriff to take surety of one for
his appearance at a day assigned; Of this see five sorts in the Table of the
Reg. Judic. verbo, Pone per Vadium.

Ponendis in Assists, Is a Writ, founded upon the Statute of Westminster. 2. ca. 38.
and Articuli super Chartas, ca. 9. which Statutes show what persons Sheriffs
ought to impanel upon Assizes and Juries, and what not; as also what number,
which see in Reg. of Writs, fo. 178. a. and Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 133. b.

Ponendum in Balliam, Is a Writ willing that a Prisoner be bailed in cases
bailable. Reg. of Writs, fo. 133.

Ponendum sigillum ad exceptionem, Is a Writ whereby the King willetn (...)
justices, according to the Stat. of Westminster. 2. to put their Scals to Exceptions
laid in by the Defendant against the Plaintiffs Declaration, or against the
Evidence, verdict, or other Proceedings before the Justices.

Pontage, (Pontagium) Is a contribution toward the maintenance or reedifying
of Bridges, Westminster. 2. ca. 25. Anno 13 Ed. 1. It may also signify Toll taken to
this purpose of those that pass over Bridges, Anno 1 Hen. 8. ca. 9. 22 Hen. 8.
ca. 5. and 39 Eliz. ca. 24. Per Pontagium clamat esse quiet. de operibus
pontium. Plac. in Itin. apud Cestriam 14 Hen. 7.

Pontibus reparandis, Is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, etc. willing him to
charge one or more to repair a Bridge, to whom it belongs, Reg. of Writs, fo.
153. b.

Porca. See Ridge of Land.

Porcary, (Porcaria) A Swinesty. Fleta:

Porter of the door of the Parliamenthouse, Is a necessary Officer belonging to
that high High Court, and enjoys the privileges accordingly, Cromp. Iurisd.
fo. 11.

Porter in the Circuit of Justices, Is an Officer that carries a Verge or white
Rod before the Justices in Air; so called a Portando virgum, Anno 13 Edw. 1.
ca. 41. See Vergers.

Port-greve, (Sax. Port-gerefe, i. Portus vel urbis praefectus; Port in the
Saxon signifies the same with Civitas, and gerefe, or reve, a Collector of the
Rents, (as in diverse Lordships at this day,) Is a chief Magistrate in certain
Maritime Towns; and, (as Camden says in his Britan. pa. 325.) the chief
Magistrate of London was so termed; in stead of whom Richard the First ordained
two Bailiffs; but, presently after him King John granted them a Mayor for their
yearly Magistrate.

Carta Willielmi Conquestoris Civitat. London.
WIlliam, King, Great William Bishop, and Godfrey Portgreve, and all the
Bnrgeis within London, French and English. And I grant you, that I will rhat
ye be all your Law worth, that ye were Edwardis days the King. And I will that
ich Child be his Faders Eyer, and I nil suffer, that any man you any wrongys
beed. And God you keep.

Ex libro pervetusto, penes Will. King, Ar. Portioner (Porconarius, or
Portionarius,) -- Pateat universis quod ego Johannes Botelere, Porconarius
secundae portionis Ecclesia de Bromyord, dedi -- dat. 17 Ric. 2. Where a
Parsonage is served by two or sometimes three Ministers alternately, as
Bromyard, supra, Burford in Shropshire, etc. The Ministers are called
Portioners, because they have but their Portion or Proportion of the Tithes or
Profits of the Living.

Portmen (Anno 13 Eliz. cap. 24.) The Twelve Burgesses of Ipswich, are so
called. Also the inhabitants of the Cinque Ports are so termed, according to
Camdens Britannia.

Portmote (from the Sax Port, i. Portus and gemot, i. Conventus) Is a Court
kept in Haven-Towns or Ports; as Swainmot in the Forest. Manwood, par. 1. page
111. It is called the Portmoot Court. Anno 43 Eliz. ca. 15. Curia Portmotorum,
est Curia in Civitate Cestriae coram Majore in aula Motorum tenenda. Pl. in
Itin. ibid. 14 Hen. 7.

Portsale (Anno 35 Hen. 8. cap. 7.) Is the sale of Fish, presently upon its
arrival in the Port or Haven.

Possession (Possessio, quasi, Pedis positio) Is twofold, actual, and in Law:
The first is, when a Man actually enters into Lands or Tenements to him
descended; the other, when Lands or Tenements are descended to a Man, and he
has not as yet actually entered into them. Before, or until an Office is found
of Lands Escheated by Attainder, (...) King has only Possession in Law, and
not in Deed. Stamf. Praerog. fol. 54. There is also an Unity of Possession,
which the Civilians call Consolidationem: As if the Lord purchase the Tenancy
held by Heriot service, the Heriot is extinct by Unity of Possession; because
the Seigneury and Tenancy are now in one Man's possession. Kitchen, fol. 134.
See other Divisions of Possession in Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 17.

Post. See Per.

Post Conquestum, Was first inserted in the Kings Title by Edward the Third,
Anno 1328. Claus. 2 Edw. 3. in Dorso. m. 33.

Post Diem, Is a Fee by way of Penalty upon a Sheriff for his neglect in
returning a Writ after the day assigned for its return; for which, the Custos
Brevium has four pence, whereas he has nothing, if it be returned at the day;
sometimes taken for the Fee it self.

Post Disseisin (Post Disseisina) Is a Writ given by the Statute of Westminster. 2.
cap. 26. and lies for him that, having recovered Lands or Tenements by Praecipe
quod reddat, upon default, or reddition, is again disseised by the former
Disseisor. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 190. See the Writ that lies for this in the Reg.
of Writs, fol. 208. a.

Post Fine, Is a duty belonging to the King, for a Fine formerly acknowledged
before him in his Court, which is paid by the Cognizee, after the Fine is fully
passed, and all things touching the same accomplished: The rate thereof is so
much, and half so much as was paid to the King for the Fine, and is collected
by the Sheriff of the County where the Land lies, whereof the Fine was levied,
to be answered by him into the Exchequer.

Post Term, Is a Fee or Penalty taken by the Custos Brevium of the Court of
Common Pleas only, for the Filing any Writ by any Attorney after the Term, or
usual time, in which such Writs are returnable; for which the Custos Brevium
takes the Fee of xx d.

Postea, Is a Return or Certificat of the proceedings by Nisi Prius into the
Court of Common Pleas after a Verdict, and there afterward recorded. See
Plowden, Casu, Saunders, fol. 211. a. See an example of it in Co^es Rep. Vol.
6. Rowlands Case, fol. 41. See Custos Brevium.

Posteriority (Posterioritas, the Being or coming after or behind) Is a word
of Comparison and Relation in Tenure, the Correlative whereof is Priority: For
a Man holding Lands or Tenements of two Lords, holds of his Ancienter Lord by
Priority, and of his later Lord by Posteriority Stamf. Praerog. fol. 10. and
11. When one Tenant holds of two Lords, of the one by Priority, of the other by
Posteriority, etc. Old Not. Br. fol. 94. See 2 Instit. fol. 392.

Postnati. -- 7 Jac. It was by all the Judges solemnly adjudged, that those,
who, after the descent of the Crown of England to King James, were born in
Scotland, were no Aliens in England. As on the contrary, the Antenati, or those
born in Scotland, before the said descent, were Aliens here, in respect of the
time of their Birth. See Calvin's Case, 7 Report.

Pot (Anno 13 Car. 2. cap. 6.) A Headpiece, for War.

Pot Ashes (Anno 12 Car. 2. cap. 4.) Are made of the best Wood-ashes, and used
in the making of Soap, some are made in England, but the best come from beyond
Sea.

Pound (Parcus) Signifies generally any strong enclosure to keep in Beasts; but
especially a place of strength, to keep Cattle that are distrained or put in
for any Trespass done by them, until they be replevied or redeemed; and in this
signification it is called a Pound Overt, or open Pound, being built upon the
Lords Waste, and is called the Lords Pound; for he provides it for the use of
himself and his Tenants. See Kitchen, fol. 144. It is divided into Pound Open,
and Pound Close, Pound Open, or Overt, is not only the Lords Pound, but a
Backside, Court, Yard, Pasture-Ground, or whatever else, whither the owner of
the Beasts Impounded may come to give them Meat and Drink, without offense, for
their being there, or his coming thither. Pound Close is then the contrary,
viz. Such a one, as the owner cannot come unto, for the purpose aforesaid,
without offense; as some Close-house, Castle, Fortress, or such like place.

Pound-breach. See Pund-brech.

Poundage (Pondagium) Is a Subsidy granted to the King, of all manner of
Merchandise of every Merchant, Denizen, and Stranger, carried out of this
Realm, or brought into the same, to the value of Twelve pence in every Pound.
This was granted to Henry the Sixth for term of his life, and to King Charles
the Second, Anno 12 Car. 2. cap. 4.

Pourallee. See Purluc.

Pour fair proclamee, que null inject Fines ou ordures en fosses ou Rivers pres
Cities, etc. Is a Writ directed to the Mayor, Sheriff, or Bailiss of a City or
Town, commanding them to proclaim, That none cast filth into the Ditches or
places near adjoining, and, if any be cast already, to remove it. This is
founded upon the Statute 12 Rich. 2. cap. 13. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 176.

Pourpartie (Propars, Propartis vel Propartia,) Is contrary to Pro indiviso;
for to make Pourpartie, is to divide and sever the Lands that fall to
Parceners, which before Partition they hold jointly and Pro indiviso. Old Not.
Br. fol. 11.

Pourpresture (Pourprestura; from the Fr. Pourpris, a Close or Enclosure) Is
thus defined by Glanvile, lib. 9. cap. 11. Pourprestura est proprie, quando
aliquod super Dominum Regem injuste occupatur; ut in Dominicis Regis, vel in
viis publicis obstructis, vel in aquis publicis transversis a recto cursu; vel
quando aliquis in civitate super regiam plateam aliquid aedificando
occupaverit, and generaliter, quoties aliquid fit ad nocumentum Regii
Tenementi, vel Regii viae vel Civitatis. And by Crompton in his Juris. fol.
152. thus. Pourpresture is properly when a Man takes to himself or encroaches
any thing, which he ought not, whether it be in any Jurisdiction, Land, or
Franchise; and generally, when any thing is done to the Nuisance of the Kings
Tenants. See Kitchen, fol. 10. And Manwood, par. 1. page 269. and Par. 2. cap.
10. Some Authors make three sorts of this offense, one against the King, the
second against the Lord of the Fee, the third against a Neighbor, by a
Neighbor^ See 2 Inst. fol. 38. and 272.

Pour seis^r terres la femme que tient en Dower, etc. Was a Writ whereby the
King seized the Land, which the Wife of his Tenant in Capite, deceased, had for
her Dowry, if she married without his leave, and was grounded on the Statute of
the Kings Prerogative. cap. 3. See Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 174.

Poursuivant (from the Fr. Poursuivre, i. Agere, persequi) Signifies the
Messenger of the King attending upon Him in Wars, or at the Council Table, or
Exchequer, or in His Court, or at His Chamber, to be sent upon any occasion or
message; as for the apprehension of a party accused or suspected of any
offense. Those that are used in Marshal Causes are called Pursuivants at Arms;
whereof there are four of special names, which see in the word Herald. Stow,
speaking of Richard the Third his end, has these words, page 784. His Body was
naked to the Skin, not so much as one Clout about him, and was trussed behind
a Pursuivant at Arms like a Hog, or a Calf, etc.

Pourveyor (Provisor, from the Fr. Pourvoire, Providere, Prospicere) Signifies
an Officer of the King or Queen, that provides Corn and other Victual for their
House. Mentioned in Magna Charta, cap. 22. and other Statutes; but the Office
is restrained by Stat. 12. Car. 2. cap. 24. See Pourveyance and Achat.

Pourveyance (Fr. Pourvoyance) Is the providing Corn, Fuel, Victual, and other
necessaries for the Kings House. By Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. it is provided,
That no person or persons up any Warrant, Commission, or Authority, under the
Great Seal, or otherwise, by color of buying or making provision or Purveyance
for His Majesty, or any Queen of England, for the time being, or that shall be;
or for His, their, or any of their Household, shall take any Timber, Fuel,
Cattle, Corn, Grain, Malt, Hay, Straw, Uictual, Cart, Carriage, or other thing
whatsoever, of any the Subjects of His Majesty, His Heirs, or Successors,
without the full and free consent of the owner or owners thereof, had, and
obtained without Menace or Enforcement, etc. See The Antiquity of Praeemption
and Pourueyance, etc. And 3 Inst. fol. 82.

Power of the County (Posse Comitatus) According to Lambert in his Eiren. lib.
3. cap. 1. fol. 309. co(...)ins the Aid and Attendance of all Knights,
Gentlemen, Yeomen, Laborers, Servants, Apprentises, and Villains, and of other
young Men above the age of fifteen, within the County; because all of that age
are bound to have Harness, by the Statute of Winchester. But Women,
Ecclesiastical Persons, and such as are decrepit, or labor with any continual
infirmity, shall not be compelled to attend. For the Stat. 2 Hen. 5. cap. 8.
says, That persons able to travel shall be assistant in this service; which is
used, where a Possession is kept upon a forcible Entry, or any force or rescue
used, contrary to the Command of the Kings Writ, or in opposition to the
execution of Justice.

Powldavis. See Poledavis.

Poynings Law, Is an Act of Parliament made in Ireland by Henry the Seventh,
and so called, because Sir Edward Poynings was Lieutenant there, when it was
made; whereby all the Statutes in England were made of force in Ireland, which
before that time were not, neither are a^y now in force there, which were made
in England since that time. See Cokes 12 Rep. fol. 109. Hill. 10 Jac.

Pray in Aid. See Aid.

Pratum falcabile, A Meadow or Mowingground. -- Jur. dicunt quod praedicta
placea a tempore quo -- Fuit Pratum falcabile, usque ad praedictum annum quod
praedictus W. illud aravit. Trin. 18 Edw. 1. in Banco. Rot. 50.

Prebend (Praebenda) Is the Portion which every Member or Canon of a Cathedral
Church, receives in right of his place, for his maintenance. Canonica Portio is
properly used for that share, which every Canon or Prebendary receives yearly
out of the common stock of the Church; and Praebenda is a several Benefice
rising from some Temporal Land or Church, appropriated toward the maintenance
of a Clerk or Member of a Collegiat Church, (as the Prebends of Keyton, and
Coupes at Maldon) and is commonly surnamed of the place, whence the profit
arises.

Prebends are either Simple, or with Dignity, Simple Prebends are those, that
have no more but the Revenue toward their maintenance: Prebends with Dignity,
are such as have some Jurisdiction annexed to them, according to the diverse
Orders in every several Church. Of this see more in the Decretals, tit. De
Praebendis and Dignitat.

Praebenda, Was also, in old Deeds, used for Provender. See Corody.

Prebendary (Praebendarius) Is he that has such a Prebend; so called a
Praebendo auxilium and consilium Episcopo.

Precariae, Days works, which the Tenants of some Manors are bound to give the
Lord in Harvest, which in some places are corruptly called Bind days, for Biden
days, from the Sax. Bidan, to pray or entreat. Baldwinus una bovata pro ii s.
and Dimd. and ii. Gallinas, and xx Ova, and iv Precarias, in Autumpno; cum uno
homine, bis arare, bis herciare, semel falcare, semel foenum levare, etc. Mon
Angl. 2 par. fol. 539. a. See Bederepe.

Prece partium, Is when a Suit is continued by the Prayer, Assent, or Agreement
of both Parties. Anno 13 Edw. 1. cap. 27.

Precept (Praeceptum) Is commonly taken for a Commandment in Writing, sent out
by a Justice of Peace, or other-like Officer, for the bringing a Person, or
Records before him; of which, you have example of diverse in the Table of the
Register Judicial: And sometimes for the command or provocation, whereby one
Man incites another to commit Felony, Theft, or Murder. Stamf. Pl. Cor. fol.
105. Bracton (lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 19.) calls it Praeceptum or Mandatum;
whence we may observe three diversities of offending in Murder, Praeceptum,
Fortia, Consilium: Praeceptum, being the instigation used before hand; Fortia,
the Assistance in the Fact, as helping to bind the party murdered or robbed;
Consilium, advise either before, or in the Deed.

Praceptories (Praeceptoriae, Anno 32 Hen. 8. cap. 24.) Were Benefices in a
kind, and so termed, because they were possessed by the more eminent sort of
the Templers, whom the chief Master by his Authority created and called
Praeceptores Templi. Stephens de Jurisd. lib. 4. cap. 10. number. 27. Of these
Praeceptories, I find sixteen recorded, as anciently belonging to the
Hospitalers and Templers in England, viz. Cressing-Temple, Balshal, Shengay,
Newland, Yeveley, Witham, Temple-bruere, Willinghton, Rotheley, Ovenington,
Temple-Combe, Trebigh, Ribstane, Mount S. John, Temple-Newsum; and
Temple-burst. Mon. Angl. 2 par. fol. 543.

Praecipe quod reddat, Is a Writ of great Diversity, both in its form and use,
for which see Ingressus and Entry. This Form is extended as well to a Writ of
Right, as to other Writs of Entry or Possession. Old Not. Br. fol. 13. And
Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 5. And it is sometime called A Writ of Right Close, when it
issues out of the Court of Chancery Close; sometimes A Writ of Right Patent: As
when it issues out of the Chancery, Patent, and open to any Lords Court for any
of his Tenants deforced, against the Deforcer, and must be determined there. Of
which, read more at large in Fitz. Not. Br. ca. 1.

Pracipe in Capite (Magna Charta, ca. 24.) Was a Writ issuing out of the Court
of Chancery, for a Tenant holding of the King in Chief, as of his Crown, and
not of the King, as of any Honor, Castle, or Manor. Reg. of Writs, fol. 4. b.

Precontract (Anno 2 and 3 Edw. 6. ca. 23.) Is a Contract made before another
Contract; chiefly in Relation to Marriages.

Predial Tithes (Decimae Praediales) Are those which are paid of things arising
and growing from the Ground only; as Corn, Hay, Fruits of Trees, and such
like. Anno 2 Edw. 6. cap. 13. See Cokes 2 Instit. fol. 649.

Preemption (Praeemptio) Was a Privilege allowed the Kings Purveyor, to have
the choice and first-buying of Corn, and other Provision before others, for the
Kings House; which is taken away by Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

Prelate (Praelatus) We commonly understand to be an Archbishop or Bishop: But
thus says the Learned Spelman, Praelati Ecclesiae vocantur nedum Superiores; ut
Episcopi, sed etiam Inferiores, ut Archidiaconi, Presbyteri, Plebani and
Rectores Ecclesiarum. Sic enim in Bulla Privileg. apud Mat. Par. in Hen. 3. sub
An. 1246. Innocentius, etc. Universis tam Cathedralium quam aliorum Praelatis,
nec non Patronis Ecclesiarum, Clericis and laicis per Regnum Angliae
constitutis salutem, etc. Page 476.

Premises. See Habendum.

Premium (Praemium) A Reward or Recompense. Among Merchants it is used for that
sum of Money, as Eight or ten per Cent. which the Ensured gives the Ensurer,
for ensuring the safe return of any Ship or Merchandise. Anno 19 Car. 2. cap. 1.

Praemunire, Is taken either for a Writ so called, or for the offense whereupon
the Writ is granted; the one may be understood by the other. Heretofore the
Church of Rome, under pretense of her Supremacy, and the Dignity of S. Peter's
Chair, took upon her to bestow most of the Bishoprics, Abbathies, and other
Ecclesiastical Livings of worth here in England, by Mandates, before they were
void; pretending therein a great care to see the Church provided of a
Successor, before it needed. Whence it arose, that these Mandates or Bulls were
called Gratiae Expectativae; or Provisiones, whereof you may read a learned
Discourse in Duarenus; de Beneficiis, lib. 3. cap. 1. These Provisions were so
ri^e with us, that at last, King Edward the Third not disgesting so
intolerable an Encroachment, made a Statute in the Twenty fifth year of His
Reign, Stat. 5. cap. 22. and another Stat. 6. cap. 1. and a third Anno 27.
against those that drew the Kings people out of the Realm, to answer things
belonging to the Kings Court; and another Anno 28 Stat. 2. cap. 1, 2. 3, and 4.
whereby he greatly restrained this liberty of the Pope; who notwithstanding,
still adventured to continue the Provisions; in so much, as King Richard the
Second, likewise made a Statute against them, Anno 12. cap. 15. And in the
Thirteenth year of His Reign, cap. 2. making mention of the said first Statute
of Edward the Third, ratifying the same, and appointing the punishment of those
that offended against it, to be Perpetual banishment, Forfeiture of their
Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels, etc. And again in the Sixteenth year of
His Reign, cap. 5. to meet more fully with all the shifts, invented to avoid
the former Statutes, he expressed the offense more particularly, and sets the
same punishment to it, that he ordained in the last mentioned Statute. After
him, King Henry the Fourth, in like manner aggrieved at other abuses, not fully
met with in the former Statutes, in the second year of His Reign, cap. 3. and
4. adds certain new Cases, and lays upon the Offenders in them, the same
punishment; whereto I refer you, as likewise to Anno 9 Ejusdem, cap. 8. and 3
Hen. 5. cap. 4. and Smith de Repub. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 9.

Some later Statutes do cast this punishment upon other Offenders, as namely
the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. upon him that denies the Kings Supremacy the
second time; and the Stat. 13 Eliz. cap. 2. upon him that affirms the Authority
of the Pope; or refuses to take the Oath of Supremacy; and the Stat. 13 Eliz.
cap. 1. upon such as are Seditious talkers of the inheritance of the Crown, or
affirm the Queen to be an Heretic. And the Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 1. upon such
as affirm the Parliament begun at Westminster, 3 Nov. 1640. is not yet
dissolved, or that there is any obligation by any Oath, Covenant, or Engagement
whatsoever, to endeavor a change of Government, either in Church or State, or
that both or either House of Parliament have, or has a Legislative Power
without the King. And the word is applied most commonly to the punishment first
ordained by the Statutes before mentioned, for such as transgressed them: For
where it is said, that any Man for an offense committed, shall incur a
Praemunire, it is meant, That he shall incur the same punishment, as is
inflicted on those that transgress the Stat. 16 Rich. 2. cap. 5. commonly
called the Statute of Praemunire, which kind of Reference or Application is
not unusual in our Statutes. As to the Etymology of the word, some think it
proceeds from the strength given to the Crown, by the former Statutes, against
the usurpation of foreign power; which opinion may receive some ground from the
Stat. 25 Edw. 3. stat. 6. cap. 1. But others think it grows from the Verb
Praemonere, being barbarously turned into Praemunire, to forewarn or bid the
offender take keed; or from the severity or grievousness of the Punishment. Of
which, a Reason may be gathered from the Form of the Writ, in Old Not. Br. fol.
143. Praemunire facias praefatum praepositum and J. R. procuratorem, etc. Quod
tunc sint coram nobis, etc. Which words can be referred to none, but parties
charged with the offense. See 3 Inst. fol. 119.

Prender (from the Fr. Prendre, i. accipere) Is the power or right of taking a
thing, before it is offered. -- It lies in Render, but not in Prender. Cokes
Rep. 1 Part. Sir Jo. Peter's Case.

Prender de Baron, Signifies literally to take a Husband; but it is used as an
Exception, to disable a Woman from pursuing an Appeal of Murder, against the
killer of her former Husband. Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 3. cap. 59.

Prepensed (Praepensus) Forethought; as Prepensed malice (Malitia Praecogitata)
when a Man is slain upon a sudden quarrel, yet, if there were Malice Prepensed
formerly between them, it makes it Murder, or, as it is called (in the Stat. 12
Hen. 7. cap. 7.) Prepensed Murder. See Murder. And 3 Inst. fol. 51.

Praepositus Ccclesiae. See Church-reve.

Praepositus Uillae, Is used sometimes for the Constable of a Town, or
Petit-Constable. Cromp. Juris. fol. 205. Howbeit, the same Author fol. 194.
seems to apply it otherwise, for there Quatuor homines Praepositi, are those
four Men, that for every Town must appear before the Justices of the Forest in
their Circuit. It is sometimes used for an Head or Cheif-officer of the King,
in a Town, Manor, or Village, or a Reeve. See Reeve. Animalia and res inventa
coram ipso and Sacerdote ducendae erant. LL. Edw. Conf. cap. 28.

Praerogative of the King (Praerogativa Regis, from prae, i. ante, and rogare,
to ask or demand: For though an Act has passed both Houses of Parliament, yet
before it be a Law, the Royal Assent must be asked and obtained) Is generally
that Power, Preeminence, or Privilege, which the King has over and above
other persons, and above the ordinary course of the Common Law, in the right of
His Crown -- Potest Rex ei, lege suae dignitatis, condonare si velit, etiam
mortem promeritam. LL. Edw. Confess. cap. 18. The Kings Person is subject to no
Man's Suit; His Possessions cannot be taken from Him, by any violence or
wrongful Disseisin; His Goods and Chattels are under no Tribute, Toll, or
Custom, nor Distrainable; with very many other Regal Rights, and Privileges.
See Stamf. Praerog. and the Statute of the Kings Praerogative, Anno 17 Edw. 2.
and Plowden, Casu, Mines. Spelman calls it Lex Regiae Dignitatis.

Prerogative Court (Curia Praerogativa Archiepiscopi Cant.) Is the Court
wherein all Wills are proved, and all Administrations granted that belong to
the Archbishop, by his Prerogative, that is, in case where the deceased had
Goods of any considerable value out of the Diocese, wherein he died, and that
value is ordinarily 5 l. except it be otherwise by composition between the said
Archbishop, and some other Bishop, as in the Diocese of London it is 10 l. And
if any contention arise, touching any such Will or Administration, the cause is
properly debated and determined in this Court; the Judge whereof is called The
Judge of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury. The Archbishop of York has also
the like Court, which is termed his Exchequer, but far inferior to this in
Power and Prosit. 4 Inst. fol. 335.

Prescription (Praescriptio) Is a Title, taking its substance of use and time
allowed by the Law, As when a Man claims any thing, because he, his Ancestors,
or they, whose estate he has, have had, or used it all the time, whereof no
memory is to the contrary; or when, for continuance of time, whereof there is
no memory, a particular person has particular right against another particular
person. Kitchen, fol. 104. See Coke on Littl. fol. 140. b. But as in the Civil
Law, so in the Common, Prescription may be in a shorter time, at least in some
particular Cases. For example, where the Statute Anno 8 Rich. 2. cap. 4. says,
That a Judge or Clerk convicted for false entering of Pleas, etc. may be Fined
within two years, the two years being past, he prescribes against the
punishment of the said Statute. So the Statute Anno 11 Hen. 7. says, That he,
who will complain of Maintenance or Embracery, whereby Perjury is committed by
a Jury, must do it within six days, those six days ended, the parties
prescribe: And diverse other Statutes have the like Limitations of time, whence
may arise a like Prescription. See Action Perpetual and Temporal. See Lamb.
Eiren. lib. 4. ca. 5. page 469. Of this Prescription, and the Learning touching
the same, you may read Cokes Rep. Lutterels Case, Vol. 4. fol. 84. and Latches
Rep. fol. 110. Praescriptio est jus quoddam, ex tempore congruens, authoritate
legum vim capiens, paenam negligentibus inferens and sinem litibus imponens. --
Quadragenalis Praescriptio omnem prorsus actionem excludat. Reformatio Legum
Eccles. page 246. See 2 Inst. fol. 653.

Presentation (Praesentatio) Is used properly for the act of a Patron, offering
his Clerk to the Bishop, to be instituted in a Benefice of his Gift, the Form
whereof see in Reg. of Writs, fol. 322. a. See Parson.

Presentee, Is the Clerk that is so presented by the Patron. In the Stat. 13
Rich. 2. cap. 1. mention is made of the Kings Presentee, that is, he whom the
King presents to a Church

Presentment, Is a mere denunciation of the Jurors themselves, or some other
Officer, as Justice of the Peace, Constable, Searcher, Surveyor, etc. (without
any information) of an offense inquirable in the Court, whereunto it is
presented. Lamb. Eiren. lib. 4. cap. 5. page 467.

President (Praeses) Is used for the Kings Lieutenant in any Province or
Function; as President of Wales, York, Barwick, President of the Kings Council.
Anno. 22 H^n. 8: ca. 8. And 24 Hen. 8. ca. 3. and 1.

Pressed, Is used for a duty in Money to be paid by the Sheriff, upon his account
in the Exchequer; or for Money left or remaining in his hands. Anno 2 and 3
Edw. 6. ca. 4.

Pressed Money, Is so called of the French word Pressed, i. Promptus, Expeditus;
for that it binds those that receive it, to be ready at all times appointed,
commonly meant of Soldiers. Anno 18 Hen. 6. 19. -- 7 Hen. 7. 1. -- 7 Hen. 8 5.
And 2 Edw. 6: 2.

Prestation Money (Praestatio, i. A performing or paying) Is a sum of Money
paid by Archdeacons yearly to their Bishop, Pro exteriori Jurisdictione. -- Et
quieti sint a Praestatione Muragii. Carta Hen. 7. Burgens. Mountgomer.
Praestatio was also anciently used for Pourveyance. See Mr. Phillips Book on
that subject, page 222. And see Spiritualties.

Presumption (Praesumptio) Is of three sorts. 1. Violent, which is many times
Plena Probatio; as if one be run through the Body in a House, whereof he
instantly dies, and a Man is seen to come out of the House with a Bloody Sword,
and no other Man was at that time in the House. 2. Probable, which moves
little. 3. Levis seu temeraria, which moves not at all. So in case of a Charter
of Feossment, if all the witnesses to the Deed be deed, then Violent
Presumption, which stands for a proof, is continual and quiet Possession. Coke
on Littl. lib. 1. ca. 1. sect. 1. Praesumptio stat in dubio, it is doubted of,
yet it is accounted Veritatis comes quatenus in contrarium nulla est probatio,
ut regula se habet; Stabitur praesumptio donec probetar in contrarium.
Presumption was anciently taken for intrusion. -- Assultus, Roberia, Sterbrech,
Praesumptio terrae vel pecunia Regis, Thesaurus inventus, etc. LL. Hen. 1. cap.
11. De his quae sunt de Jure Regis.

Pretensed Right (Jus Pretensum) Is where one is in possession of Lands or
Tenements, and another who is out, claims it; and sues for it; here the
Pretensed Right or Title is to be in him, who so does sue and claim.

Price. See Value.

Pricked-bread. -- Molendinario septem panes de Conventu and septem panes de
Prickedbread. Monast. Angl. 1 Part. fol. 496. b. Quaere.

Pride-gabel, In the Manor of Rodeley in Com. Gloc. is paid to this day, as a
Rent to the Lord of the Manor, by certain Tenants, in duty and acknowledgment
to him for their liberty and privilege of Fishing for Lamprays in Severn.
(Pride for brevity, being the later syllable of Lamprid, (as anciently they were
called) and Gavel, a Rent or Tribute.) Tailors Hist. of Gavelkind, fol. 112.

Primo Beneficio. See Beneficio.

Primage (Anno. 32 Hen. 8. ca. 14.) Is a duty due to the Mariners and Sailers
for the Loading of any Ship at the setting forth from any Haven, which is in
some places a penny in the pound; in others six pence per Pack or Bale,
according to the Custom of the place.

Primier Seisin (Prima Seisina, i. The first Possession) Was a Branch of the
Kings Prerogative, whereby he had the first possession of all Lands and
Tenements holden of him in chief, whereof his Tenant died seized in Fee, and
consequently the Rents and Profits of them, until the Heir, if he were of age,
did his homage, if under age, until he were. But all charges arising by Primier
Seisins, are taken away by the Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

Prince (Princeps) Is sometimes taken for the King himself; but more properly
for the Kings Eldest Son, who is Prince of Wales; as the Eldest Son to the
French King is called Dauphine, both being Princes by their Nativity. Ferns
Glory of Generosity, page 138.

Before Edward the Second was born at Carnarvan, and was the first Prince of
Wales, the Kings Eldest Son was called Lord Prince. Stamf. Praerog. ca. 22.
fol. 75. See 27 Hen. 8. ca. 26. And 28 Ejusdem, ca. 3.

Principal (Principalium) An Heir-lome, Quod vide. In Urchenfield Com. Heref.
certain Principals, as the best Beast, best Bed, best Table, etc. pass to the
eldest Child, and are not subject to Partition. Also the chief person in some
of the Inns of Chancery is called Principal of the House. See Ancient.

Principality of Chester. Anno 21 Rich. 2. ca. 9. See County Palatine, and
Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 137.

Prior perpetual, or Dative and removeable. Anno 9 Rich. 2. ca. 4. And 1 Edw.
4. ca. 1. Lord Prior of Saint John's of Jerusalem. Anno 26 Hen. 8. ca. 2. See
Abbot.

Priors Aliens (Priores Alieni) Were certain Religious Men, born in France, and
Normandy, and Governors of Religious Houses, erected for Outlandish Men here in
England; which were by Henry the Fifth thought no good Members for this Land,
and therefore suppressed; whose Livings were afterward by Henry the Sixth,
given to other Monasteries and Houses of Learning, (Stows Annals, page 582. And
1 Hen. 5. ca. 7.) but specially to the erecting of those two famous Colleges,
called The Kings Colleges of Cambridge and Eaton. 2 Part Inst. fo. 584.

Priority (Prioritas) Signifies an Antiquity of Tenure, in comparison of
another less ancient. As, To hold by Priority, is to hold of a Lord more
anciently than of another. Old Not. Br. fo. 94. So to hold by Posteriority is
used in Stamf. Praerog. ca. 2. fol. 11. The Lord of the Priority shall have the
custody of the Body, etc. Cromp. Juris. fol. 120. See Posteriority.

Prisage (Prisa, Fr. Pris) Is that Custom or Share, that belongs to the King,
or Lord Admiral, out of such Merchandises as are taken at Sea, by way of lawful
Prize, which is usually a Tenth part. 31 Eliz. ca. 5.

Prisage of Wines (Anno 1 Hen. 8. ca. 5.) Is a word almost out of use, now
called Butlerage, (because the Kings chief Butler receives it) which is a
Custom whereby the King challenges out of every Bark laden with Wine,
containing Twenty Tuns or more, two Tun of Wine; the one before, the other
behind the Mast at his price, which is Twenty shillings for each Tun; yet this
varies according to the Custom of the place, for at Boston, every Bark laden
with Ten Tuns of Wine, or above, pays Prisage. See Butlerage, and Calthrops
Reports, fol. 20. And 4 Part Inst. fol. 30.

MEmorandum, quod Rex habet ex antiqua consuetudine de qualibet Nave Mercatoris
Vini 6 Careat. Applican. infra aliquem portum Angliae de viginti doliis duo
dolia and de december doliis unum de Prisa Regia pro quodam certo ab antiquo
constitut. solvend. P. Rec. 20 R. 2.

Prise (Prisa) From the Fr. Prendre, i. Capere) Signifies in our Statutes the
things taken of the Kings Subjects by Purveyers. Anno 13 Edw. 1. ca. 7. and 28
Ejusdem, stat. 3. ca. 2. It signifies also a Custom due to the King. An. 25
Ejusdem, ca. 5. Reg. of Writs, fol. 117. b. In forancis paginis antiquis (says
the Learned Spelman) Prisae plerumque intelliguntur de annonae reique
frumentariae captionibus aliis etiam necessariis, ad alenda instruendaque
castrorum praefidia; nec non and regiam familiam minori quam justo pretio
agricolis areptis, etc. In Rescripto quodam Anno 3 Edw. 1. Norf. ss. -- Rogerus
de Monte alto, qui sororem and haeredem Hugonis de Albeney, etc. desponsaverat,
clamat habere libertates has subscriptas, viz. Castellum suum de Risinge cum
Prisis 40 dierum, etc. Ubi clausulam cum Prisis 40 dierum intelligo de
liberate capiendi victualia quae vocant ad sustentationem praesidiarii militis
Castri sui, ita quod pretium reddat infra 40 dies. See the Stat. 12 Car. 2. ca.
24.

Prisoner (Fr. Prisonnier) Signifies one that is restraiued of his liberty upon
any Action, Civil, or Criminal, or upon Commandment. And a Man may be Prisoner
upon Matter of Record, or Matter of Fact: Prisoner upon Matter of Record, is
he, who, being present in Court, is by the Court committed to Prison, only
upon an Arrest, be it by the Sheriff, Constable, or other. Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib.
1. ca. 32. fol. 34 and 35.

Privation (Privatio) A bereaving or taking away: Most commonly applied to a
Bishop, or Rector of a Church; when by Death, or other act, they are deprived
of their Bishopric or Benefice. See Coke on Littl. fol. 329.

Privy (Fr. Prive, i. Familiaris) Signifies him that is partaker, or has an
interest in any Action, or thing; as Privies of Blood, Old Not. Br. fol. 117.
Every Heir in Tail is Privy to recover the Land intailed. Eodem, fol. 137.
Merchants Privy, are opposite to Merchant Strangers. Anno 2 Edw. 3. cap. 9. and
14. Coke (lib. 3. Walkers Case, fol. 23. And lib. 4. fol. 123.) mentions four
kind of Privies, viz. Privies in Blood, as the Heir to his Father; Privies in
Representation, as Executors or Administrators to the deceased; Privies in
Estate, as he in Reversion, and he in Remainder, when Land is given to one for
life, and to another in Fee; the reason is, for that their Estates are created
both at one time: The fourth is Privy in Tenure, as the Lord by Escheat, that
is, when Land Escheats to the Lord for want of heirs. The Expositor of
Law-terms adds a fifth sort of Privy, whom see, and Coke on Litt. lib. 3. ca.
8. Sect. 161.

Privy Seal, (Privatum sigillum) Is a Seal that the King uses to such Grants,
or other things as pass the Great Seal; First, they pass the Privy-Signet, then
the Privy Seal, and lastly the Great Seal of England. The Privy Seal is also
sometimes used in things of less consequence, that do not at all pass the great
one. No Writs shall pass under the Privy Seal, which touch the Common Law. 2
Inst. fo. 555.

Privilege, (Privilegium) Is either personal or real: A personal Privilege is
that which is granted or allowed to any person, either against or besides the
course of the Common Law: as, a Member of Parliament may not be Arrested, nor
any of his menial servants in the time of Parliament, nor for certain days
before and after. A Privilege real is that which is granted to a place, as to
the Universities, that none of either may be called to Westminster Hall, or
prosecuted in other Courts. See the New Book of Entries, verbo, Privilege.
Privilegium est jus singular, hoc est, privata lex, quae uni homini vel loco,
vel Collegio and similibus aliis conceditur.

Privity, (Fr. Privaute) Private Familiarity, Friendship, Inward Relation. If
there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant holds of the Lord by certain services,
there is a privity between them, in respect of the tenure. See Privy.

Probat of Testaments, (Probatio testamentorum) Is the exhibiting and proving
last Wills and Testaments before the Ecclesiastical Judge, delegated by the
Bishop, who is Ordinary of the place where the party dies. If all the deceased
parties Goods, Chattels, and Debts owing him were in the same Diocese, then the
Bishop of the Diocese, or the Archdeacon (according as their composition or
prescription is) has the Probat of the Testament; if the Goods were dispersed
in diverse Dioceses, so that there were any sum of note, (as five pounds
ordinarily) out of the Diocese where the party lived, then is the Archbishop
of Canterbury (or York) the Ordinary by his Prerogative. This Probat is made in
two sorts, either in common form, or per testes; The first, is only by the
Oath of the Executor, who swears upon his credality, that the Will by him
exhibited, is the last Will and Testament of the Party deceased. Per testes is,
when, besides his Oath, he also produces Witnesses, or makes other proof to
confirm the same; which later course is taken most commonly, where there is
fear of strife or dispute about the Testators Goods: For, it is held that a
Will proved in common form only, may be called in question any time within
thirty years after. And, where a Will disposes of Lands, or Tenements of
Freehold, it is now usually proved by Witnesses in Chancery.

Procedendo, Is a Writ, whereby a Plea, or Cause, formerly called from a base
Court to the Chancery, King's Bench, or Common Pleas, by Writ of Privilege, or
Certiorari, is released, and sent again to the same Court to be proceeded in
there, after it appears that the Defendant has no cause of privilege, or that
the matter comprised in the Parties allegation on suggestion is not well
proved. Brook, hoc titulo, and Coke, vol. 6. fo. 63. See, Anno 21 Rich. 2. ca.
11. Letters of Procedendo, granted by the keeper of the Privy Seal. See in what
diversity it is used in the Table of the Register of Writs Original and
Judicial. Anno 21 Iac. ca. 23.

Process, (Processus, a procedendo ab initio usque ad finem) Is so called,
because it proceeds (or goes out) upon former matter, either Original or
Judicial; and, has two significations: First, it is largely taken for all
proceeding in any real or personal, civil or criminal Action, from the Original
Writ to the end. Britton. fo. 138. Secondly, We call that the Process, by which
a man is called into any Temporal Court, which is always in the name of the
King. See Lamb. in his Tractat of Processes adjoining to his Eiren. Diverse
kinds of Process upon Inditements before Justices of the Peace, see in Cromp.
Justice of P. fo. 134. Special Process is that, which is especially appointed
for the offense by Statute.

Processum continuando, Is a Writ for the continuance of a Process, after the
death of the Chief Justice, or other Justices in the Writ or Commission of Oyer
and Terminer. Reg. of Writs, fo. 128. a.

Prochein amy, (Fr. Prochain amie, proximus amicus) Is used for him that is
next of kin to a child in his nonage, and is in that respect allowed by Law, to
deal for him in managing his affairs; as to be his Guardian, if he hold in
Socage, and in the redress of any wrong done him. Stat. Westminster. 1. ca. 48. and
Westminster. 2. ca. 15. and is, in the prosecution of any action at law, per
Gardianum, where the Plaintiff is an Infant, and per proximum Amicum, where the
Infant is Defendant. See 2 Inst. fo. 261.

Proclamation, (Proclamatio) is a notice publicly given of any thing, whereof
the King thinks fit to advertise his Subjects; so is it used Anno 7 Ric. 2. ca.
6. 31 Hen. 8. ca. 8. Proclamation of Rebellion is a Writ so called, whereby
public notice is given, where a Man, not appearing upon a Subpaena, nor an
Attachment in the Chancery, shall be reputed a Rebel, if he render not himself
by a day assigned in this Writ. See Commission of Rebellion.

Proclamation of a Fine, Is a notice openly and solemnly given at all the
Assizes, held in the County within one year after the engrossing it; which
Proclamations are made upon transcripts of the Fine, sent by the Justices of
the Common-Plees to the Justices of Assise, and of the Peace. West, Part 2.
Symbol. tit. Fines. Sect. 132. where also you may see the form of the
Proclamation. Proclamare est palam and valde clamare. See Proclamations in
diverse cases, New Book of Entries, verbo, Proclamations.

Pro confesso, Upon a Bill exhibited in Chancery, where the Defendant appears,
and is in contempt for not answering, and is in castody; upon a Habeas Corpus
(which is granted by order) to bring him to the Bar, the Court assigns him a
day to answer, which being expired, and no answer put in, a second Habeas
Corpus is likewise granted, and a further day assigned, by which day, if he
answer not, the Bill, upon the Plaintiffs Motion, shall be taken pro confesso,
unless cause be showed by a day, which the Court does usually give; and, for
want of such cause showed upon Motion, the Substance of the Plaintiffs Bill
shall be decreed, as if it had been confessed by the Defendants Answer. As it
was the Case of Filmore and Denny Hill. 1662. Or, after a fourth insufficient
Answer made to the Bill, the matter of the Bill, not sufficiently answered
unto, shall be taken pro confesso.

Proctors of the Clergy, (Procuratores Cleri) Are those, who are chosen and
appointed to appear for Cathedral or other Collegiate Churches, as also for the
common Clergy of every Diocese, to sit in the Convocation House in the time of
Parliament. The manner of their election see in Cowels Interpreter on this
word. See Prolocutor and Convocation, and see 4 Inst. fo. 4.

Procurations, (Procurationes) Are certain sumnis of Money which Parish Priests
pay yearly to the Bishop or Archdeacon, ratione visitationis; They were
anciently paid in necessary Victuals for the Visitor and his Attendants, but
afterward turned into Money. Procuratio is defined by Vallensis, to be
necessariorum sumptuum exhibitio, quae, ratione Visitationis, debetur ab
ecclesia vel monasterio ei cui ex officio incumbit jus and onus visitandi, sive
is sit Episcopus sive Archidiaconus, sive Decanus, sive Legatus summi
Pontificis. Anno 1290. Md. quod die Mercurii in Festo Sancti Lucae Evang.
Dominus Episcopus caepit Procurationem suam in cibis and potibus apud
Bordesley, and pernoctavit ibidem. Giff. fo. 226. b. See an Historical
Discourse of Procurations and Synodals, Printed Anno 1661. These are also
called Proxies; as, Archidiaconatus Glouc. valet clare in Proxis, Cenag. and
Pentecostal. per an. 64 -- 10 -- 00. Ex Record Primitiar. 26 Hen. 8. See Dier,
fo. 273. b. and Claus. Rot. 31 Ed. 1. m. 15. dorso.

Procuracy, (Anno 3 Rich. 2. Stat. 1. ca. 3.) See Procurator.

Procurator, Is used for him that gathers the fruit of a Benefice for another
Man. Anno 3 Rich. 2. Stat. 1. ca. 3. And Procuracy for the writing or
instrument, whereby he is Authorized. They are at this day in the West parts
called Proctors.

Procurors. See Malveis Procurors.

Proof, alias Prove, Is used for an Enquest. Anno 28 Ed. 3. ca. 13.

Profer, (Profrum, vel Proferum, from the Fr. Proferer, i. Producere, Edicere,
Allegare,) Is the time appointed for the Accounts of Sheriffs, and other
Officers, in the Exchequer, which is twice in the year. Anno 51 Hen. 3. Stat.
5. which may be gathered also out of the Register, fo. 139. in the Writ De
Attornato vicecomitis pro profro faciendo. We read also of Profers, Anno 32
Hen. 8. ca. 21. in these words; Trinity Term shall begin the Monday next after
Trinity Sunday, whenever it shall happen to fall, for the keeping of the
Essoines, Profers, Returns, and other Ceremonies heretofore used and ke(...).
In which place Profer signifies the offer or endeavor to proceed in an Action
by any Man, concerned so to do. See Britton. ca. 28. fo. 50. b. and 55. a(...)
80. b. and Fleta, lib. 1. ca. 38. Sect. Utlagati and seq. -- Praeterea idem
Henricus de Hastinggis, and antecessores sui solebant capere and de jure habere
rationabiles expensas suas versus Scaccarium singulis annis, pro duobus Profris
faciendis and uno compoto reddendo per annum, etc. Escact. Anno 30 Ed. 1. n. 19.

Profer the Half-mark. See Half-Mark.

Profession, (Professio) Is used particularly for the entering into any
Religious Order. New Book of Entries, verbo Profession.

Prohibition, (Prohibitio) Is a Writ to forbid any Court, either Spiritual or
Secular, to proceed in any Cause there depending, upon suggestion, that the
cognition thereof belongs not to the said Court. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 39. G. but,
is now usually taken for that Writ, which lies for one that is impleaded in the
Court Christian, for a Cause belonging to the temporal Jurisdiction, or the
Cognizance of the Kings Court, whereby, as well the Party and his Counsel, as
the Judge himself and the Register are forbidden to proceed any farther in that
Cause. See Brook, hoc titulo, and Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 93. and Bracton, lib. 5.
Tract. 5. ca. 3. usque ad 12. who says, that it lies not after Sentence given
in any Cause. And the Stat. Anno 50 Ed. 3. ordains, that but one Prohibition
should lie in one Cause. See the diversity of Prohibitions in the Table of the
Register of Writs, New Book of Entries, on this Word, and 2 Part Inst. fo. 601.

Prohibitio de vasto directa parti, Is a Writ Judicial directed to the Tenant,
prohibiting him, from making Waste upon the Land in controversy, during the
Suit, Reg. of Writs Judic. fo. 21. It is sometimes made to the Sheriff, the
example whereof you have next following in the same Book.

Pro indiviso, Is a Possession or Occupation of Lands or Tenements, belonging
to two or more persons, whereof none knows his several portion; as Coparceners
before partition. Bracton, lib. 5. Tract. 2. ca. 1. Number. 7.

Prolocutor of the Convocation House (Prolocutor Domus Convocationis) Is an
Officer chosen by Persons Ecclesiastical, publicly assembled by virtue of the
Kings Writ at every Parliament: And as there are two Houses of Convocation, so
are there two Prolocutors, one of the higher House, the other of the lower; the
later of which is, presently upon the first Assembly, by the motion of the
Bishops, chosen by the Lower House, and presented to the Bishop for Prolocutor
of the Lower House, that is, the person, by whom they intend to deliver their
Resolutions to the Higher House, and to have their own House especially ordered
and governed. His Office is to cause the Clerk to call the names of such as are
of that House, when he sees cause, to read all things propounded, gather
suffrages, and the like. Cowel.

Promooters (Promotores) Are those, who in Popular and Penal Actions, do
prosecute Offenders in their name, and the Kings, having part of the Fines or
Penalties for their reward. These among the Romans were called Quadruplatores
or Delatores. They belong chiefly to the Exchequer, and Kings Bench. Smith de
Repub. Angl. lib. 2. ca. 14. Sir Edw. Coke calls them Turbidum hominum genus. 3
Instit. fol. 191.

Promulged (Promulgatus) Published, proclaimed. Anno 6 Hen. 8. ca. 4.

Pronotary or Prothonotary (Protonotarius, i. Primus notarius) Is a chief Clerk
of the Common Pleas, and Kings Bench, whereof the first has three, the other
one: For the Prognotary of the Common Pleas (Anno 5 Hen. 4. ca. 14.) is termed
a chief Clerk of that Court. He of the Kings Bench Records all Actions Civil,
as the Clerk of the Crown Office does all Criminal Causes in that Court. Those
of the Common Pleas, since the Order of 14. Jac. upon an Agreement made betwixt
the Prothonotaries and Filacers of that Court (who before did enter all
Declarations and Pleas, whereunto a Sergeants hand was not required) do enter
and enrol all manner of Declarations, Pleadings, Assizes, Judgments, and
Actions. They make out all Judicial Writs, except Writs of Habeas Corpus and
Distringas Jurator. for which, there is a particular Office not much beyond the
memory of Man erected, called The Habeas Corpora Office. They also make out
Writs of Execution, and of Seisin, Writs of Privilege, for removing Causes
from other Inferior Courts of Record, in case where the party has cause of
Privilege. Writs of Procedendo, of Scire Facias in all Cases, and Writs to
enquire of Damages; and all Process upon Prohibitions, and upon Writs of Audita
Quaerela, and False Judgment, Cum multis aliis. They enter and enrol all common
Recoveries; and may make Exemplifications of any Record in the same Term,
before their Rolls are made up and brought into the Treasury of Records in that
Court.

Pro partibus Liberandis, Is a Writ for the Partition of Lands between
Coheirs. Reg. of Writs, fol. 316.

Property (Proprietas) Is the highest right that a Man has, or can have to any
thing, and no ways depending upon another Man's courtesy. Which none in our
Kingdom can properly be said to have in any Lands or Tenements, but only the
King in right of his Crown: Because all the Lands throughout the Realm are in
the nature of Fee, and hold either mediately or immediately of the Crown. This
word nevertheless is used for that right in Lands and Tenements that common
persons have; because it imports as much as arile Dominium, though not
Directum. See Fee.

Prophecies (Prophetiae) Are in our Statutes taken for wizzardly fore-tellings
of Matters to come, in certain hidden and enigmatical Speeches; whereby great
commotions have been often caused in this Kingdom, and great attempts made by
those, to whom such Speeches promised good success, though the words are
mystically framed, and point only at the Cognizance, Arms, or some other
quality of the parties. Anno 3 Edw. 6. ca. 15. And 7 Ejusdem, ca. 11. And 5
Eliz. ca. 15. But these for distinction sake, are called Fond, False, or
Fantastical Prophecies. 3 Inst. fol. 128.

Propounders. The 85 Cha. of Cokes 3 Institutes, is entitled, Against
Monopolists, Propounders, and Projectors; where it seems to be used only as a
Synonima to Monopolists.

Proprietary (Proprietarius) Is he that has a property in any thing, Quae
nullius arbitrio est obnoxia. But it was heretofore most commonly used for him
that has the Fruits of a Benefice to himself, and his Heirs, or Successors, as
in time past, Abbots and Priors had to them and their Successors. See
Appropiation.

Proprietate Provanda, Is a Writ that lies for him, who would prove a property
before the Sheriff. Reg. of Writs, fol. 83. and 85. For where a Property is
alleged, a Replegiare properly lies not. Brook, Property 1.

Pro rata, i. Pro proportione. Anno 16 Car. 2. ca. 6.

Pro rata portionis. See Oneranda pro rata portionis.

Prorogue (Prorogo) To prolong, defer, or put off to another day, to continue.
Anno 6 Hen. 8. cap. 8. The difference between a Prorogation, and an Adjournment
or Continuance of the Parliament, is, That by the Prorogation in open Court,
there is a Session; and then such Bills as passed in either House, or by both
Houses, and had no Royal assent to them, must at the next Assembly begin again:
For every several Session of Parliament is in Law, a several Parliament; but if
it be but adjourned or continued, then is there no Session, and consequently
all things continue in the same state they were in before the Adjournment. 4
Inst. fol. 27.

Prosecutor, Is he that follows a Cause in an others name. See Promooters.

Protection (Protectio) Is generally taken for that benefit and safety, which
every subject, denizen, or alien, specially secured, has by the Kings Laws.
Anno 25 Edw. 3. cap. 22. And it is used specially for an Exemption or Immunity,
given by the King to a person against Suits in Law, or other vexations, upon
reasonable causes him thereto moving, which is a Branch of His Prerogative. And
of this Protection, Fitzherbert (Not. Br. fol. 28.) makes two sorts: The first
he calls a Protection, cum clasula, Volumus -- Whereof he mentions four
particulars, 1. A Protection, Quia profecturus, for him that is to pass over
Sea in the Kings service. 2. Quia moraturus, for him that is abroad in the
Kings service upon the Sea, or in the Marches. Anno 7 Hen. 7. cap. 2. 3. For
the Kings Debtor, that he be not sued nor attached, till the King be paid his
debt. Anno 15 Edw. 3. And 4. in the Kings service beyond Sea, or on the Marches
of Scotland. Anno 1 Rich. 2. cap. 8. Reg. of Writs, fol. 23. And Britton, cap.
123.

The second form of Protection is Cum clausula Nolumus, which is granted most
commonly to a Spiritual Company for their Immnnity from having their Cattle
taken by the Kings Ministers: But it may also be granted to a single person
Spiritual or Temporal. Protection extends not to Pleas of Dower, Quare Impedit,
Assise of Novel Disseisin, Darrein Presentment, Attaints, nor Pleas before
Justices in Air. See New Book of Entries on this word.

Proto-Forestarius, Was he whom our ancient Kings made chief of Windsor Forest,
to hear all causes of death, or mayhem there. Came. Brit. page 213. A kind of a
Lord Chief Justice in Air.

Protest (Protestari) Has two diverse Applications, one is by way of cautel, to
call witness (as it were) or openly to affirm, That he does either not at all,
or but conditionally yield his consent to any act, or unto the proceeding of a
Judge in a Court, wherein his Jurisdiction is doubtful, or to answer upon his
Oath, further then he is by Law bound Reg. of Writs, fol. 306. b The other is
by way of complaint to Protest a Man's Bill: As if I pay money to a Merchant in
France, taking his Bill of Exchange to be repaid in England by his Factor or
Assignee, if at my coming I find not my self satisfied, but either delaid or
denied, then I go into the Exchange, and Protest that I am not paid or
satisfied by him. And thereupon, if he has any Goods within the Realm, the Law
of Merchants allows me satisfaction out of them.

Protestation (Protestatio) Is (as Justice Walsh defines it) a defense of
safeguard to the party that makes it, from being concluded by the Act he is
about to do, that Issue cannot be joined upon it. Plowden, fol. 276. b. It is a
Form of pleading, when one does not directly affirm, nor directly deny any
thing that is alleged by another, or which he himself alleges.

Protbonotary. See Pronotary.

Prove. See Proof.

Prover (Probator) Anno 28 Edw. 1. And 5 Hen. 4. cap. 2. See Approver. And 3
Part Inst. fol. 129. A Man became an Approver and appealed five, and every of
them joined battle with him, Et duellum percussum fuit cum omnibus, and
Probator devicit omnes quinque in duello, quorum quatuor suspendebantur, and
quintus clamabat esse Clericum and allocatur; and Probator pardonatur. Mich. 39
Edw. 3. coram Rege Rot. 97. Suff.

Province (Provincia) Was used among the Romans for a Country, without the
compass of Italy, gained to their subjection by the Sword, of which, that part
of France next the Alps, was one, and still retains the name. But with us a
Province is most usually taken for the Circuit of an Archbishops Jurisdiction,
as the Province of Canterbury, and that of York. Anno 32 Hen. 8. ca. 23. and 33
Ejusdem, ca. 31. Yet it is often used in our Statutes for several parts of the
Realm; and sometimes for a County. -- In Placito Agnetis quae fuit uxor
Radulphi de Butiller versus Priorem de Repindon, pro terra in Pykinton, Prior
dicit quod nulla villa est in Provincia illa, quae sic vocatur. Placit. de
Juratis and Assisis apud Derby. Pasch. 53 Hen. 3. Rot. 2.

Provincial (Provincialis) Is a chief Governor of a Religious Order, as of
Friars, etc. Anno 4 Hen. 4. cap. 17.

Provision (Provisio) Is used with us, as it is in the Canon Law, for the
providing a Bishop, or any other person with an Ecclefiastical living, by the
Pope, before the Incumbent be dead. It is also called Gratia expectativa or
Mandatum de providendo. The great abuse whereof through all Christendom
heretofore, you may read not only in Duarenus de sacris Ecclesiae Ministeriis
and Beneficiis, lib. 3. cap. 2. But also particularly in England, mentioned in
diverse of our Statutes. viz. 35 Edw. 3. cap. 22. stat. 4. and 5. commonly
called the Stat. De Provisionibus, and 27 and 38 Ejusdem, stat. 2. Anno 2 Rich.
2. cap. 7. and 3 Ejusdem, cap. 3. and 7 Ejusdem, cap. 12. Anno 2 Hen. 4. cap.
3. and 4. and Anno 3 Hen. 5. cap. 4. See Praemunire.

Provisor, Is generally taken for him that has the care of providing things
necessary; a Purveyor; but more especially in our Statutes it signifies one
that sued to the Court of Rome for a Provision, (which Vide supra.) Old Not.
Br. fol. 143. who were prohibited by Proclamation, 42 Hen. 3. Anno 1258. Holl.
page 259. b. 18. Provisores dicuntur, qui vel Episcopatum vel Ecclesiasticam
aliam Dignitatem in Romana Curia sibi ambiebant de futuro, quod ex gratia
expectativa nuncuparunt, quia usque dum vacaret expectandum esset. Spel.

Proviso, Is a Condition inserted into any Deed, upon the observance whereof
the validity of the Deed depends; it sometimes signifies a Covenant. Cokes 2
Rep. Lord Cromwels Case. It has also another signification in matters
Judicial; as if the Plaintiff or Demandant be slow or desist in prosecuting an
Action, by not bringing it to a Trial, the Defendant or Tenant may take out the
Venire Facias to the Sheriff, which has in it these words Proviso quod -- To
this end, that if the Plaintiff take out any Writ to that purpose, the Sheriff
shall Summon but one Jury upon them both. In which case, we call it, bringing
down the Record, or going to Trial, by Proviso. See Old Not. Br. fol. 159. In
Nisi Prius.

Provost-Marshal, An Officer in the Kings Navy, who has charge of the
Prisoners taken at Sea. Anno 13 Car. 2. cap 9. art. 30. And is sometimes used
for a like purpose at Land, or to seize or arrest any within the Jurisdiction
of his place or office.

Proxege. See Senege. Quaere, If it be not the payment of Proxies or
Procurations.

Proxies (Sir John Davies Rep. fol. 4.) Are yearly payments made by
Parish Priests to their Bishop or Archdeacon, Ratione Visitationis. See
Procurations, and the Case Inter Regem and Sir Ambros. Forth, 2 Jac. in the
Exchequer.

Pryk, Is a kind of Service and Tenure. -- Nich. Filius and Haeres Nich. de
Longforde Chivalier, tenet quatuor Messuagia, 40 Acras terrae, december Acras
prati and lx s. redditus cum pertinentiis in Kinwaldmersh, de Rege in Capite,
per servitium inveniendi unum equum, unum saccum, and unum Pryk in guerra
Walliae, quandocunque contigerit Regem ibi guerrare. Mich. Fines 1 Rich. 2.
Derb. fol. 204.

Public Faith, (Fides Publica) Anno 17 Car. 1. cap. 18. Was a Rebellious
Cheat, to raise Money of the seduced People, upon the Public Faith of the
Nation, to make a wicked and causeless War against a most Religious and
Gracious Sovereign, which began in or about the year 1642.

Pucellage (Pucellagium, Fr. Pucelage) Virginity, Maidenhead. -- Quod tenuit
eam dum idem B. abstulit Pucellagium suum, vel quod concubuit cum ea. Bracton,
lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 28. number. 2, 3, and 5. In an ancient MS. I find it
written Puellagium. In placito pro Raptu, sic continetur -- quod ipsam de
Puellagio suo felonice, and totaliter defloravit. Inter Plac. Mich. 19 Edw. 3.
London. 159.

Pudhepec (Sax.) -- Si Pudhepec (i. nemoris caesio) Paerco Regis vel Forestae
fiat, 30 manc. emendetur, nisi Propositio propensior amplius exigat. LL. Hen.
1. cap. 38. But the Learned Spelman believes it to be false written, for the
Saxon udhepec, i. Wudhepec, the W. in that Character being like the P. in ours.

Pudeld (Coke on Littl. fol. 233.) The same with Woodgeld; for it seems to be a
mistake of the Saxon udgeld

Puisne (Fr. Puisne) Younger, Puny, born after. See Mulier.

Pundbrech (A Sax. Pund, i. Parcus and brech, i. fractura) Si Pundbrech (i.
Fractura Parci) fiat in Curia Regis plena Wyta sit; alibi quinque mancae. LL.
Hen, 1. cap. 40. It is the illegal taking of Cattle out of the Pound, either by
breaking the Pound, picking the Lock, or otherwise.

Purchase (Purchacia, from the Fr. Pourchasser) Is to buy Lands or Tenements
with ones Money, or otherwise gain it by ones industry, contradistinguished
from that which comes to one by descent from his Ancestors. Gaufridus de
Mandevilla Comes Essexiae fundator Canobii Sancti Jacobi Waldensis in Charta
prima -- Contuli, etc. omnes Ecclesias inferius annotatas, tam de Dominio meo,
quam de emptis and Purchasiis, etc. Joinct-Purchas (conjunctum perquisitum.)
Reg. of Writs, fol. 143. b. Is where two persons or more join in a Purchase of
Lands.

Purfles of a Woman's Gown (from the Fr. Pourfiler, Anno 33 Hen. 8. cap. 5.) A
sort of trimming for Women's Gowns, then in use; it was made of Tinsel, or
Gold-Thred, or Lace, and was also called Baudkin Work. So Came. tit. Ireland,
speaks of a Mantle or Shag-rug, with a deep fringed Purfle.

Purgation (Purgatio) Is the clearing ones self of a crime, whereof he is
probably and publicly suspected, and thereof accused before a Judge. Of this
there was great use in England, touching matter of Felony imputed to Clerks in
former times, as appears by Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 2. cap. 48. and Westminster. 1. cap.
2. See Clergy. It is still observed in matters pertaining to the Ecclesiastical
Court, as suspicion or common fame of incontinency, or such like.

Purgation is either Canonical or Vulgar; Canonical, is that which is
prescribed by the Canon Law; the form whereof, is usual in the Spiritual Court,
the person suspected taking his Oath, That he is clear of the Fact objected;
and bringing so many of his honest Neighbors, not above Twelve, as the Court
shall assign him, to swear upon their Consciences and Credulity, that he swears
truly: The Vulgar, and ancient manner was by fire, or water, or by combat, used
by Insidels and Christians also, till by the Canon Law it was abolished. But
Combat, though now disused, may be still practiced by the Laws of the Realm, in
Cases doubtful, and where there is a want of evidence, or other proof, if the
Defendant choose rather the combat, then other trial. See Ordel and Combat.

Purificatio Beatae Mariae Uirginis. (Anno 32 Hen. 8. cap. 21.) See Candlemass.

Purlue or Purlieu (from the Fr. Pur, i. Purus, and lieu, locus) Is all that
Ground near any Forest, which, being made Forest by Henry the Second, Richard
the First, or King John, were by Perambulation granted by Henry the Third
severed again from the same, and became Purlue, i. Pure and free from the Laws
and Ordinances of the Forest. Manwood, Par. 2. For. Laws, cap. 20. See the
Stat. 33 Edw. 1. stat. 5. And the Perambulation whereby the Purlieu is
Deafforested, is called Pourallee, i. Perambulatio. 4 Inst. fol. 303.

Purlieu-Man, Is he that has Ground with(...) the Purlieu, and being able to
dispend forty shillings per annum of Freehold, is licensed to ^unt in his own
Purlieu. Manwood, part 1. pa. 151. 157. but, what observations he must use in
his hunting see more in him, pa. 180, and Par. 2 ca. 20. Number. 5. 8. 9.

Purpresture, (From the Fr. Pourprist and Pourprest, 1. Integre arreptum) est
proprie terrae alienae clandestina sustractio, ejusdemque vicinae ascriptio.
See Pourpresture.

Purprisum, (Fr. Pourpris) A Close, or Enclosure; also the whole compass or
extent of a Manor or Place. -- Donavi eis meum Purprisum de Kirkeham and domos
meas and molendinum and prata, etc. Carta Walteri Espec Priorat. de Kirkeham.
in Mon. Angl. 2 Par. fo. 106. n. 40.

Purrel, (Anno 35 Eliz. ca. 10.) A List ordained to be made at the end of
Kersies, to prevent deceit in diminishing their length.

Pursy, (Anno 43 Eliz. ca. 10.) A Term among Clothiers. See Rewey.

Pursuivant. See Poursuivant.

Purveyance See Pourveyance.

Purvieu, (Fr. Pourveu, A Patent, Gift, Grant; and Pourveu que, so that, on
condition that) Sir Edward Coke often uses it in his Works for the Body or that
part of an Act of Parliament which begins with Be it Enacted -- The Stat. of 3
Hen. 7. stands upon a Preamble and a Purview. 12 Rep. fo. 20.

Putage, (Putagium) Fornicatio ex part faeminae: quasi puttam agere, a Gall.
Put, i. Meretrix. -- Quod autem generaliter solet dici, Putagium haereditatem
non adimit; illud intelligendum est de putagio Matris; quia filius haeres
legitimus est, quem nuptiae demonstrant. Glanv. l. 7. ca. 12.

Putura, (q. Potura) A Custom claimed by Keepers in Forests, and sometimes by
Bailiffs of Hundreds, to take Man's meat, Horse meat, and Dogs meat of the
Tenants and Inhabitants gratis, within the perambulation of the Forest,
Hundred, etc. This Custom within the liberty of Knaresburg was long since
turned into the payment of 4 d. pro Putura. MS. de temp. Ed. 3. Pl. Coron. in
Com. Ebor. de Anno 21 Ed. 3. Putura in Chasia de Bovoland. 4 Inst. 307.

Per Puturam servient. Johannes Stanley Ar. clamat habere de quolibet tenente,
aliquam terram vocatam Old Oxgang Lands possidente, qualibet sexta septimana
victum prout Paterfamilias residens super hujusmodi terram habuerit. Pl. in
Itin. apud Cestriam 14 Hen. 7. And the Land subject to this Custom is called
terra puturata. Pla. apud Cestr. 31 Ed. 3.

Placita apud Preston 17 Edw. 3. coram Willielmo de Shareshull, Rogero de
Hungerford, Henrico de Hungerford, Henrico de Hanbury, Simone de Pakeman, and
Rogero de Hillary.
JOhannes de Radecliffe, Seneschallus libertatis de Penwortham attachiatus fuit
ad respondendum Abbati de Evesham de placito, etc. Johannes clamat unam Puturam
in Prioratu de Penwortham, qui est quaedam Cella Abbatiae de Evesham, pro se
and Ministris, equis and garcionibus suis, per unum diem and duas noctes, de
tribus septimanis in tres septimanas, viz. de victualibus, ut in esculentis,
and poculentis, ad custus Prioratus praedicti, indebite.

Pyker alias Pycar, A kind of Ship, mentioned Anno 31 Edw. 3. Stat. 2. ca. 2.

Pyrate. See Pirate.

Q.
QUadragesima Sunday, Is the first Sunday in Lent, and so called, because it is
about the fortieth day before Easter. See Quinquagesima.

Quadrantata terrae. See Fardingdeal.

Quadrugata terrae, A Teem Land; Quae quatuor equis agitur. -- Willielmus Prior
de Tuttebur. and omnes Monachi ejusdem loci concesserunt Ormo de Acouere and
heredibus suis unam Quadrugatam terrae quae attinet ad Man. de Malefeld solam
and quietam sicut tenuit in diebus Henr. de Ferr. etc. pro octo sol. redd. per
ann. ad Festum S. Martini, etc. Sine dat. M. S. Will. Dugdale Ar.

Quae plura, Was a Writ that lay where an Inquisition had been made by an
Escheator, of such Lands or Tenements, as any man died seized of, and all was
supposed not to be found by the Office; this was therefore to enquire what more
Lands or Tenements the party dyed seized of. The form see in Reg. of Writs, fo.
293. and in Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 255. This Writ is now made useless by taking
away the Court of Wards and Offices post mortem. Anno 12 Car. 2. ca. 24.

Quaerens non invenit plegium, Is a return made by the Sheriff, upon a Writ
directed to him, with this Condition inserted. Si A. fecerit B. securum de
clamore suo prosequendo, etc. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 38.

Quae servitia, Is a Writ. See Per quae servitia.

Quam diu se been gesserit, Is a Clause often used in Letters Pattent of the
Grant of Offices, as in those to the Barons of the Exchequer; which must be
intended in matters concerning their Office; and is no more then the Law would
have implied, if the Office had been granted for life. 4 Inst. fo. 117.

Quale jus, Is a Writ Judicial, that lies, where a man of Religion has Judgment
to recover Land, before execution is made of the Judgment; for this Writ must
go forth to the Excheator, between Judgment and Execution, to enquire whether
the Religious Person has right to recover, or whether the Judgment be obtained
by Collusion between the Demandant and Tenant, to the intent that the true Lord
be not defrauded. See Westminster. 2. ca. 32. The form of it see in Reg. of Writs
Judic. fo. 8. 16. and New Book of Entries.

Quantum meruit, i. How much he has deserved; an Action of the Case so called,
grounded upon a promise to pay a man for doing any thing so much as he should
deserve or merit.

Quare ejecit infra terminum, Is a Writ that lies for a Lessee, in case where
he is cast out of his Farm, before his term be expired, against the Feoffee or
Lessor that ejects him; And it differs from the Ejectione firmae; because this
lies where the Lessor, after the Lease made, enfeoffs another, who ejects the
Lessee; the Ejectione firmae lies against any other stranger that ejects him.
The effect of both is all one, which is, to recover the residue of the term.
See Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 197, and Reg. of Writs, fo. 227.

Quare impedit, Is a Writ that lies for him, who has purchased an Advowzen,
against him that disturbs him in the right of his Advowzen, by presenting a
Clerk thereto, when the Church is void. And it differs from the Writ called
Assisa ultimae Presentationis, because that lies, where a man or his Ancestors
formerly presented; and this for him that is the purchaser himself. Where a man
may have that Assise, he may have this Writ, but not contrariwise. See new Book
of Entries on this Writ, Bracton, lib. 4. Tract. 2. ca. 6. Fitz. Not. Br. fo.
32. and Westminster. 2. ca. 5.

Quare incumbravit, Is a Writ that lies against the Bishop, who, within six
Months after the vacation of a Benefice, confers it on his Clerk, whilst two
others are contending in Law, for the right of presenting. Old Not. Br. fo. 30.
Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 48. and Reg. of Writs, fo. 32.

Quare intrusit matrimonio non satisfacto, Is a Writ that lay for the Lord
against his Tenant, being his Ward, who, after convenable Marriage offered him,
marries another, and enters nevertheless upon his Land, without agreement first
made with his Lord and Guardian. But all Wardships being taken away (by Act 12
Car. 2. ca. 24.) This Writ is become useless.

Quare non permittit, Is a Writ, that lies for one, that has right to present
for a turn against the Proprietary. Fleta, lib. 5. ca. 16.

Quare non admisit, Is a Writ that lies against the Bishop, refusing to admit
his Clerk, who has recover d in a Plea of Advowzen, Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 47.

Quarentena habenda, Is a Writ that lies for a Widow to enjoy her Quarentene,
Reg. of Writs, fo. 175.

Quarentene, (Quarentena,) Is a benefit allowed by the Law to the Widow of a
Landed Man deceased, whereby she may challenge to continue in his capital
Message, or chief Mansion House, (so it be not a Castle) by the space of 40
days after his decease. Bracton, lib. 2. ca. 40. And, if the heir, or any
other attempt to eject her, she may have the Writ de Quarentena habenda, Fitz.
Not. Br. fo. 161. Maneat (vidua) in Capitali Messuagio mariti sui per
quadraginta dies post obitum mariti sui, infra quos dies assignotur ei dos,
nisi prius assignata fuerit, vel nisi domus illa sit Castrum. Mag. Carta ca. 7.
-- See Fleta, lib. 5. ca. 23.

Quarentene signifies also a quantity of ground containing 40 Perches, --
quatuor carucatas terrae arabilis, continentes in longitudine 8 quarentenas,
and 8. quarentenas in latitudine. Chart. Withlasii Regis Merciorum apud Ingulf.
-- Nam long debet esse pax Regis a porta sua ubi residens fuerit a quatuor
partibus loci illius, hoc est quatuor miliaria and tres quarentenae and novem
acrae latitudine, and 9 pedes, and 9 palmae and novem grana ordei. LL. Hen. 1.
ca. 17. Quarentena in London ponetur pro respectu habend. per 40 dies post
summonitionem per breve Regis, ut consulant, etc. si sibi viderint expedire.
MS. de temp. Ed. 3. Penes Johannem Trevor Arm. And Quarentine is also the Term
of 40 days, wherein any person, coming from Foreign Parts infected with the
Plague, is not permitted to land, or come on shore, until so many days are
expired.

Quare obstruxit, Is a Writ that lies for him, who, having a liberty to pass
through his neighbors ground, cannot enjoy his right, for that the owner has
so strengthened it. Fleta, lib. 4. ca. 26. Sect. Item si minus.

Quarrel, (Querela, a querendo) This properly concerns personal Actions, or mixed
at the highest, for the Plaintiff in them is called Querens, and, in many of
the Declarations in trespass it is said queritur. Yet, if a Man release all
Quarrels, or querels, (a Man's Deed being taken most strongly against himself) it
is as strong as all Actions; for, by it all actions real and personal are
released.

Quareria, A Quarry of Stone. -- Praeterea dedi eis Turbariam, and Petrariam
and Quareriam, ubicunque invenire poterint in territorio villae de Hepp, etc.
Mon. Ang. Par. 2. fo. 595. b.

Quarter. -- Eight Bushels striked make the Quarter of Corn. Anno 15 Rich. 2.
ca. 4.

Quarter Sessions, Is a Court held by the Justices of Peace in every County
once every Quarter of a year, 25 Edw. 3. Stat. 1. ca. 8. How far the
Jurisdiction thereof extends, see Lamb. Eiren. lib. 4. and Sir Tho. Smith de
repub. Angl. lib. 2. ca. 19. Originally it seems to have been erected only for
matters touching the breach of the Peace; but now it extends much farther, by
power given to the Justices of Peace by many late Statutes.

Quash, (Quassare. Fr. Quasser.) To overthrow or annul. Bracton. lib. (...).
Tract. 2. ca. 3. number. 4. Anno 11 Hen. 6. ca. 2. As, if the Bailiff of a liberty
return any out of his Franchise, the Array shall be quashed; as an Array,
returned by one that has no Franchise, shall be quashed. Coke on Lit. fo. 156.

Quechord, (Anno 17 Edw. 4. ca. 3.) A kind of Game, prohibited by the said
Statute: perhaps the same we now call Shovelbord.

Que est mesme, (Signifying verbatim, which is the same thing) Is used with us,
as a word of Art, in an action of trespass or such like, for a direct
justification of the very act complained of by the Plaintiff, as a wrong. For
example, in an Action of the Case, the Plaintiff says, the Lord threatened his
Tenants at will in such sort, as he forced them to give up their Lands. The
Lord for his defense pleads, that he said unto them, if they would not depart,
he would sue them at Law: This being the same threatening that he used, or, to
speak artificially, que est le mesme, the Defense is good. See Kitchen, in Cha.
Que est le mesme, fo. 236.

Que estate, Signifies verbatim, which estate, or the same Estate; and is a
Plea, whereby a man, entituling another to Land, etc. says, that the same
estate himself had, he has from him; For example, in a Quare impedit, the
Plaintiff alleges, that such four persons were seized of Lands, whereunto the
Advowson in question was appendant in Fee, and did present to the Church, and
afterward the Church was void, que estate -- that is, which estate of the four
persons he has now during the vacation, by virtue whereof he presented, etc.
Broke tit. que estate, fo. 175. and see Coke on Litt. fo. 121.

Queen (Regina) Is either she that holds the Crown of this Realm by right of
Blood, or she that is Married to the King, which last is called Queen Consort.
In the former signification, she is in all construction the same that the King
is, and has the same power in all respects: In the later, she is inferior, and
a person exempt from the King; for, she may sue, and be sued in her own name:
yet, what she has is the Kings, and what she loses the King loses. Stamf.
Praerog. ca. 2. fo. 10. and Coke, lib. 4. Copyhold-Cases, fo. 23. b.

Queen gold, (Aurum Reginae) Is a Royal Duty, or Revenue belonging to every
Queen Consort, during her Marriage to the King of England, both by Law, Custom,
and Praescription, payable by sundry persons in England and Ireland (upon
diverse Grants of the King) by way of Fine or Oblation, amounting to ten Marks
or upwards; to wit, one full tenth part above the entire Fine, as Ten pounds
for every Hundred pounds Fine, upon Pardons, Contracts, or Agreements; which
becomes a real debt and duty to the Queen, by the name of Aurum Reginae, upon
the Parties bare agreement with the King for his Fine, and recording it,
without any promise or contract, for this tenth part exceeding it. Lib. Nig.
Scac. pa. 43. 44. Cokes 12. Rep. fo. 21. 22. and Mr. Pryns Tractate, on this
Subject per tot.

Quein redditum reddat, Is a Writ Judicial, lying for him to whom a Rent-Seck,
or Rentcharge is granted, by Fine levied in the Kings Court, against the
Tenant of the Land, that refuses to atturn to him, thereby to cause him to
atturn. Old. Not. Br. fo. 156.

Querela frescae fortiae, Is a Writ. See Freshforce.

Querela coram Rege and Consilio, etc. Is a Writ, whereby one is called to
justify a complaint of a Trespass made to the King himself, before the King
and his Counsel, Reg. of Writs, fo. 124.

Questus est nobis, etc. Is the form of a Writ of Nuisance, which, by the Stat.
Anno 13 Ed. 1. ca. 24, lies against him to whom the House or other thing that
breeds the Nuisance is alienated; whereas before the Statute this Action lay
only against him that first levied, or caused the Nuisance to the damage of his
Neighbor.

Quia improvide, Seems to be a Supersedeas granted in the behalf of a Clerk of
the Chancery, sued against the privilege of that Court, in the Common Pleas,
and pursued to the Exigend, or in many other cases, where a Writ is erroneously
sued out, or misawarded. See Dyer, fo. 33. n. 18.

Quid juris clamat, Is a Writ Judicial, issuing out of the Record of a Fine,
which remains with the Custos Brevium of the Common Pleas, before it be
engrossed (for after it cannot be had) and it lies for the Grantee of a
reversion or remainder, when the particular Tenant will not atturn. West, par.
2. Symbol. tit. Fines. Sect. 118. See New Book of Entries, on this Writ.

Quid pro quo, Is an artificial Speech, signifying as much as the Greek (...)
among the Civilians, which is a mutual performance of both parties to a
Contract, or a giving one thing for another, as 10 l. for a Horse, Kitchen, fo.
184.

Quietancia sectae Hundredi and Wichmote -- Per haec verba Johannes Stanley Ar.
clamat quod ipse and tenentes sui non teneantur venire ad Curiam istam. Pl. in
Itin. apud Cestriam 14 Hen. 7. See Acquietancia.

Quietancia Assisarum super Assisam -- Per haec verba Johannes Stanley clamat,
quod ipse, and tenentes and residentes sui non ponantur in Assisis jurat. nec
magnis Assisis. Plac. ut supra.

Quietus, (i. Freed or acquitted) Is a word used by the Clerk of the Pipe, and
Auditors in the Exchequer, in their Acquittances or Discharges given to
Accountants; usually concluding with abinde recessit quietus, which is called a
Quietus est, and is mentioned in the Act of general Pardon, 12 Car. 2. ca. 11.
and 14 Car. 2. ca. 21. A Quietus est granted to the Sheriff, shall discharge
him of all accounts due to the King. Anno 21 Jac. ca. 5.

Quinquagesima Sunday, Is that we call Shrove-Sunday, and is so called, because
it is about the fiftieth day before Easter; of which you may read in Durandi
Rationali Divinorum, cap. de Quinquagesima, and mentioned in Briton, and other
ancient Law-writers.

Quinque portus, The Cinque Ports, which are, 1. Hastings, 2. Romene, 3. Hethe,
4. Dover, and 5. Sandwich. To the first Winchelsea and Rye belong, which are
reckoned as part or members of the Cinque Ports. -- Servitium quod Barons
Quinque Portuum praescriptorum recognoscunt facere ad summonitionem Regis per
annum, si contigerit per 15 dies ad custum eorum proprium; ita quod primus dies
computatur a die quo vela navium erexerunt, usque parts ad quas n dear debent,
vel ulterius quamdiu Rex voluerit ad custum ejus. See Cinque Ports.

Quinsieme or Quinzime (Decima quinta) Is a French word signifying a Fifteenth;
with us it is a Tax, so called, because it is raised after the Fifteenth part
of Men's Lands or Goods. Anno 10 Rich. 2. cap. 1. and 7 Hen. 7. cap. 5. See
Fifteenth and Tax. It is well known by the Exchequer Roll what every Town
throughout England is to pay for a Fifteenth. Sometime this word Quinsieme or
Quinzime is used for the fifteenth day after any Feast, as the Quinzime of S.
John Baptist. Anno 13 Ed. 1. in the Preamble.

Quintane (Quintana) Fr. Quintaine and Bersant) A kind of exercise tkat young
Men did, and still do use in some parts of this Nation (especially Shropshire,)
by breaking Poles on Horseback against a strong Plank or Butteress set up in
the Highway, most used at marriages. What it was anciently, Matthew Paris thus
delivers. -- Eo tempore juvenes Londini statuto Pavone pro bravio, ad stadium
quod Quintana vulgariter dicitur, vires proprias and equorum cursus sunt
experti. In Hen. 3 sub initio Anni 1253.

Quint-exact (Anno 31 Eliz. cap. 3.) Quinto exactus, Is the last Call of a
Defendant, who is sued to the Outlary, when, if he appear not, he is by the
judgment of the Coroners, returned outlawed; if a Feme, waved. See Exigent.

Quinzime. See Quinsieme.

Quiteclaim (Quieta clamantia) Is a Release or Acquitting a Man for any Action,
that he has or may have: A quitting of ones Claim or Title. Bracton, lib. 5.
tract. 5. cap. 9. number. 9. and Lib 4. tract. 6. cap. 13. number. 1.

Quit-rent (Quietus Redditus) Quasi, Quiet-rent, is a certain small Rent,
payable yearly by the Tenants of most Manors, which when paid, the Tenant is
quiet and free, till it becomes due again. This in some ancient Records is
written White-rent; because paid in Silver.

Quod ei Deforceat, Is a Writ that lies for the Tenant in Tail, Tenant in
Dower, or Tenant for Life, against him that entered or took away their Land
recovered, or against his Heir. See Brook hoc tit. Reg. of Writs, fol. 171. and
Westminster. 2. cap. 4.

Quod Clerici non eligantur in Officio Balivi, etc. Is a Writ that lies for a
Clerk, who, by reason of some Land he has, is made, or like to be made either
Bailiff, Bedel, or Reeve, or some such like Officer. See Clerico infra sacros,
etc. And Regist. of Writs, fol. 187.

Quod permittat, Is a Writ that lies for the heir of him that is disseised of
his Common of Pasture, against the heir of the Disseisor, being dead. Briton
(cap. 8.) says, This Writ lies for him, whose Ancestor died seized of Common of
Pasture, or other like thing annexed to his Inheritance, against the Deforceor
See Brook hoc tit. and New Book of Entries.

Quod Clerici beneficiati de Cancellaria, Is a Writ to exempt a Clerk of the
Chancery, from contributing toward the Proctors of the Clergy in Parliament.
Regist. of Writs, fol. 261 a.

Quod persona nec Prebendarii, etc. Is a Writ that lies for Spiritual Persons
that are distrained in their Spiritual Possessions, for the payment of a
Fifteenth, with the rest of the Parish. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 176.

Quod non permittat. See Consuetudinibus and Servitiis.

Quo jure, Is a Writ, that lies for him who has Land, wherein another
challenges Common of Pasture, time out of mind; and it is to compel him to
show by what title he so challenges it. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 128. and Britton,
cap. 59. at large.

Quo minus, Is a Writ that lies for him, who has a grant of House-bote and
Hay-bote, in another Man's Woods, against the Grantor making such Waste, as the
Grantee cannot enjoy his Grant. Old Not. Br. fol. 148. and Kitchen, fol. 178.
This Writ also lies for the Kings Farmer in the Exchequer, against him to whom
he sells any thing by way of Bargain, touching his Farm, or who owes him any
Money, or against whom he has any cause of Personal Action. Perkins, Grants 5.
For he supposes by the Vendees detaining any due from him, he is made less
able to pay the King Rent. Under which pretense any one, who pays the King a
Fee-farm Rent, may have this Writ against any other person for any debt, or
damage, and bring the Cause to trial in the Exchequer.

Quo Warranto, Is a Writ that lies against him, who usurps any Franchise or
Liberty against the King, as to have Waiff, Stray, Fair, Market, Court Baron,
Leet, or such like, without good Title. Old Not. Br. fol. 149. or else against
him that intrudes himself as heir into Land. Bracton, lib. 4. tract. 1. cap. 2.
number. 3. And 18 Edw. 1. stat. 2 and 3. And 30 Ejusdem. See also the New Book of
Entries.

Quorum, Is a word often mentioned in our Statutes, and much used in
Commissions, both of Justices of the Peace, and others. As for example, where a
Commission is directed to five persons, or to any three of them, whereof A. B.
and C. D. to be two, in this Case A. B. and C. D. are said to be of the Quorum,
because the rest cannot proceed without them. So a Justice of the Peace and
Quorum is one, without whom, the rest of the Justices in some cases cannot
proceed. Anno 3 Hen. 7. cap. 3. And 32 Hen. 8. cap. 43.

Quyke, Was anciently used for a Live or Quick Beast. John Bracebrige of
Kinnersbury Esquire in his Will, dated 7 Hen. 8. Ordained, That his best Quyke
should be taken in the name of his Mortuary.

R.
RAchetum alias Rachatum (from the Fr. Rachater or Racheter, i. Redimere)
Theifbote, the Compensation or Redemption of a Theif. Nullus capiat Rachetum,
hoc est Theifbute de Latrocinio. 1 Stat. Rob. R. Scot. cap. 9.

Rack (Fidiculae, sic dict. quia eis rei in eculeo torquentur, ut fides
inveniatur) An Engine, in the Tower, with Cords, and Strings, to extort
Confession from Delinquents. John Holland, Earl of Huntingdon, was by King
Henry the Sixth, created Duke of Exeter, Anno 16 H. 6. the King granted to him
the Office of Constableship of the Tower. He and William de la Poole, Duke of
Suffolk, and others, intended to have brought in the Civil Laws: For a
beginning whereof, the Duke of Exeter, being Constable of the Tower, first
brought into the Tower the Rack or Brake, allowed in many Cases by the Civil
Law; and thereupon it was called The Duke of Exeters Daughter, because he first
brought it thither. 3 Inst. fol. 35.

Rack-vintage (Anno 32 Hen. 8. cap. 14.) Is a second Vintage or Voyage for
Wines by our Merchants into France, etc. for Racked Wines, that is, Wines drawn
from the Lees. from this Voyage, our Merchants commonly return about the end of
December, or beginning of January.

Rad Knights. See Rod Knights.

Radechenistres, i. Liberi homines. Domesday, tit. Leofminstre (Lempster) --
Ibi erant 8 Praepositi, and 8 Bedelli, 8 Radechenistres, 238 Villani, and 75
Bordarii, etc.

Radman, Domesday, tit. Herefscire. 15 Bordar. Praepositus and unus Radman,
etc. Seems to be the same with Rod-Knight.

Rageman, Is a Statute so called, of Justices assigned by Edward the First and
his Council, to hear and determine, throughout all England, all Complaints of
Injuries done within five years next before Michaelmas, in the Fourth year of
His Reign.

Ragmans-Roll Edward the Third (says Sir Richard Baker in his Chronicle, fol.
127.) surrendered by His Charter, all His Title of Sovereignty to the Kingdom
of Scotland, restored diverse Deeds and Instruments of their former Homages and
Fealties, with the famous Evidence called Ragmans Roll.

Ran (Sax.) Aporta Rapina, so open a spoiling a Man, as it cannot be denied.
Hoveden, inter ea quae Willielmus prinius constituit in emendationem legum
Angliae, part post. Hen. 2. -- Decretum est etiam ibi, ut si Francigena
appellaverit Anglicum, de perjurio, aut murdro, furto, homicidio, Ran, quod
dicunt apertam rapinam, quod negari non potest, Anglicus se defendet per quod
melius voluerit, aut judicio ferri, aut duello. Consonant whereunto it is to
this day vulgarly said by one, who takes the Goods of another injuriously, and
by violence: He has taken all he could Rap and ran; rap, from rapio, to snatch.

Range (from the Fr. Ranger, i. To order, array, or dispose of) Is used in the
Forest Laws, both as a verb (as to range) and as a Substantive (as to make
range) Char. de Foresta, cap. 6. The Ranger is a sworn Officer of the Forest,
of which sort, there are Twelve, Idem. cap. 7. whose authority is partly
described by his Oath, set down by Manwood, Par. 1. page 50. but more
particularly, in Par. 2. cap. 20. number. 15, 16, and 17. His Office chiefly
consists in these three points, Ad perambulandum quotidie per terras
deafforestatas, ad videndum, audiendum and inquirendum tam de malefactis, quam
de malefactoribus in Balliva sua; ad refugandum feras forestae tam Veneris quam
Chaseae de terris deafforestatis, in terras afforestatas and ad presentandum
omnes transgressiones Forestae in terris deafforestatis factas, ad proximas
Curias illius Forestae tentas. This Ranger is made by the Kings Letters Patent,
and has a Fee of 20 or 30 l. paid yearly out of the Exchequer, and certain
Fee-Deer.

Ransom (Redemptio, Fr. Rencon.) Signifies properly the sum paid for redeeming
a Captive, or Prisoner of War, and sometimes a great sum paid for the pardoning
some heinous crime. Anno 1 Hen. 4. cap. 7. and 11 Hen. 6. cap. 11. When one is
to make a Fine and Ransom, the Ransom shall be treble to the Fine. Cromp. Just.
of Peace, fol. 142. a. And Lamb. Eiren. lib. 4. cap. 16. page 556. Horn (in his
Mirror of Justices) makes this difference between Amerciament and Ransom; that
Ransom is the redemption of a corporal punishment, due by Law to any offense.
Lib. 3. cap. de Amerciament taxable. See Coke on Littl. fol. 127. a.

Rape (Rapus vel Rapa) Is a part of a County, signifying as much as a Hundred,
and sometimes Quod plures in se continet Hundredos: As, all Sussex is divided
into six Rapes only; viz. The Rape of Chichester, Arundel, Brember, Lewis,
Penensey, and Hastings; every of which, besides their Hundreds, has a Castle,
River, and Forest belonging to it. Came. Brit. page 225. and 229. These parts
are in other Counties called Tithings, Lathes, or Wapentakes. Smith de Repub.
Angl. lib. 2. cap. 16.

Rape (Raptus) Is when a Man has carnal knowledge of a Woman by force, and
against her will: But if the Woman conceive, it is no Rape, for she cannot
conceive unless she consent. Coke on Littl. lib. 2. cap. 11. sect. 190. This
offense is Felony in the Principal, and his Aiders. Anno 13 Rich. 2. stat. 2.
cap. 1. 11. Hen. 4. cap. 13. -- 1 Edw. 4. cap. 1. and Westminster. 2. cap. 13. and
shall not be allowed Clergy. Anno 18 Eliz. cap. 7. But Fleta says, the
complaint must be made within forty days, else the Woman may not be heard, Lib.
3. cap. 5. sect. Praeterea. And carnal knowledge of a Woman under ten years old
is Felony. Anno 8 Eliz. cap. 6. Of the diversity of Rapes, see Cromptons
Justice of Peace, fol. 43 and 44. The offender is called Raptor, a Ravisher,
and in Bractons time he was punished with the loss of his Eyes and Stones, Quia
calorem stupri induxerunt. 3 Inst. fol. 60.

Rape of the Forest (Raptus Forestae) Inter delicta numeratur, quorum cognitio
ad unicum Regem spectat. LL. Hen. 1. cap. 10. -- Violentus concubitus, Raptus
Forestae, Relevationes Baronum suorum, etc. Trespass committed in the Forest,
by violence.

Rapine (Rapina) To take a thing secretly against the owners will, is properly
Theft, openly, or by violence, is Rapine. Anno 14 Car. 2. cap. 22. and 18
Ejusdem, cap. 3.

Raptu haeredis, Is a Writ lying for the taking away an heir, holding in
Socage; of which, there are two sorts, one when the heir is married; the other,
when not. Of both, see Reg. of Writs, fol. 163. b.

Raze (Raseria) -- Toll shall be taken by the Raze, and not by the Heap or
Cantel. Ordinance for Bakers, Brewers, etc. cap. 4. it seems to have been a
measure of Corn, now disused -- Debentur ei annuatim december and octo Raseriae
avenae and sex Raseriae ordei, etc. Spel.

Rate Tithe, Is where Sheep or other Cattle are kept in a Parish for less time
then a year, the owner must pay Tithe for them Pro rata, according to the
Custom of the place. Fitzh. Not. Br. fol. 51. Brook, Disms. 26. Pro rata
dicimus pro proportione, vel proportionaliter. Lindwood.

Ratification (Ratificatio) A ratifying or confirming: It is particularly used
for the confirmation of a Clerk in a Prebend, etc. formerly given him by the
Bishop, etc. where the right of Patronage is doubted to be in the King. See
Reg. os Writs, fol. 304.

Rationabili part bonorum, Is a Writ that lies for the Wife, against the
Executors of her Husband, denying her the third part of her Husbands goods,
after Debts and Funeral charges paid. Fitzh. Not. Br. fol. 222. who there cites
the 18 Chapter of Magna Charta, and Glanvile, to prove, that, according to the
Common Law of England, the goods of the deceased, his debts first paid, should
be divided into three parts, whereof his Wife to have one, his Children the
second, and the Executors the third: And this Writ lies as well for the
Children, as for the Wife; which appears also by the Reg. of Writs, fol. 142.
b. Yet it seems to have use, only where the Custom of the Country serves for
it. See the New Book of Entries, on this word.

Rationabilibus divisis, Is a Writ, that lies where two Lords have their
Seigneuries joining together, for him that finds his Waste encroached upon
within the memory of Man, against the encroacher, thereby to rectify the
bounds of their Seigneuries; in which respect, Fitzherbert calls it, in its own
nature, a Writ of Right. The Old Not. Br. says this may be by Justicies, which
may be removed by a Pone out of the County, to the Common Bench. See Fitz. Not.
Br. fol. 128.

Ravishment (Raptus, Fr. Ravissement, i. Direptio, raptio) Signifies an
unlawful taking away either a Woman, or an Heir in Ward. Sometimes it is also
used in one signification with Rape.

Ravishor (Raptor) He that deflowres a Woman by violence. See the penalty for
Ravishing, or being Ravished, does afterward consent, in the Statute of 6
Rich. 2. cap. 6. See Rape.

Ray, Seems to be a word appropriated to Cloth, never colored or dyed. Anno
11 Hen. 4. cap. 6. Worsteds Ray. Anno 17 Rich. 2. cap. 3.

Reafforested, Is where a Forest has been disafforested, and again made
Forest; as the Forest of Dean by the Stat. 20 Car. 2. cap. 3.

Realty, Is an abstract of real, and is contradistinguished from Personalty.

Reasonable Aid (Rationabile auxilium) Was a duty, which the Lord of the Fee
claimed of his Tenants holding by Knights-service, or in Soccage, to marry his
daughter, or make his eldest Son a Knight. Westminster. 1. cap. 39. But see the Stat.
12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

Reattachment (Reattachiamentum) Is a second Attachment of him, who was
formerly attached, and dismissed the Court without day, as by the not coming of
the Justices, or some such casualty. Brook, hoc titulo. Where he makes
Reattachment General and Special. General, is where a Man is reattached for his
appearance upon all Writs of Assise lying against him. Brook eodem, number. 18.
Then, Special must be for one or more certain. Reg. of Writs Judicial, fol. 35.
See the New Book of Entries, verbo, Reattachment.

Rebellion (Rebellio) Did anciently signify a second resistance of such, as
being formerly overcome in battle by the Romans, yielded themselves to their
subjection. But now we use it generally, for the traitorous taking arms against
the King, be it by Natural Subjects, or by others, formerly subdued. Rebel is
sometimes attributed to him that wilfully breaks a Law. Anno 25 Edw. 3. cap. 6.
And 31 Ejusdem, stat. 3. cap. 2. Sometimes to a Villain disobeying his Lord.
Anno 1 Rich. 2. cap. 6. Commission of Rebellion, see in Commission.

Rebellious Assembly, Is a gathering together of Twelve persons or more,
intending to going about, practicing or putting in ure unlawfully of their own
authority, to change any Laws or Statutes of the Realm, or to destroy the
enclosure of any Park or or Ground enclosed, or Banks of any Fishponds, Pool,
or Conduit, to the intent the same shall remain void, or to the intent,
unlawfully to have Common, or Way in any of the said Grounds, or to destroy the
Deer in any Park, or any Warren of Conneys, Dove-Houses, Fish in any Ponds, or
any House, Barns, Mills, or Bays, or to burn Stacks of Corn, or to abate Rents
or Prizes of Victuals. Anno 1 Mar. cap. 12. and 1 Eliz. cap. 17. See West, par.
2. Symbol. tit. Indictments. Sect. 65. and Cromp. Justice of Peace, fol. 41. b.

Rebutter (Fr. Bouter, i. Repellere, To repel or bar) A Man grants Land to the
use of himself, and the issue of his Body, to another in Fee with Warranty, and
the Donee leaseth out the Land to a third person for years, the heir of the
Donor impleads the Tenant, alleging the Land was in Tail to him: The Donee
comes in, and by virtue of the Warranty made by the Donor, repels the heir,
because though the Land was intailed to him, yet he is heir to the Warrantor
likewise: And this is called a Rebutter.

Again, if I grant to my Tenant to hold Sine impetitione vasti, and afterward
implead him for Waste made, he may debar me of this Action, by showing my
grant; which is likewise a Rebutter. Brook tit. Bar, number. 23 and 25. See the
New Book of Entries, verbo, Rebutter. And Coke on Littl. fol. 365. a.

Recaption (Recaptio) Signifies a second Distress of one formerly distrained
for the same cause, and also during the Plea grounded on the former Distress.
It likewise signifies a Writ, lying for the party thus distrained, the form and
further use whereof, see in Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 71. Reg. of Writs, fol. 86. and
Reg. Judicial, fol. 69.

Receiver (Receptor and Receptator) Is used commonly in the evil part for such
as receive stolen Goods from Thieves, and conceal them; but annexed to other
words, as Receiver of Rents, etc. It signifies an Officer of good account,
belonging to the King, or other great Personage. Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 18. There
is also an Officer called the Receiver of the Fines upon original Writs in
Chancery.

Receiver-General of the Duchy of Lancaster, Is an Officer belonging to the
Duchy Court, who gathers in all the Revenues and Fines of the Lands of the
said Duchy, and all Forfeitures and Assessments, or what else is thence to be
received: Anno 39 Eliz. cap. 7.

Receiver-General of the Muster Rolls. Anno 35 Eliz. cap. 4.

Receipt. See Resceit.

Recluse (Reclusus) Is he who being entered into a Religious Order, is shut up
there, and stirs not out of the House or Cloister. Littl. fol. 92.

Recognizance (Fr. Recognoissance, i. Recognitio) Is a Bond or Obligation,
testifying the Recognizor to ow the Recognizee a sum of Money, and is
acknowledged in some Court of Record, or before some Judge, Master of Chancery,
Justice of Peace, etc. Anno 23 Hen. 8. cap. 6. Some Recognisances are not
sealed, but enrolled; and Execution by force thereof, is of all the Recognizors
Goods and Chattels (except Draught-Beasts, and Implements of Husbandry,) and
the Moiety of his Lands. West, Par. 1. Symb. lib. 2. sect. 149. And Reg. of
Writs, fol. 146, 151, and 252.

Recognizance has another signification, as appears in the Statute of Westminster.
1. cap. 36. For it is there provided and agreed, That if any Man be attainted
of Disseisin done in the time of the King that now is, or for taking any manner
of Goods, or Movables, and it be found against him by Recognizance of Assise
of Novel-Disseisin, the Judgment shall be, etc. where it is used for the
Verdict of the Twelve Men impannelled upon an Assise; which Twelve are also
called Recognitors of the Assise. Littl. fol. 72. Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 2.
cap. 9. number. 2. and lib. 3. tract. 1. cap. 11. number. 16. See the Statute of 20
Edw. 1. stat. 4. and New Book of Entries, verbo, Recognizance.

Recognizee, Is he is to whom one is bound in a Recognizance. Anno 11 Hen. 6.
cap. 10.

Recognition (Recognitio) An acknowledgment. It is the title of the first
Chapter of the Stat. 1 Jac.

Recognitione adnullanda per vim and duritiem facta, Is a Writ to the Justices
of the Common Bench, for the sending a Record touching a Recognizance, which
the Recognizor suggests to have been acknowledged by force and hard dealing;
that, if it so appear, it may be disannulled. Reg. o^ Writs, fol. 183.

Recognitors (Recognitores) Is a word used for the Jury impaneld upon an
Assise. The reason why they are so called, is, because they acknowledge a
Disseisin by their Verdict. Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 2. cap. 9. number. 2. See
Recogzance.

Record (from Recordare, to remember) Signifies an authentical and
uncontrolable testimony in writing, contained in Rolls of Parchment, and
preserved in Courts of Record, and they are said to be Vetustatis and veritatis
vestigia. Coke Praef. to 8 Rep. An Act committed to writing in any of the Kings
Courts, during the Term wherein it is written, is alterable, and no Record; but
that Term once ended, and the Act duly enrolled, it is a Record, and of that
credit, that admits no alteration or proof to the contrary. Brook tit. Record,
number. 20. and 22. yet see Cokes Rep. lib. 4. Rawlins Case, fol. 52. b. The King
may make a Court of Record by his Grant. Glanvile, lib. 8. cap. 8. Britton,
cap. 121. As Queen Elizabeth by Her Charter, dated 26 Aprilis, Anno 3 Regni
sui, made the Consistory Court of the University of Cambridge, a Court of
Record. There are reckoned three sorts of Records, viz. A Record Judicial, as
Attainder, etc. A Record Ministerial upon Oath, as an Office or Inquisition
found; a Record made by Conveyance and Consent, as a Fine or Deed enrolled, or
the like. Coke lib. 4. Ognels Case, fol. 54. b.

Recordare facias, or Recordari facias, Is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, to
remove a Cause, depending in an Inferior Court, as Court of Ancient Demesne,
Hundred or County, to the Kings Bench or Common Pleas, Fitz. Not. ^r. fo. 71.
B. and C. Where, and in what Cases this Writ lies, read Brook, tit. Recordare
and Pone. It seems to be called a Recordare, because it commands the Sheriff,
to whom it is directed, to make a Record of the proceedings by himself, and
others, and then to send up the Cause. See the Register, verbo, Recordare, in
the Table of Original Writs.

Recorder (Recordator) Is he, whom the Major, or other Magistrate of any City
or Town Corporate, having Jurisdiction or a Court of Record, within their
Precincts by the Kings Grant, does associate unto him, for his better direction
in matters of Justice, and proceedings according to Law. And he is for the most
part, a person well seen in the Common Law.

Recordo and Processu Mittendis, Is a Writ to call a Record, together with the
whole Proceedings in the Cause, out of an Inferior Court into the Kings Court.
See the Table of the Register of Writs.

Recordo utlagariae mittendo, Is a Writ Judicial, which see in Reg. Judic. fol.
32.

Recovery (Recuperatio, from the Fr. Recouvrer, i. Recuperare) Signifies an
obtaining any thing by Judgment or Trial of Law, as Evictio does among the
Civilians. But there is a true Recovery, and a feigned. The true one is an
actual or real Recovery of any thing, or the value thereof by Verdict and
Judgment. A feigned Recovery is a certain form or course set down by Law, to be
observed for the better assuring Lands or Tenements unto us; the end and effect
whereof is, to discontinue and destroy Estates in Remainder and Reversion, and
to Ba^^the Intails thereof. And to this Formality, there are (in a Recovery
with single Voucher) required three parties, the Demandant, the Tenant, and the
Vouchee. The Demandant, is he that brings the Writ of Entry, and may be termed
the Recoverer. The Tenant is he, against whom the Writ is brought, and may be
called the Recoveree. The Vouchee is he, whom the Tenant Voucheth, or calls to
Warranty for the Land is demand. A Recovery with double Voucher, is where the
Tenant voucheth one, who Voucheth another, or the Common Vouchee; and a
Recovery with treble Vouchers, is where three are Vouched. See West, par. 2.
Symb. tit. Recoveries, sect. 1.

But, to explain this Point: A Man, that is desirous to cut off an Estate-tail
in Lands or Tenements, to the end, to sell, give, or bequeath them, causes (by
the contrivance of his Council or Attorney) a feigned Writ of Entry, Sur
Disseisin in le Post, to be brought for the Lands, of which, he intends to dock
or cut off the Intail; and, in a feigned Count or Declaration thereupon made,
pretends he was disseised by him, who, by a feigned Fine or Deed of Bargain and
Sale, is named and supposed to be Tenant of the Lands. This feigned Tenant, if
it be a single Recovery, is made to appear and vouch the Bag-bearer of Writs,
for the Custos Brevium, in the Court of Common Pleas (in which Court only the
said Common Recoveries are to be suffered) who makes default; whereupon a
Judgment is, by such Fiction of Law, entered, That the Demandant shall recover,
and have a Writ of Seisin, for the possession of the Lands demanded, and that
the Tenant shall recover the value of the Lands, against the Lands of the
Vouchee-Bagbearer, a poor unlanded and illiterate person, which is feigned to
be a satisfaction for the Heir in Tail, though he is never to have or expect
it; one Edward Howes, a Bag-bearer, and Common Vouchee, having in the space of
25 or 30 years, passed or suffered to be recovered against him, by such
fictitious Actions and Pleadings, a considerable part of the Lands of England,
and obliged his own Lands, when he had none at all, to answer the value of the
Lands, recovered against the Tenants or Remainders in Tail. This feigned
Recovery is also called a Common Recovery; because it is a beaten and Common
Path to that end, for which it is ordained; viz. To cut off the Estates above
specified. See New Book of Entries, verbo, Recovery.

Recoupe (from the Fr. Recouper, i. To out again; also to reply quickly and
sharply to ^a peremptory Demand) We use it to Defaulk or Discount. As, if a Man
has Ten pound issuing out of certain Land, and he disseises the Tenant of the
Land in an Assise brought by the Disseisce, the Disseisor shall Recoupe the
Rent in the Damages.

Recreant (Fr.) Cowardly, faint-hearted. Hence Recroantise. See Cravent.

Recto, Is a Writ, called a Writ of Right, which is of so high a nature, that
whereas other Writs in Real Actions, are only to recover the possession of the
Lands or Tenements in question, which have been lost by an Ancestor, or by the
Party Demandant himself, this aims to recover both the Seisin, which some
Ancestor or the Demandant himself had; and also the property of the thing,
whereof the Ancestor died not seized, as of Fee, and whereby are pleaded and
tried both their Rights together, viz. That of Possession and Property. And if
a Man once lose his cause upon this Writ, either by Judgment, Assise, or
Battle, he is without remedy, and shall be excluded, Per exceptionem rei
judicatae. Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 1. cap. 1. and seq. where you may read much
on this subject. See Right.

It has two species: Rectum Patens, a Writ of Right Patent; and Rectum
Clausum, a Writ of Right Close. The first is so called, because it is sent
open, and is in nature the highest Writ of all other, lying always for him that
has Fee-simple in the Lands sued for, and not for any other. And when it lies
for him that challenges Fee-simple, and in what Cases, See Fitz. Not. Br. fol.
1. C. whom see also fol. 6. or a special Writ of Right in London, otherwise
called a Writ of Right, according to the Custom of London. This Writ is also
called Breve magnum de Recto. Reg. of Writs, fol. 9. and Fleta, lib. 5. cap.
32. sect. 1.

A Writ of Right close, Is a Writ directed to a Lord of ancient Demesne, and
lies for those, who hold their Lands and Tenements by Charter, in Fee-simple,
or in Fee-tayl, or for term of lite, or in Dower, if they are ejected out of
such Lands, or disseised. In this case a man or his he^ may sue out this Writ
of right close, directed to the Lord of ancient Demesne, commanding him to do
him right in his Court. This is also called Breve parvum de Recto, Reg. of
Writs, fo. 9. and Britton. ca. 120. in fine. See also Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 11.
and seq.

Yet, note that the Writ of right patent seems to be extended farther in use
then the original intention: For a Writ of right of Dower, which lies for the
Tenant in Dower, is patent, as appears by Fitzherb, Natura, Brevium, fo. 7. E.
The like may be said in diverse other cases; of which see also the Table of Reg.
of Writs, verbo, Recto. This Writ is properly tried in the Lords Court between
Kinsmen, who claim by one title from their Ancestor. But, how it may be thence
removed, and brought either to the County or Kings Court, see Fleta, lib. 6.
ca. 3, 4 and 5. Glanvile seems to make every Writ, whereby a Man sues for any
thing due unto him, a Writ of Right, lib. 10. ca. 1. lib. 11. ca. 1. lib. 12.
ca. 1.

Recto de dote, Is a Writ of Right of Dower, which lies for a Woman, that has
received part of her Dower, and proceeds to demand the Remnant in the same
Town, against the Heir. Of this see more in Old. Not. Br. fo. 5. and Fitz. fo.
7. E. Reg. of Writs, fo. 3. and New Book of Entries, verbo, Droyt.

Recto de dote unde nihil habet, Is a Writ of right, which lies in case, where
the Husband, having diverse Lands or Tenements, has assured no Dower to his
Wife, and she thereby is driven to sue for her Thirds against the Heir or his
Guardian. Old. Not. Br. fo. 6. Reg. of Writs, fo. 170.

Recto de rationabili part, Is a Writ that lies always between privies of
Blood, as Brothers in Gavelkind, or Sisters, or other Coparceners, as Nephews
or Neeces, and for Land in Fee-simple. For example, if a Man Lease his Land for
Life, and afterward dies, leaving issue two Daughters, and after the Tenant
for life likewise dies, the one Sister entering upon all the Land, and so
deforcing the other, the Sister so deforced shall have this Writ to recover her
part. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 9. Reg. of Writs, fo. 3.

Recto quando Dominus remisit, Is a Writ of right, which lies in case where
Lands or Tenements that are in the Seigneury of any Lord, are in demand by a
Writ of right. For, if the Lord hold no Court, or otherwise, at the Prayer of
the Demandant or Tenant, shall send to the Court of the King his Writ, to put
the Cause thither for that time, (saving to him at other times the right of his
Seigneury) then this Writ issues out for the other party, and has its name from
the words therein comprised, being the true occasion thereof. This Writ is
close, and must be returned before the Justices of the Common-Bank: Old. Not.
Br. fo. 16. Reg. of Writs, fo. 4.

Recto de advocatione Ecclesiae, Is a Writ of right, lying where a man has
right of Advowsen, and the Parson of the Church dying, a stranger presents his
Clerk to the Church, and he not having brought his Action of Quare impedit, nor
darrein presentment within six Months, but suffered the Stranger to usurp upon
him. Which Writ he only may have that claims the Advowsen, to himself and his
heirs in Fee. And, as it lies for the whole Advowsen, so it lies also for the
half, the third or fourth part. Old Not. Br. fo. 24. Reg. of Writs, fo. 29.

Recto de custodia terrae and haeredis, Is a Writ, which, by the Stat. 12 Car.
2. ca. 24. is become useless; as to Lands holden in Capite or by
Knight Service, but not where there is Guardian in Socage, or appointed by the
last will and Testament of the Auncestor. The form of it see in Fitz. Not. Br.
fo. 139. and Reg. of Writs, fo. 161.

Recto sur disclaimer, Is a Writ that lies, where the Lord, in the Court of
Common Pleas, does avow upon his Tenant, and the Tenant Disclaims to hold of
him, upon which Disclaimer he shall have this Writ, and if the Lord aver and
prove, that the Land is holden of him, he shall recover the Land for ever. Old
Not. Br. fo. 150. which is grounded on the Statute of Westminster. 2. ca. 2.

Rector, (Lat.) Signifies a Governor: And Rector Ecclesi^ parochialis, Is he
that has the Charge or Cure of a Parish Church, qui tantum jus in Ecclesia
parochiali habet, quantum Praelatus in Ecclesia Collegiata. It has been
overruled, that Rector Ecclesiae parochialis is he that has a Parsonage, where
there is a Vicaridge endowed, and he that has a Parsonage without a Vicaridge,
is called Persona: But, the distinction seems to be new and subtle. It is
certain Bracton uses it otherwise (lib. 4. Tract. 5. ca. 1.) in these words, Et
sciendum, quod Rectoribus Ecclesiarum parochialium competit Assisa, qui
instituti sunt per Episcopos and Ordinarios, ut Personae. Where it is plain,
that Rector and Persona are confounded. Note also these words there following;
Item dici possunt Rectores Canonici de Ecclesiis praebendatis. Item dici
possunt Rectores, vel quasi Abbates, Priores and alii, qui habent Ecclesias ad
proprios usus. See Vicar.

Rectory, (Rectoria) Is taken pro integra Ecclesia parochiali, cum omnibus suis
juribus, praedi. is, decimis, aliisque proventuum speciebus. Spelm.

Rectus in Curia, i. Right in Court: Is he that stands at the Bar, and no man
objects any offense against him. Smith de Repub. Angl. lib. 2. ca. 3.

Reddendum, Is used substantively for the clause in a Lease, etc. whereby the
Rent is reserved to the Lessor. Coke, lib. 2. Cromwels case, fo. 72. b.

Reddition, (Redditio) Is a judicial confession and acknowledgment that the
Land or thing in demand belongs to the Demandant, or at least not to himself.
Anno 34 and 35 Hen. 8. ca. 24. Perkins, Dower, 379. 380.

Redemptions, (Redemptiones) Mulctae gravissimae, utpote quae pro aestimatione
capitis ipsius delinquentis impinguntur, Anglice Ransomes. See Misericordia.

Redisseisin, (Redisseisina) Is a Disseisin made by him, who once before was
found and adjudged to have disseised the same Man of his Lands or Tenements:
for which there lies a special Writ, called a Writ of Redisseisin. Old. Not.
Br. fo. 106. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 188. See New book of Entries on this word. The
punishment for Redisseisin see in the Stat. 52 Hen. 3. ca. 8.

Redmans, or Radmans, Domesday in fine Cestrescire. Tit. Lanc. Blacburn
Hundret. -- Rex E. tenuit Peneverdant. Ibi 11 Car. sunt in Dominio and 6
Burgenses, and 3 Radmans, and 8 Vil. and 4 Bovar. These Redmans may be the same
in signification as the Rod or Rad Knights, Men, which by the Tenure, or Custom
of their Lands were to ride with, or for the Lord of the Manor about his
business or affairs.

Redubbors, or Adubbors, Are those that buy stolen Cloth, and, to the end it may
not be known, turn it into some other Color or Fashion. Briton. ca. 29. and
see 3 Inst. fo. 134.

Re-entry, (From the Fr. Rentrer, i. Rursus intrare) Signifies the resuming or
re-taking that possession, which we had lately foregone. As, if I make a Lease
of Land or Tenement, I do thereby foregoe, or quit the Possession; and, if I
condition with the Lessee that for non-payment of the Rent at the day, it shall
be lawful for me to re-enter; this is as much, as if I conditioned to take
again the Land into my own hands, and to recover the possession by my own fact,
without the assistance of Judge or Process.

Reer-County. See Rier County.

Re-extent, Is a second Extent made upon Lands or Tenements, upon complaint
made, that the former Extent was partially executed. Brook, tit. Extents, fo.
313.

Regal fishes, (Anno 1 Eliz. ca. 5.) Are Whales and Sturgeons; some add
Porpusses. The King by His Prerogative ought to have every Whale cast on shore,
or Wrecked in all places within this Realm (unless granted to Subjects by
special words) as a Royal-fish. The King himself shall have the Head and Body,
to make Oil and other things, and the Queen the Tail to make Whalebones for her
Royal Vestments. Pat. 1 Edw. 1. m. 25. dorso. See Tract. de Auro Reginae, pa.
127.

Regalia, (Anno 13 Eliz. ca. 16.) Dicuntur jura omnia ad fiscum spectantia: The
Rights of a King, which the Civilians say are six. 1. Power of Judicature. 2.
Power of Life and Death. 3. All kind of Arming. 4. Masterless Goods. 5.
Assessments. 6. And the value of Money. See Royalties. Also the Crown, Scepter
with the Cross, Scepter with the Dove, St. Edwards Staff, four several Swords,
the Globe, the Orb with the Cross, and other such like used at the Coronation
of our Kings, are called Regalia. See the Relation of the Coronation of King
Charles the Second in Bakers Chron.

Regalis Justicia, -- Item praefati Barons, (sc. Quinque Portuum) habere
debent, ut asserunt, per Chartam suam Regalem Justiciam in villa Gernemuth,
tempore Feriae una cum Balivo seu Praeposito villae praedictae, viz.
Cognitionem Assisae panis, ulnarum, ponderum and alidrum mensurarum, and
similiter void Strand and Den, secundum consuetudines suas usitata^, etc.
Rot. Parl. 8 Ed. 2. Nu. 262.

Regardant. Villain regardant, was called regardant to the Manor, because he
had the charge to do all base, villainous services within the same, and to see
the same freed of all filthy and loathsome things that might annoy it, Coke on
Litt. fo. 120. This word is only applied to a Villain or Neif, yet in old
Books it was sometimes applied to Services. ibid.

Regard, (Regardum and Rewardum) from the Fr. Regard, i. Aspectus, respectus;
though it has a well-known general signification of any care or respect, yet a
special also, wherein it is used only in matters of the Forest, and there two
ways; one for the Office of the Regarder, the other for the compass of ground
belonging to the Regarders charge. Cromp. Jurisd. fo. 175. 199. Touching the
former, thus Manwood. The Air, general Sessions of the Forest, or Justice
seat, is to be kept every third year; and, of necessity the Regarders of the
Forest must first make their Regard, which must be done by the Kings Writ; And,
the Regarder is to go through the whole Forest, and every Bailywic, to see and
enquire of the Trespasses therein; ad videndum, ad inquirendum, ad
imbreviandum, ad certificandum, etc. Part 1. Pa. 194, and 198. Touching the
second, the compass of the Regarders charge is the whole Forest, that is, all
that ground which is parcel of the Forest; for, there may be Woods within the
limits of the Forest, which are no part thereof, and those are without the
Regard. Manwood, Part 2. ca. 7. number. 4. Anno 20 Car. 2. ca. 3.

HEnricus Rex Anglorum omnibus Forestariis suis de Glocestershire, salutem.
Sciatis me concessisse and praesenti carta confirmasse Ecclesiae S. Jacobi de
Bristowa (in qua sepultus est Robertus Comes Glocestriae avunculus meus) and
Monachis ibidem Deo servientibus, pro salute mea, and pro anima ipsius Comitis,
quod terra ipsius Ecclesia, and Monachorum in ea Deo servientium de Cisseleia,
and boscus ejusdem terrae, sint quieta de Rewardo and decimationis exigentia
pro Essartis. Et prohibeo ne inter Assarta amodo computetur. Test Roberto
Episcopo Winton.

Regarder, (Regardator, Fr. Regardeur, i. Spectator) Is an Officer of the Kings
Forest, who is sworn to make the Regard of it, as has been used in ancient
time; and, to view and enquire of all offenses of the Forest, as well of Vert,
as of Venison, and of all concealments of any offenses or defaults of the
Foresters, and all other Officers of the Kings Forest, concerning the Execution
of their Offices, etc. More particulars of the Regarders Office, how he is
chosen, and the form of his Oath, see in Manwood, par. 1. page 188. 195. and
207. and Cromp. Juris. fol. 153.

Regio Assensu, Is a Writ, whereby the King gives His Royal Assent to the
Election of a Bishop or Abbot. Reg. of Writs, fol. 294. b.

Registry (Registrum, from the old Fr. Gister, i. In lecto reponere, suo loco
constituere) Signifies the Office, Books, and Rolls, wherein the proceedings of
the Chancery, or any Spiritual Court, are recorded: The Writer and Keeper
whereof, is called the Register, in Latin Registrarius.

Register is also the name of a Book, wherein are expressed most of the Forms
of Writs used at the Common Law, called the Register of the Chancery; of which,
thus Spelman -- Codex dicitur quo Brevia Regia, tam originalia quam judicialia
formularum inscribuntur; Hujus Codicis me minit Westminster. 2. cap. 24. and 25. This
Register is one of the most ancient Books of the Common Law; according to Coke
on Littl. fol. 159.

Register of the Parish Church (Registrum Ecclesiae Parochialis) Is that
wherein Baptisms, Marriages, and Burials are, in each Parish, overy year
orderly Registered. Which was laudably instituted by the Lord Cromwell in
September, Anno 1538. While he was Viccar-General to King Henry the Eight.

Regius Professor (Anno 12 Car. 2. ca. 17.) Henry the Eight founded Five
Lectures in each University, viz. Of Divinity, Hebrew, Greek, Law, and Physic;
the Readers of which Lectures are called in the University Statutes, Regii
Professores.

Regrator (Regratarius, Fr. Regrateur) Did anciently signify such, as bought
by great, and sold by retail. Anno 27 Edw. 3. stat. 1. cap. 3. But now it
signifies him that buys and sells any Wares or Victuals, in the same Market or
Fair, or within four miles thereof. Anno 5 Edw. 6. cap. 14. and 13 Eliz. 25. In
the Civil Law he is called Dardanarius, a Dardano quodam hujus sceleris
authore. In ancient time, both the Ingrosser and Regrator were comprehended
under the word Forestaller. 3 Inst. 195.

Rehabere facias seisinam quando Uicecomes liberabit seisinam de majore part,
quam deberet, Is a Writ Judicial. Reg. of Writs Judic. fol. 13. 51. There is
another Writ of this Name and Nature, fol. 54.

Rehabilitation (Anno 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21.) Is one of those Exactions mentioned
in the said Statute, to be claimed by the Pope heretofore in England; and seems
to signify a Bull or Breve, for re-inabling a Spiritual Person to exercise his
Function, who was formerly disabled; or a restoring to former ability.

Rejoinder (Rejunctio) Signifies an Answer or Exception to a Replication: For
first, the Defendant puts in an Answer to the Plaintiffs Bill, which is
sometimes called an Exception. The Plaintiffs Answer to that, is called a
Replication; and the Defendants to that, Duplication, in the Civil Law, and
Rejoinder with us, especially in Chancery. West, par. 2. Symbol. tit. Chancery,
sect. 56.

Rekpenis. Constitut. Rob. Dunelm. Episc. Anno 1276. cap. 3. -- Porro huic
Sanctioni adjicimus, quod si plures liberi proprium habentes, in parontum
pariter familia vivant, ad denarios qui nuncupantur Rekpenis minime arceantur,
cum sic communiter intrinscois aluntur a parentibus, sic in extrinsecis ab
eisdem laetentur pariter se defendi.

Relation (Re latio) Is, where, (in consideration of Law) two times, or other
things are considered, as if they were all one; and by this, the thing
subsequent is said to take his effect by relation at the time preceding: As if
A. deliver a writing to B. to be delivered to C. as the Deed of A. when C. has
paid a sum of Money: Now when the Money is paid, and the writing delivered,
this shall be taken as the Deed of A. at the time when it was first delivered.
So Bills of Parliament, to which the King Assents on the last day of
Parliament, shall relate, and be of force, from the first day of the beginning
of the Parliament. Coke (lib. 3. Butlers Case) says it is Fictio juris.

Release (Relaxatio) Is an Instrument, whereby Estates, Rights, Titles,
Entries, Actions, and other things, are sometimes extinguished, sometimes
transferred, sometimes abridged, and sometimes enlarged. West, par. 1. Symb.
lib. 2. sect. 509. And there is a Release in fact, and a Release in Law. In
fact, is that which the very words expressly declare; in Law, is that which
acquits by way of consequent, or intendment of Law; an example whereof, you
have in Perkins, Grants, 71. How these are available, and how not, see
Littleton at large, Lib. 3. cap. 8. And of diverse sorts of Releases, see New
Book of Entries, verbo, Release.

Releif (Relevamen, Relevium) Signifies a certain sum of Money, which the
Tenant, holding by Knight Service, Grand Sergeanty, or other Tenure, for which
Homage or Regalservice was due, and after the death of his Ancestor, paid to
his Lord at his entrance. Mag. Charta, cap. 2. and 28 Edw. 1. stat. 1. Bracton,
lib. 2. cap. 36. says it is called a Releif, Quia haereditas, quae jacens fuit
per Antecessoris decessum, relevatur in manus haeredum, and propter factam
relevationem, facienda erit ab haerede quaedam praestatio, quae dicitur
Relevium. See the Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. A Releife is likewise paid in
Soccage, Tonure, or Petit Serjeanty, where a Rent, or any thing is paid, by
rendering as much as the Rent, or payment reserved.

Relegation (Relegatio) A banishing, or sending away. As Abjuration is a
sorswearing the Realm for ever; Relegation is taken for a banishment for a time
only. Coke on Littl. fol. 133.

Religiosi, Religious men, such as entered into some Monastery, or Convent. In
ancient Deeds of sale of Land we often find the Vendee restrained from giving
or alienating it Viris Religiosis vel Judaeis; to the end the Land might not
fall into Mortmiain. See Judaism. -- Rex Vicecom. -- Praecipimus tibi quod
clamari facias sine dilatione per comitatum tuum, quod nulli, sicut diligunt
corpora and catalla sua, malum faciant vel dicant viris Religiosis vel
Clericis, contra pacem nostram; Et si quem inde attingere possimus, ad proximum
quercum cum suspendi faciemus. T. meipso apud Marlebergh, xi Apr. Claus. 9 Joh.
m. 3.

Remainder, Remanentia) Signifies an Estate limited in Lands, Tenements, or
Rents to be enjoyed after the Estate of another expired. For example, a man may
grant Land to one for term of his life, the remainder to another for term of
his life. Litt. ca. Atturnment, fo. 113. And this Remainder may be either for a
certain term, or in Fee-simple, or Fee-tail, as appears by Brock, tit. Done and
Remainder, fo. 245. -- Glanvile, lib. 7. ca. 1. in fine, has these words;
Notandum, quod nec Episcopus, nec Abbas, quia eorum Baroniae sunt de Elemosina
Dom. Regis, and antecessorum ejus, non possunt de Dominicis suis aliquam partem
dare ad remanentiam, sine assensu and confirmatione Domini Regis. In like sort
Bracton uses it, lib. 2. ca. 23. and lib. 4. Tract. 2. ca. 4. nu. 4. See New
Book of Entries, verbo Remainder. In eo igitur differunt Remanentia and
Reversio: haec post statutum terminum ad donatorem vel haeredes suos (uti in
fontem) remeat: illa vero ad tertium quempiam (seu extraneum) progreditur.
Spelm.

Remembrancers of the Exchequer, (Rememoratores Scaccarii) are three Officers;
one called the Kings Remembrancer, (Anno 35 Eliz. ca. 5.) The second the Lord
Treasurers Remembrancer, upon whose charge it lies, to put the Lord Treasurer,
and the rest of the Justices of that Court in remembrance of such things as are
to be called on, and dealt in for the Kings behoof. The third is called the
Remembrancer of the first fruits, Anno 5 Rich. 2. Stat. 1. ca. 14 and 15. These
(Anno 37 Edw. 3. ca. 4.) are called Clerks of the Remembrance.

The Kings Remembrancer enters in his Office all Recognizances taken before the
Barons for any the Kings Debts, for appearances, or observing of Orders; he
takes all Bonds for the Kings Debts, for appearance or observing Orders, and
makes Process upon them, for the breach of them. He Writes Process against the
Collectors of Customs, Subsidies, and Fifteenths, for their accounts. All
Informations upon Penal Statutes are entered in his Office; and all matters upon
English Bills in the Exchequer Chamber remain in his Office. He makes the Bills
of Compositions upon penal Laws, and takes the stalment of Debts; He has
delivered into his Office all manner of Indentures, Fines, and other Evidences,
that concern the assuring or passing any Lands to or from the Crown. He yearly
in Crastino animarum reads in open Court the Statute for election of Sheriffs,
and gives them their Oath: he reads in open Court the Oath of all the Officers
of the Court, when they are admitted.

The Treasurers Remembrancer makes Process against all Sheriffs, Escheators,
Receivers, and Bailiffs for their accounts: He makes Process of Fieri Facias
and Extent, for any Debts due to the King, either in the Pipe, or with the
Auditors; makes Process for all such Revenue, as is due to the King by reason of
his Tenures. He makes Record, whereby it appears whether Sheriffs and other
Accountants pay their Profers due at Easter and Michaelmas. He makes another
Record, whether Sheriffs and other Accountants keep their days of Prefixion.
All Estreats of Fines, Issues, and Americiaments, set in any Courts of
Westminster, or at the Assizes or Sessions, are certify d into his Office, and
are by him delivered to the Clerk of the Estreats to make out Process upon
them. There are also brought into his Office all the Accounts of Customers,
Controllers, and other Accountants, to make entry thereof on Record. See
Repertory of Records, fo. 121.

The Remembrancer of the First Fruits takes all Compositions, and Bonds for
First Fruits and Tenths, and makes Process against all such as pay not the same.

Remitter, (from the Lat. Remittere, to restore, or send back,) Where a man has
two titles to Land; and is seized of the later, and, that proving defective, he
is restored to the former more ancient title; This is a Remitter, Fitz. Not.
Br. fo. 149. F. Dyer, fo. 68. number. 22. and see Brook, tit. Remitter. If Land
descend to him that has right to it before, he shall be remitted to his better
Title, if he will. Doctor and Student, ca. 9. fo. 19. b. See Terms of the Law,
on this word, and Coke on Litt. li. 3. c. 12.

Render, (from the Fr. Render. i. Reddere, Retribuere) and so it signifies with
us. A Fine with render, is, where Lands are rendered back by the Cognizee to
the Cognizor. Also there are certain things in a Manor that lie in Prender,
that is, which may be taken by the Lord or his Officers when they chance,
without the Tenants leave, as Escheats, etc. and certain that lie in Render,
that is, must be rendered or answered by the Tenant, as Rents, Reliefs, Heriots,
and other Services. West, Par. 2. Symb. Sect. 126. C. Also some Service
consists in seisance, some in Render. Perkins, Reservations, 696.

Renegeld. Per Renegeld Johannes Stanley Ar. clamat habere de qualibet bovata
terrae infra feodum de Aldford 1 d, exceptis Dominicis terris and terris in
feodo praedicto infra Hundred. de Macclefeld. Rot. Plac. in Itin. apud
Cestriam, 14 Hen. 7.

Renovant, (from renovo, to renew, or make again) -- The Parson sued one for
Tithes to be paid of things renovant, but this Horse, being only for labor and
travel, would not renew, etc. Croke 2 Part, fo. 430.

Rent, (Reditus) Is a sum of Money, or other consideration, issuing yearly out
of Lands or Tenements. Plowden, Casu, Browning, fo. 132. b. 138. a. and 141. b.
Of which there are three sorts; Rent-service, Rentcharge, and Rent-seck.
Rent-service is, where a man holds his land by fealty, and certain rent, or by
Fealty, Service and Rent. Litt. lib. 2. ca. 12. fo. 44. or that which a man,
making a Lease to another for years, reserves yearly to be paid him for the
same. Rentcharge is, where a man charge his Land or Tenements, by Deed
indented, either in Fee, 'Fee-tail, or for term of life, with a sum of Money
to be paid to the Grantee yearly, with clause of distress for not payment
thereof, Litt. ubi supra. Rent-seck, otherwise Dry-rent, is that, which a man,
making over an Estate of Lands or Tenements by Deed indented, reserves yearly
to be paid him, without Clause of Distress, mentioned in the Indenture. See
more on this subject in the Terms of the Law; and the difference between a Rent
and an Annuity in Doctor and Student, ca. 30. Dial. 1.

Rents resolute, (Redditus resoluti) Are reckoned among the Fee-farm Rents, to
be sold by the Stat. 22 Car. 2. ca. 6. and are such Rents or Tenths, as were
anciently payable to the Crown from the Lands of Abbeys and Religious-Houses,
and, after the dissolution, these Abby-lands being demised to others, the said
Rents were still reserved, and made payable again to the Crown.

Renusiator, -- Et sunt communes latrones and Renusiatores hominum, etc. Trin.
28 Ed. 3. Ebor. 37. q.

Reparatione facienda, Is a Writ that lies in diverse cases, whereof one is,
where there are three Tenants in Common, Join-tenants, or pro indiviso* of a
Mill or House, which is fallen into decay; and the one is willing to repair it,
the other two not. In this case the party willing shall have this Writ against
the other two, Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 127. where you may see the form and many uses
of it, as also in Reg. of Writs, fo. 153. b.

Repeal, (From the Fr. rappel, i. revocatio) Signifies the same with us, as the
Repeal of a Statute, is the revoking or disanulling it. Brook uses Repellance
in the same sense.

Re-pleader, (Replacitare) Is to plead again, that which was once pleaded
before. See Brook and New Book of Entries, verbo, Repleader.

Replegiare de averiis, Is a Writ brought by one, whose Cattle are distrained,
or put in pound upon any cause by another, upon surety given to the Sheriff to
pursue, or answer the Action at Law. Anno 7 Hen. 8. ca. 4, Fitz. Not. Br. fo.
68. See Reg. of Writs for diverse sorts of this Writ; New Book of Entries,
ver^o* Replevin, and Dyer, fo. 173. number. 14.

Replevie, (Plevina) Is derived of replegiare, to re-deliver to the owner upon
pledges or suerty; and signifies the bringing the Writ called Replegiari
facias, by him that has his Cattle or other goods distrained by another for any
cause, and putting in Surety to the Sheriff, that upon delivery of the thing
distreined, he will pursue the Action against him that distreined, Coke on
Litt. lib. 2. ca. 12. Sect. 219. Goods may be replevied two manner of ways,
viz. by Writ, and that is by the Common Law, or by Plaint, and that is by
Statute Law, for the more speedy having again of their Cattle and Goods.
Replevie is used also for the bailing a man, Pl. Cor. fo. 72, 74. and Westminster. 1.
ca. 11. and 15.

Replevish, (Replegiare) Is to let one to Main-prise upon surety. Anno 3 Ed. 1.
ca. 11.

Replication, (Replicatio) Is an exception of the second degree made by the
Plaintiff upon the first Answer of the Defendant, West, par. 2. Symb. tit.
Chancery, Sect. 55. and Westminster. 2. ca. 36. It is that which the Plaintiff
replies to the Defendants Answer in Chancery; and, this is either General or
Special. Special is grounded upon matter arising out of the Defendants answer,
etc. General, so called, from the general words therein used.

Report, (From the Lat. Reportare) Is a public relation, or a bringing again
to memory Cases judicially argued, debated, resolved, or adjudged in any of the
Kings Courts of Justice, with such causes and reasons as were delivered by the
Judges of the same. Coke on Litt. fo. 293. Also when the Chancery, or other
Court refers the stating some case, or computing an account, etc. to a Master
of Chancery, or other Referree, his Certificate therein, is called a Report.

Reposition of the Forest, (i. A re-putting to) Was an Act whereby certain
Forest-grounds, being made Purlieu upon view, were by a second view laid or put
to the Forest again. Manwood, Par. 1. Pa. 178.

Reprisels, (Reprisalia) From the Fr. Reprise, i. Recaptio, vel captio rei
unius in alterius satisfactionem) Is all one in the Common and Civil Law.
Reprisalia est potestas pignorandi contra quemlibet de terra debitoris data
Creditori pro injuriis and damnis acceptis. Vocab. utriusque Juris. This among
the Ancient Romans was called Clarigatio. In the Statute 27 Edw. 3. Stat. 2.
ca. 17. it is called Law of Marque; because one destitute of Justice in another
Territory, redresseth himself by the goods belonging to Men of that Territory.

Reprises, (Fr. Resumptions, or takings back.) We use it for deductions and
duties, which are yearly paid out of a Manor or lands, as Rent-charges,
Pensions, Fees or Stewards, or Bailiffs, etc. Therefore we say the Manor of
Dale yields 40 l. per annum ultra Reprizas, besides all Reprises.

Requests, (Curia Requisitionum,) See in Court. The place where this Court was
held, was anciently called Camera alba. Rot. Parl. Anno 17 Edw. 3.

Resceit, (Receptio) Is an admission, or receiving a third person to plead his
right, in a cause formerly commenced between other two, New Book of Entries,
verbo Resceit. As if Tenant for life or years brings an Action, he in the
Reversion comes in, and prays to be received, to defend the Land, and to plead
with the Demandant. See Brook Tit. Resceit, fo. 205. and Perkins, Dower, 448.
Resceit is also applied to an admittance of Plea, though the controversy be
only between ^two. Brook. tit. Estoppel. Coke on Litt. fo. 192. b.

Resceit of homage, (Receptio Homagii) Is the Lords receiving Homage of his
Tenant at his admission to the Land. Kitchen, fo. 148. See Homage.

Rescous, (Rescussus) From the Fr. Rescousse, i. Liberatio, redemptio) Is an
illegal taking away, and setting at liberty, a Distress taken, or a person
arrested by Process, or course of Law; which is a Rescouse in Deed: And, where
a man has taken a Distress, and the Cattle distreined, as he is driving them to
the Pound, happen to go into the House of the owner, if he that took the
distress demand them of the owner, and he deliver them not, this is a Rescous
in Law. Coke on Litt. lib. 2. ca. 12. Sect. 237. It is also used for a Writ
which lies for this fact, called Breve de rescussu, whereof you may see both
the form and use in Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 101. Reg. of Writs, fo. 125. and New
Book of Entries, verbo Rescous: This, in some cases, is Treason, upon matters
of Treason, and in some Felony, in cases of Felony. Cromp. Justice, fo. 54. b.

Rescussor, Is he that commits such a Rescous. Crokes Rep. 2 Part, fo. 419.

Reseiser, (Reseisire) Is a taking again of Lands into the Kings hands, whereof
a general Livery or Ouster le main was formerly missued, contrary to order of
Law. Stamf. Praerog. 26. See Resumption.

Reservation, (Reservatio) A providing for store; as when a man departs with
his Land, but reserves or provides for himself a rent out of it for his own
livelihood. Sometimes it serves to reserve a new thing* and sometimes to except
part of the thing in esse that is granted. See Perkins Reservations, per totum.

Resiance, (Resiantia) From the Fr. Reseant vel resseant, i. Resident)
Signifies a Man's abode or continuance in a place, Old Nut. Br. fo. 85. Whence
also comes the participle resiant, that is, continually dwelling or abiding in
a place, Kitchen, fo. 33. It is all one in truth with residence, but that
custom ties this only to persons Ecclesiastical. Veteri autem jure nostro
etiam and Scotico aliud significat, utpote morbum validum seu veteranum, quo
quis exire de suis aedibus prohibetur. Essonium igitur quod de malo lecti
nuncupatur; hoc est excusatio, quod ratione infirmitatis sistere se in foro non
valeat, essonium nuncupant de reseantisa. Glanvile, lib. 1. ca. 11. --
Quandoque intervenit (Essonium) ex infirmitate de reseantisa. Ubi in margin
notatur, Essonium de reseantisa idem valet quod essonium de malo lecti. -- Et
Galli apertius dixerunt Exoine de mal resseant. Spelm.

Residence, (R(...)tia) Is peculiarly used both in the Canon and Common Law,
for the continuance or abode of a Parson or Vicar upon his Benefice: The defalt
whereof (except the party be qualified and dispensed with) is the loss of ten
pounds for every month. Anno 28 Hen. 8. ca. 13.

Resignation, (Resignatio) Is used particularly for the yielding up a Benefice
into the hands of the Ordinary, otherwise called renunciatio by the Canonists.
And, though it signify all one in nature with the word Surrender, yet it is by
use restrained to the yielding up a Spiritual Living as aforesaid, and
Surrender to the giving up Temporal Lands into the hands of the Lord. And, a
Resignation may now be made into the hands of the King, as well as of the
Diocesan, because he has Supremam Authoritatem Ecclesiasticam, as the Pope had
here in times past. Plowden, Casu Gr^ndon, fo. 498.

Resort, or Ressort, (Fr.) Is a word used properly in a Writ of Tail or
Cousenage, as Descent is in a Writ of right: In French it signifies the
Authority or Jurisdiction of a Court. -- Salvo tamen tam ressorto quam aliis
jure nostro, and jure etiam alieno. Lit. Pat. Philip le Hardy R. Franc.

Respectu computi vicecomitis habendo, Is a Writ for the respiting a Sheriffs
account, upon just occasion, directed to the Treasurer and Barons of the
Exchequer, Reg. fo. 139, and 179.

Respite, (Respectus) Is used for a delay, forbearance, or continuation of
time. Praecipio tibi, quod poni facias in respectum usque ad aliquem terminum
competentem. Glanvile, lib. 12. ca. 9. in Brevi Regis.

Respite of Homage, (Respectus Homagii) Is the forbearance of Homage, which
ought first of all to be performed by the Tenant, holding by Homage; but, it
had the most frequent use in such as held by Knight Service in Capite; who, did
pay into the Exchequer every fifth Term, some small Sum of Money to be
respited, the doing their Homage, see the Stat. 12 Car. 2. ca. 24. whereby this
Respite of Homage is taken away, as a charge incident, or arising from
Knight Service, etc.

Respondeat superior, Where the Sheriffs are removable, as in London, for
insufficiency, responde^t superior, that is, the Mayor and Commonalty of
London. Pur insufficiency del Bailiff d'un Liberty, respondeat Dominus
libertatis, 44 Ed. 3. 13. See 4 Inst. fo. 114.

Responsalis, (qui Responsum defert) Is he that appears for another in Court at
a day assigned, GIanvile, lib. 12. ca. 1. But Fle^a, (lib. 6. ca. 11.) makes a
difference between Atturnatum, Essoniatorem and Responsalem; as if Essoniator
came only to allege the cause of the parties absence, be he the demandant or
tenant; and Responsalis came for the Tenant, not only to excuse his absence,
but to signify what trial he meant to undergo, viz. the Combat or the Country.
See Attorney.

Responsions, (Responsiones) Seems to be a word used particularly by the
Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, for certain accounts made to them by such as
held their Lands or Stocks, Anno 32 Hen. 8. ca. 24.

Restitution, (Restitutio) Is a yielding up, or Restoring any thing unlawfully
taken from another. It is also used for the setting him in possession of Lands
or Tenements, who had been unlawfully disseised of them; which, when to be
done, and when not, see Cromp. Just. of P. fo. 144. usque 149.

Restitutione extracti ab Ecclesia, Is a writ to restore a Man to the Church,
which he had recovered for his Sanctuary, being suspected of Felony. Reg. of
Writs, fo. 69. a.

Restitutione temporalium, Is a Writ that lies where a man, being elected and
confirmed Bishop of any Diocese, and has the Kings Royal assent thereto, for
the recovery of the Temporalties or Barony of the said Bishopric. Which is
directed from the King to the Eschaator of the County, the form whereof you
have in Reg. of Writs, fo. 294. and in Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 269.

Resummons, (Resummonitio) Signifies a second Summons, or calling a man to
answer an Action, where the first Summons is defeated, or suspended by any
occasion, as the death of the party, or such like. See Brook tit. Resummons,
fo. 214. See of these four sorts, according to four diverse cases in the Table
of Reg. of Writs judicial, fo. 1. and New Book of Entries, verb. Reattachment
and Resummons.

Resumption, (Resumptio) Is particularly used for the taking again into the
Kings hands such Lands or Tenements, as before, upon false suggestion or other
Error, he had granted by Letters-Patent to any Man, Brook tit. Repellance and
Resumption, fo. 298. And so it is used Anno 31 Hen. 6. ca. 7. and 19 Hen. 7.
ca. 10 See Reseiser.

Retail, (Anno 3 and 4 Iid. 6. ca. 21.) Qui rem integram ementes, per
minutiores eam parts distrah^bant. Anglice, to buy by great, and sell by
Retail, i. by parcels.

Reteiner, (from Retineo) Signifies a Servant, not menial nor familiar, that
is, not continually dwelling in the house of his Lord or Master, but only
wearing his Livery, and attending sometimes upon special occasions. This Livery
was wont to consist of Hats (or Hoods) Badges, and other suites of one Garment
by the year, and were given by Lords and great Men many times on purpose for
maintenance and quarrels, and therefore have been justly prohibited by many
Statutes, as by 1 R. 2. ca. 7. upon pain of Imprisonment and grievous
forfeiture to the King. And again, Anno 16 ejusdem, ca. 4. and 20 ejusdem, ca.
1 and 2. and 1 Hen. 4. ca. 7. By which the Offenders herein should make Ransom
at the Kings will; and any Knight or Esquire hereby duly attainted, should
lose his said Livery, and forfeit his Fee for ever, etc. which Statute is
further confirmed and explained Anno 2 Hen. 4. ca. 21. and Anno 7 ejusdem, ca.
3. and Anno 8 Hen. 6. ca. 4. And yet this offense was so deeply rooted, that
Edward the Fourth was forced to confirm the former Statutes, and further to
extend the meaning of them, as appears by 8 Edw. 4. ca. 2. adding a special
pain of five pounds on every man that gives such Livery, and as much on every
one so retained, either by Writing, Oath, or Promise for every Month. These by
the Feudists are called Affidati: And, as our Reteiners are here forbidden, so
are those Affidats in other Countries. But, most of the above mentioned
Statutes are repealed by 3 Car. 1. ca. 4.

Retenementum, (from Retineo) A withholding, reteining, or keeping back -- Sine
ullo retenemento was a frequent expression in old Deeds.

Retraxit, Is so called, because it is the emphatical word in the Entry; and
is, where the Plaintiff or Demandant comes in person alone, or with the
Defendant into Court, and says, He will proceed no further; which is
peremptory, and a perpetual Bar, and may be pleaded as such to the Plaintiff
in the same Action for ever. Qui semel Actionem renunciavit, amplius repetere
non potest. Coke on Litt. lib. 2. ca. 11. S. 208. where you shall find the
difference betwixt Nonsute and Retraxit.

Return, (Returna vel retorna) From the Fr. retour, i. Reditio, reversio) has
two particular applications, namely, the return of Writs by Sheriffs and other
Officers, which is a Certificate made to the Court from whence the Writ issued,
of that which they have done, touching the execution of the same Writs. Of
returns in this signification, speaks the Statute of Westminster. 2. ca. 39. So is
the Return of a Commission, a Certificate, or answer to the Court of that which
is done by the Commissioners, Sheriff, Bailiff, or others, unto whom such
Writs, Commissions, Praecepts, or Mandats, are directed.

Also certain days in every Term are called Returns, or Days in Bank: As
Hillary Term has four Returns, viz. Octabis Hilarii, Quindena Hilarii, Crastino
Purificationis, Octabis Purificationis: Easter Term five, viz. Quindena Pasche,
Tres Pasche, Mense Pasche, Quinque Pasche and Crastino Assensionis Domini.
Trinity Term four, viz. Crastino Trinitatis, Octabis Trinitatis, Quindena
Trinitatis, Tres Trinitatis: And Michaelmas Term six Returns, viz. Tres
Michaelis, Mense Michaelis, Crastino animarum, Crastino Martini, Octabis
Martini, Quindena Martini. See the Statutes of Days in Bank, Anno 51 Hen. 3.
32 Hen. 8. ca. 21. and 17 Car. 1. ca. 6.

The other Application of this word is in case of Replevin; for, if a man
distrain Cattle for Rent, etc. and afterward so justify or avow his act, that
it is found lawful, the Cattle, before delivered to him that was distrained,
upon security given to follow the Action, shall now be returned to him that
distrained them, Brook tit. Return d'avers and hommes, fo. 218.

Returno habendo, Is a Writ that lies for him, who has avowed a Distress made
of Cattle, and proved his Distress to be lawfully taken, for the return of the
Cattle distreined, unto him, which before were repl(...) by the party
distreined, upon surety given to pursue the Action, or when the Plaint or
Action is removed by Recordari; or Accedas ad Curiam, into the Court of Common
Pleas, and he, whose Cattle were distrained, makes default, and does not
declare or prosecute his Action.

Returnum Averiorum, Is a Writ Judicial, and the same with Retorno Habendo,
granted to one impleaded for taking the Cattle of another, and unjust detaining
them Contra vadium and Plegios; and appearing upon Summons, is dismissed
without day, by reason the Plaintiff makes default, and does not declare ut
supra, and it lies for the return of the Cattle to the Defendant, whereby he
was summoned, or which were taken for security of his appearance upon the
Summons. Regist. of Writs Judic. fol. 4. a.

Returnum Irreplegiabile, Is a Writ Judicial, sent out of the Common Pleas to
the Sheriff, for the final restitution or return of Cattle to the owner,
unjustly taken by another, as Damage-Feisant, and so found by the Jury before
Justices of Assise in the County; or otherwise, by default of Prosecution. For
which, see Reg. of Writs Judic. fol. 27.

^eve alias Greve (Germanice Grave, Sax. gerefa. Praefectus, Praepositus)
Signifies the Bailiff of a Franchise or Manor, especially in the West parts.
Hence Shire-reve, a Shiref. See Kitchen, fol. 43. See Greve, and Shiref, and
Tun-greve. See Verstegan, cap. 10. and Churchreve.

Reveland. See Teinland.

Revenue (Fr. Revenu) Signifies properly the Yearly Rent and Profits that
accrews to every Man from his Lands and Possession.

Reversion (Reversio) Signifies a returning again: Therefore Reversio terrae
est tanquam terra revertens in possessione Donatori sive haeredibus suis post
donum finitum. Coke on Littl. fol. 142. b. It has a double acception; the one
is, Jus revertendi cum status possessionis defecerit; and this is but an
interest in the Land, when the Occupation and Possession of it shall fall, and
so it is commonly taken. 2. When the Possession and Estate, which was parted
with for a time cease, and is determined in the persons of the Alienees,
Assignees, Grantees, or their Heirs, or effectually returns to the Donor, his
Heirs, or Assigns, whence it was derived. This is the most proper signification
of the word, which is derived from Revertor, and apt dici non potest Reversio,
antequam revertatur in facto. See Littl. lib. 2. cap. 12. And see Remainder.

Review (Fr. Reveue) A Bill of Review in Chancery, is, where the Cause has
been heard, and the Decree signed and enrolled; and some Error in Law, appears
in the Body of the Decree, or new matter discovered in time after the Decree
made: Which Bill must be exhibited by leave of the Court, and not otherwise.
Coll. of Orders in Chanc. page 69.

Reviving, Is a word metaphorically applied to Rents and Ac(...) and signifies
a renewing them, after they (...) extinguished. Whereof see diverse examples in
Brook, tit. Revivings of Rents, Action, etc. fol. 223.

Bill of Revivor, Is where a Bill has been exhibited in Chancery against one,
who answers, and before the Cause is heard, or if heard, the Decree be not
enrolled, and either party dies: In this Case a Bill of Revivor must be
brought, to the end, the former proceedings may stand Revived, and the Cause be
finally determined.

Revocation (Revocatio) Is the recalling a thing granted: Of which, you have
diverse in the Register of Writs. As, Revocationem brevis de audiendo and
terminando, fol. 124. Revocationem Praesentationis, fol. 304, 305, etc.

Rewey (Anno 43 Eliz. cap. 10.) -- So as the same Clothes, being put in water
are found to shrink, Rewey, Squally, Cockling, Light, and notable faulty, etc.
i. Unevenly wrought, or full of Rews.

Ribaud (Fr. Ribauld) A Rogue, Rascal; Fornicator, Whoremonger. Rot. Parl. 50
Edw. 3. number. 61. Petition against Ribauds and sturdy Beggars.

Rider-Roll See in Roll.

Ridge or Rig of Land (Riga) Terram quam e pluribus sul^u in agg^rem efferunt
arantes, ita ut sicca seeds frumentis habeatur, Romani strigam (atque inde
agros strigatos) nos, a Ridge of Land. Spel. Yet I have seen in the
Exemplification of a Writ of Partition, Anno 20 Eliz. Test Jacobo Dyer Mil.
unam acram terrae arabil. continen. quinque porcas terrae, Anglico Ridges.

Ridings, Are the names of the Parts or Divisions of Yorkshire, being three,
viz. East Riding, West Riding, and North Riding, and mentioned in the Statute
of 22 Hen. 8. cap. 5. and 23 Ejusdem, cap. 18. In Indictments in that County,
it is requisite, that the Town and the Riding be expressed. West, par. 2. Symb.
tit. Indictnents, sect. 70. Q.

Riens pass per le fait, Is the form of an Exception taken in some Cases to an
Action, See Brook, tit Estraunger al fait ou Record.

Riens arrear, Is a kind of Plea used to an Action or Debt upon Arrearages of
Account, whereby the Defendant does allege that there is nothing arrear. Book
of Entries.

Riens per descent (i. Nothing by descent) Is the Plea of an Heir, where he is
sued for his Ancestors Debt* and has no Land from him by descent. See 3 Part
Cokes Rep. fol. 151.

Riens deins le guard, Was a challenge to a Jury or Enquest within London, etc.
But it is abrogated by the Statute 7 Hen. 7. cap. 5.

Rier County (Retro comitatus) From the Fr. Arriere, i. Posterior) in the Stat.
2. Edw. 3. cap. 5. is opposite to open County; And by comparing that Statute
with West(...). 2. cap. 38. it appears to be some public place, which the
Sheriff appoints for Receipt of the Kings Money, after the end of his County.
Fleta says it is, Dies crastinus post comitatum. Lib. 2. cap. 67.

Right (Jus) In general signification, includes not only a right, for which a
Writ of Right lies, but also any Title or Claim, either by force of a
condition, Morgage, or the like, for which no Action is given by Law, but only
an Entry. Coke on Littl. lib. 3. cap. 8. sect. 445. and 447. There is Jus
Proprietatis, A Right of Ownership. Jus Possessionis, A Right of Seisin or
Possession. And Jus Proprietatis and Possessionis, A Right both of Property and
Possession; which was anciently called Jus Duplicatum. See Recto and Droit.

Right in the Court. See Rectus in Curia.

Rhyme (Rima) Is taken for a mean kind of Verse, commonly made by some
unskilful Poetaster. Of a Libellous and Rebellious Rhyme, I have thought fit to
insert this Abstract of an ancient and memorable Record.

Placita coram Domino Rege apud Ebor. de Termino Pasche Anno Regni Regis
Ricardi Secundi, 16.
Quamplurimi de Cotingham and Villis circumjacentibus indictantur, quod ipsi
alligati fuerint quilibet ad alterum sustinendum and manutenendum omnes
querelas suas versus quoscunque: Et quod modo guerrino obsiderunt villam de
Kingston super Hull, and pontes circumjacentes diripuerunt, ita quod nullus ire
vel redire posset ad dictam villam, ac insuper fecerunt Rimam in Anglicis
verbis, and dictam Rimam public apud Beverley proclamari fecerunt die, etc.
quae Rima sequitur in haec verba.

IN the Country hard was we,
That in our Soken shrews should be,
With all for to bake.
Among you Friars it is so,
And other Orders many more,
Whether they sleep or wake.
And yet will ilke an help up other,
And maintain him als his brother,
Both in wrong and right.
And also will in strand and stoure
Maintain our Neighbor
With all our might.
Ilke Man may come and go
Among us, both to and fro,
Say you sickerly.
But bethning will we suffer none,
Neither of Hob, nor of John,
With what may he merry be.
For unkind we ware,
If we suffered less or mare
Any villan hethning.
But it were quite double again,
And accord, and be ^ul feign
To bide dressing.
And on that purpose, yet we stand,
Who so does us any wrang,
In what place it fall.
Yet he must als we will,
Als have I hap and heel,
Do again us all.
Sed perdonantur 28 ex eis.

Ringhead (Anno 43 Eliz. cap. 10.) An Engine used in stretching Woollen Cloth.

Riot (Fr. Riotte, quod non solum rixam and jurgium significat, sed vinculum
etiam, quo plura in unum, fasciculorum instar, colligantur) Signifies the
forcible doing an unlawful act, by three or more persons assembled together for
that purpose. West, par. 2. Symb. tit. Indictments, sect. 65. The differences
and agreements between a Riot, Rout, and Unlawful Assembly, See in Lamb. Eiren.
lib. 2. cap. 5. Stat. 1 Mar. cap. 12. and Kitchen, fol. 19. who gives these
Examples of Riots: The breach of Enclosures, Banks, Conduits, Parks, Pounds,
Houses, Barns, the burning of Stacks of Corn, etc. Lamb. ubi supra mentions
these: To beat a Man, to enter upon a Possession forcibly. See Rout and
Unlawful Assembly; see also, in Cromp. Justice of Peace, diverse Cases of Riots.
Anno 17 Rich. 2. cap. 8. and 13 Hen. 4. cap. 7. See Rout.

Ripariae (from Ripa, a Bank) in the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 47. Signifies
the Water or River running between the Banks, be it Salt or Fresh. 2 Inst. fol.
478. The word occurs also in Rot. Cart. 9 Edw. 2. number. 12.

Ripiers (Riparii, a Fiscella, qua in devehendis piscibus utuntur. Anglice a
Ripp) Are those that use to bring Fish from the Sea Coast to the inner parts of
the Land. Came. Brit. page 234.

Roather Beasts (Anno 7 Edw. 6. cap. 11.) See Rother-Beasts.

Robbery (Robaria) from the Fr. Rob, i. Vestis) Is a Felonious taking away
another Man's Goods from his Person, Presence, or Estate against his will,
putting him in fear, and of purpose to steal the same. West, par. 2. Symbol.
tit. Indictments, sect. 60. This is sometimes called Violent Theft, which is
Felony, of two pence. Kitchen, fol. 16. and 22. See Cromptons Justice of Peace,
fol. 30. b.

Robbers (Robatores) Were so called originally, because they only took away
the Robes or Clothes from Travelers; Latrones validi, qui in personas hominum
insilientes, bona sua diripiunt.

Robersmen or Roberdsmen (Anno 5 Edw. 3. cap. 14. and 7 Rich. 2. cap. 5.)
Lambert interprets them to be Mighty Thieves. Eiren. lib. 2. cap. 6. Sir Edward
(...)ke in his Third Instit. fol. 197. says, Robin-Hood lived in Richard the
First's time in the Borders of England and Scotland by Robbery, burning Houses,
Rape, and Spoil, etc. And that these Roberdsmen took name from him.

Kod (Roda terrae) Is otherwise called a Perch, and is a measure of sixteen
foot, and a half long; and in Staffordshire twenty foot, to measure Land with.
See Perch.

Rod Knights alias Rad Knights (from the Sax. rad, angl. Road, i. Equitatus,
and tnyt, i. puer, minister, famulus; quasi pueri vel ministri equitantes) Were
certain Servitors, who held their Land by serving their Lords on Horsback.
Debent equitare cum Domino suo de Manerio in Manerium, vel cum Domini Uxore.
Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 35. number. 6. Not much unlike our Retainers.

Rose-tyle alias Creast-tyle, Is that Tyle which is made to lay upon the Ridge
of the House. Anno 17 Edw. 4. cap. 4.

Rogue (Rogus, from the Fr. Rogue, Arrogans) Signifies an idle sturdy Beggar,
who (wandering from place to place without Pasport, after he has been by
Justices, bestowed or offered to be bestowed on some certain place of abode) is
worthily so called; who for the first offense, is called A Rogue of the first
degree, and punished by whipping and boring through the Grissel of the Right
Ear, with a hot Iron, an inch in compass; and for the second offense is called
A Rogue in the second degree, and put to death as a Felon, if he be above
eighteen years old. See the Stat. 14 Eliz. cap. 5. and 18 Ejusdem, cap. 3. and
Anno 36 cap. 17. See Lamb. Eiren. lib. 4. cap. 4.

Rogus (Lat.) A great Fire; also a Pile of Wood. -- Mandatum est constabulario
castri de Divis. Et custodi Forestae de Cippeham, quod fieri fac. unum Rogum in
Foresta praedicta ad operationes Castri praedicti, prout melius viderit
expedire, etc. T. x Maii. Claus. 54 Hen. 3. m. 8. Rogus cum comburitur, pira
est congeries lignorum ad comburendum. Vocab. utriusque Juris.

Roll (Rotulus) Signifies a Schedule of Paper or Parchment, which may be turned
or wound up with the hand to the fashion of a Pipe: Of which, there are in the
Exchequer several kinds, as the Great Wardrobe Roll, the Cofferers Roll, the
Subsidy Roll, etc. Of which, see the Practice of the Exchequer Court, fol. 75.

Rider-Roll (Noys Reports, fol. 84.) The Court Ex Officio may Award a
Certiorari ad informandam conscientiam; and that which is certified, shall be
annexed to the Record, and is called a Rider Roll. Or a Rider Roll is a
Schedule or small piece of Parchment, not seldom sewed or added to some part of
a Roll or Record.

Rolls, or Office of the Rolls in Chancerylane, anciently called Domus
Conversorum, Was an House built or appointed by King Henry the Third, for such
Jews as were converted to the Christian Faith: But King Edward the Third, in
the One and fiftieth year of His Reign, expulsed them for their wickedness, and
deputed the place for the Custody of the Rolls, and Records of the Chancery;
the Master whereof, is the second person in Chancery, and in the absence of the
Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, sits as Judge, being commonly called The
Master of the Rolls.

Romefeoh, Romepeny, (Sax. romfeoh, i* Nummus Romae datus, nam feoh est nummus,
pecunia, stipendium; rompening, Romae Denarius; Pening enim (hodie A penny) est
Denarius. Vide Romescot.

Romescot (Romefeoh vel Romefee, Romepeny, alias Denarius Sancti Petri and
Hearthpony) Is compounded of Rome and Scot, from the Sax. sceat, i. Census,
pecunia, quasi, nummus Romae dicatus. It was an annual tribute of one penny from
every family or household, paid yearly to Rome at the Feast of St. Peter ad
Vincula, 1 Aug. It was given by Inas, King of the West Saxons, Anno 725. as an
Alms, being in Pilgrimage at Rome, and was prohibited in the days of Edward the
Third. It amounted to Three hundred Marks, and a Noble yearly Romfeoh in Festo
Sancti Petri ad Vincula debet reddi -- Qui supra tenebit, reddat Episcopo
Denarium illum, and 30 Denarios addat, and Regi 50 solidos. LL. Hen. 1 cap. 12.
See Peterpence.

Rood of Land (Rodata Terr^) Is the fourth part of an Acre. Anno 5 Eliz. cap. 5.

Rother-Beasts (Sax. Hryther) Under this Name are comprehended Oxen, Cows,
Steers, Heyfers, and such like Horned-Beasts. Anno 21 Jac. cap. 28. And in
Herefordshire, the Dung of such Beasts is still called Rothersoyl.

Rotulus Wintoniae, Domesday Book so called, because it was of old kept at
Winchester, among other Records and Monuments of the Kingdom. See Domesday.
Some say there was a more ancient Record or Book, of like nature with Domesday,
but made long before by King Alfred, called Rotulus Wintonia.

Rouge Cross. See Herald.

Roundlet. See Runlet.

Rout (Fr. Route, i. A company or number) Which signifies an Assembly of three
persons, or more, going forcibly to commit an unlawful act, though they do it
not; and is the same which the Germans yet call Rot, meaning a Band or great
company of Men gathered together, and going to execute, or are executing indeed
any Riot, or unlawful act. See the Stat. 18. Edw. 3. stat. 1. and 2 Rich. 2.
cap. 6. It is a Rout, whether they put their purpose in execution, or no, if
they go, ride or move forward after their meeting. Brook, tit. Riot, 4. 5. So
as a Rout seems to be a special kind of unlawful. Assembly, and a Riot, the
disorderly fact committed generally by any unlawful* Assembly. Howbeit, two
things are common both to Rout, Riot, and Unlawful Assembly: The one, that
three persons at the least be gathered together; the other, that they being
together, do disturb the Peace, either by words, show of arms, turbulent
gesture, or actual violence, etc. See Lamb. Eiren. lib. 2. cap. 5. See Riot and
Unlawful Assembly.

Royal Assent (Regius Assensus) Is that Assent or Approbation, which the King
gives to a thing formerly done by others, as to the election of a Bishop by
Dean and Chapter; which given, then he sends a Special Writ to some person for
the taking of Fealty. The form whereof you may see in Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 170.
C. And to a Bill passed in both Houses of Parliament. Cromp. Jur. fol. 8. Which
Assent in Parliament being once given, the Bill is Endorsed with these words.
Le Roy Veult, i. It pleases the King. If he refuse to agree to it, then thus,
Le Roy Averisa. i. The King will Advise upon it.

Royalties (Regalia vel Regalitates) Are the Rights of the King, otherwise
called the Kings Prerogative; some of which are such as the King may grant to
common persons; some so high, as may not be separated from his Crown Privative,
as the Civilians term it; though some may be Cumulative. Vide Bracton, lib. 2.
cap. 5. And Mathaeum de Afflictis, upon the title of the Feuds, Quae sint
Regalia; where are set down Twenty five particulars, or several sorts of
Royalties. See Prerogative and Regalia.

Rudge-washed Kersey, Is that which is made of Fleece-wool, washed only on the
Sheeps back. Anno 35 Eliz. cap. 10.

Runcinus (from the Ital. Runzino) Is used in Domesday for a Load-horse, or
Sumpterhorse; and sometimes a Cart-horse, which Chaucer calls a Rowney.

Rune (from the Sax. Rununge, i. A Course or Running) A Watercourse, so called
in the Marshes of Sommersetshire. Hist. of Imbanking and Draining, fol. 106. a.

Runlet alias Roundlet, Is a certain Measure of Wine, Oil, etc. containing
Eighteen Gallons and a half. Anno 1 Rich. 3. cap. 13.

Rural Deanes (Decani Rurales) Sunt Decani Temporales ad aliquod ministerium
sub Episcopo vel Archiepiscopo exercendum constituti, qui nec habent
Institutionem Canonicam secundum Doctores. Hos eosdem esse existimo, qui in LL.
Edouardi Confess. cap. 31. Decani Episcoporum appellantur. See Dean. Each
Diocese has in it one or more Arch-Deaconries, for dispatch of Ecclesiastical
business, and every Arch-Deaconry subdivided into Rural Deanries, fewer or
more, according to the bigness and extent thereof. Heylins Cosmog. fol. 304.
These were anciently called Archi-Presbyteri, and Decani Christianitatis. See
Dean.

Rusca. When the King himself (says Domesday, tit. Cestre) came in person to
Chester, every Carrucata yielded him two hundred Hesta's, and one Tun of Ale,
and one Rusca of Butter. Quaere What the quantity was? Rusca apum, is a Hive of
Bees.

S.
SAbbatum, in Domesday, is used for Peace, Postquam Willielmus Rex advenit, and
sedebat in Sabbato, and Willielmus Mallet fecit suum Castellum de Eia, etc.
Tit. Sudsex.

Sac (Saca vel Sacha) Is a Royalty or Privilege, which a Lord of a Manor
claims to have in his Court, of holding Plea in Causes of Debate, arising among
his Tenants and Vassals; and of imposing and levying Fines and Amerciaments
touching the same. But Rastal, and some others define Sac to be the forfeiture
it self. In the Laws of King Edward, set forth by Lambert, fol. 144. it is
written, (Sacha) Sacha autem est, si quilibet aliquem nominatim de aliquo
calumniatus fuerit, and ille negaverit; forisfactura probationis vel negationis
(si evenerit) sua erit. Which may be called the Amerciament paid by him, who
denies that which is proved against him to be true, or affirms that which is
not true. Fleta says, Sake significat acquietantiam de secta ad Comitatum and
Hundredum, lib. 1. cap. 47. Sac is a Saxon word, and signifies Causa, lis,
certamen, as we still say For Christ's sake, 1. Pro causa Christi. See Keilweys
Rep. fol. 145. Praecipio ut S. Benedictus de Ramefia ita been and libere habeat
Socam and Sacam suam, etc. Breve Hen. 2. Justiciariis de Norfolc. V. Saka.

Sacaburth alias Sacabere, Is he that is robbed, or by theft deprived of his
Money or Goods. Britton, cap. 15. and 29. With whom agrees Bracton, (lib. 3.
tract. 2. cap. 32. number. 2.) Furtum vero manifestum est, ubi latro deprehensus
sit seisitus de aliquo latrocinio, sc. Hondhabend and Backberend, and insecutus
fuerit per aliquem cujus res illa fuerit, qui dicitur Sacaburth, etc. It may
come from ^ac or ^aca, i. lis, causa, prosecutio, and burh, pignus; quia res
furtiva sit quasi causa pignus, hoc est, furti Symbolum. Spelman. But Sir
Edward Coke says, Sacabere or Sakebere, is derived of Sak and Bear, that is, He
that did bear the bag. 3 Inst. fol. 69.

Saccus cum brochia, Was a Service or Tenure of finding a Sack, and a Broach to
the King, for the use of his Army. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 16. number. 6. and lib.
2. tract. 1. cap. 6. See Brochia.

Sacerborgh or rather Sickerborgh, Securus Plegius. A sufficient Pledge, or
Cautioner. Skene. See Sacaburth.

Sack of Wool (Saccus Lanae) Contains Twenty six Stone, and a Stone Fourteen
pounds. Anno 14 Edw. 3. stat. 1. cap. 2. See Sarplar. In Scotland it is Twenty
four Stone, and the Stone Sixteen Pound.

Sacrafield Rents, Are certain small Rents paid by some Tenants of the Manor
of Chuton in Com. Somerset, to Sir Charles Waldegrave, Lord thereof; but why so
called, Quaere.

Sacramento Recipiendo, quod vidua Regis se non maritabit sine licentia Regis,
Was a Writ or Commission to one for the taking an Oath of the Kings Widow, that
she shall not marry without the Kings License. Reg. of Writs, fol. 298. a.

Sacrobarra. Lib. MS. de Officio Coronatoris -- Inquirendum est per 12 Juratos
pro Rege super Sacramentum suum, quod fideliter presentabunt sine ullo
concelamento omnes fortunas (^i. fortuito occisos) abjurationes, Appella,
Murdra, Sacrobarra, felonias factas per quos and quot, etc. Quaere, If
Sacrobarra be not the same with Sacrilegia.

Safe Conduct (Salvus Conductus) Is a security given by the Prince, under the
Broad Seal, to a stranger, for his quiet coming in and passing our of the
Realm: Touching which, you may see the Statutes Anno 15 Hen. 6. cap. 3. and 18
Ejusdem, cap. 8. and 28 Hen. 8. cap. 1. and the Form of it in Reg. of Writs,
fol. 25.

Safeguard. See Salva-guardia.

Safe-pledge (Salvus Plegius) Is a Surety given for a Man's appearance against a
day assigned. Bracton, lib. 4. cap. 2. number. 2. Where it is also called Certus
Plegius.

Sagibaro alias Sachbaro, The same we now call Justiciarius: It signifies as
much as Vir causarum vel causis and litibus praepositus. LL. Inae Regis
Anglo-Saxonis, cap 6. MS.

Sagitta Barbata, A Bearded Arrow. -- Reddendo inde annuatim pro omni servitio
sex Sagittas Barbatas ad Festum Sancti Michaelis, etc. Carta Hugonis de Logiis,
sine Dat.

Sailing Ware (Anno 1 Rich. 3. cap. 8.) Seems to be Canvas, or such kind of
Cloth as Sails for Ships are made of.

Saka, Hoc est, Quod Prior habet emendas and amerciamenta de transgressionibus
hominum suorum in Curia sua litigantium, tam liberorum, quam Villanorum. Reg.
Priorat. de Cokestord. See Sax.

Salary (Salarium) Is a recompense or consideration made to a Man for his pains
or industry, bestowed on another Man's business. The word is used Anno 23 Edw.
3. cap. 1.

Salet, Is a Head-peece (Anno 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar.) From the Fr. Salut, i.
Salus. Mentioned also 20 Rich. 2. cap. 1. viz. Sallet or Scul of Iron, etc.
Otherwise called a Moriam or Pot.

Salarium (Lat.) Custom paid for Salt. Camden.

Salina, A Salt-pit or Vate, a House or place where Salt is made. -- In
Herbagiis and Piscariis, in Salinis and Fabricis, in minariis ferreis, etc.
Carta 17 Edw. 2. number 28.

Salique Law (Lex Salica) De terra Salica nulla portio haereditatis mulieri
veniat, sed ad virilem sexum tota terrae hereditas perveniat, etc. Was an
ancient Law made by Pharamund, King of the Franks. Part of which, appears to
have been borrowed by our Henry the First, in compiling his Laws, as Cap. 89.
-- Qui hoc fecerit, secundum Legem Salicam moriatur, etc.

Salmon Pipe (Anno 25 Hen. 8. cap. 7.) Is an Engine to catch Salmons, or such
like Fish.

Salmon Sewse, Seems to be the young Fry of Salmon, Quasi Salmon issue. Anno 13
Rich. 3. stat. 1. cap. 19.

Saltatorium, A Deer-leap. Clamat habere liberum Parcum suum apud Halton cum
duobus Saltatoriis in eodem. Pl. apud Cestriam 31 Edw. 3.

Saltus, Highwood. See Boscus.

Salva Guardia, Is a Protection given by the King to a stranger, fearing the
violence of some of His Subjects, for seeking His Right by course of Law; the
form whereof see in Reg. of Writs, fol. 26.

Salvage Money, Is a recompense allowed by the Civil Law, in lieu of all
damages sustained by that Ship that rescues or saves another, which was set
upon by Pirates or Enemies.

Salute (Salus) Was a Coin made by our King Henry the Fifth in France, after
his Conquests there, whereon the Arms of France and England were quarterly
stamped. Bakers Chron. fol. 187.

Sanctuary (Sanctuarium) Is a place privileged by the Prince for the
Safeguard of Offenders lives, being founded on the Law of Mercy, and upon the
great Reverence, Honor, and Devotion, which the Prince bears to the place
whereunto he grants such Privilege. See Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 2. cap. 38. P.
Bonifacius 5. jussit Aras and Ecclesias esse asyla reis, says Platina. Among
all other Nations, our ancient Kings of England seem to have attributed most to
these Sanctuaries, permitting them to shelter such as had committed both
Felonies and Treasons: So that within forty days they acknowledged their fault,
and submitted themselves to banishment. During which time, if any Layman
expelled them, he was excommunicated; if any Clerk, he was made irregular: But
after forty days, no Man might relieve them. See New Book of Entries, verbo,
Sanctuary, and Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 29. How by degrees they have been taken
away. See the Statutes 26 Hen. 8. cap. 13. and 28 Ejusdem, cap. 7. 32 Ejusdem,
cap. 12. and 33 Ejusdem, cap. 15. -- 1 Edw. 6. ca. 12 and 2 Ejusdem, ca. 2. and
33. and 5 Ejusdem, cap. 10. See Abjuration. Saint John's of Beverley in
Yorkshire, had an eminent Sanctuary belonging to it, which the Saxons called
Fridstol, q. Seeds Pacis. So had St. Martins le Grand in London, 21 Hen. 8.
cap. 16. And Rippon had the like, for which see Frodmortel.

Sand-gavel, Is a payment due to the Lord of the Manor of Rodely in Com. Gloc.
for Liberty granted to the Tenants, to dig Sand for their uses. Tailors Hist.
of Gavelkind, fol. 113.

Sarplar of Wool (Sarplera Lanae) (otherwise called a Pocket) Is half a Sack; a
Sack, eighty Tod; a Tod, two Stone; and a Stone, fourteen Pound. See Fleta,
lib. 2. cap. 12. This in Scotland is called Serpliathe, and contains eighty
Stone. See Skene, verbo, Serpliathe, and 3 Part Inst. fo. 96.

Sasse, (Annis 16 and 17 Car. 2. ca. 12.) is a kind of Wear with Floudgates,
most commonly in Navigable and Cut Rivers, for the damming and loosing the
stream of Water, as occasion requires, for the better passing of Botes and
Barges to and fro. This in the West of Englad is called a Luck, and, in the
River Lee (less properly) a Turnpike, and in some places, a Sluice.

Saterdays-stop, Is a space of time in which of old it was not lawful to take
Salmons in Scotland, and the North of England; that is, from Evensong on
Saturday, till Sunrising on Monday, MS.

Sauer default. i. To excuse a defalt; which is properly when a man, having
made defalt in Court, comes afterward and alleadges good cause why he did it,
as Imprisonment at the same time, or the like, New Book of Entries on this word.

Saunkefin, (from the Fr. Sang, i. Sanguis and Fin. Finis,) Is a word used by
Britton, ca. 119. for the determination, or final end of the lineal Race or
descent of a Kindred.

Saxonlage, or Seaxenlage, (Seaxenlaga) lex Saxonum. See Merchenlage.

Scandalum Magnatum, Is the special name of a Scandal, or wrong done to any
high Personage of the Realm, as Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, or other
Nobles, as also the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer, Steward of the House, Clerk of
the Privy Seal, Justice of either Bench, or other great Officers, by false
news, or Messages, whereby Debates and Discords betwixt them and the Commons,
or any scandal to their persons may arise. Anno 2 Rich. 2. ca. 5. and has
given name to a Writ granted, to recover damage thereupon.

Scavage, Schevage, Schewage and Scheauwing, (From the Sax. sceawian,
Ostendere) Is a kind of Toll or Custom, exacted by Mayors, Sheriffs, etc. of
Merchant strangers, for Wares showed, or offered to sale within their
liberties, which is prohibited by the Statute 19 Hen. 7. ca. 8. In a Charter of
Henry the Second to the City of Canterbury, it is written Scewinga; and (in
Man. Ang. 2 Par. fo. 890. b.) Sceawing. The City of London does still retain
the Custom, to a good yearly profit. Of which Custom the half endell
appertains to the Sherifs, and the other balfen del unto the Hostys, in whose
Houses the Merchants ben lodged. And it is to wet, that Scavage is the Show;
because that Marchantys shown unto the Sherifs Marchaundyses, of the which
Custums ought to be taken, ore that any thing thereof be sold, etc. Out of an
old printed Book of the Customs of London.

Scavenger, (From the Belgic Scavan, i. To scrape, or shave away,) Two in every
Parish of London and its Suburbs are yearly chosen into this Office, who hire
Men, (called Rakers) and Carts to cleanse the Streets, and carry away the dirt
and filth thereof, mentioned 14 Car. 2. ca. 2. The Germans call him a
Drecksimon, from one Simon, a noted Scavenger of Marpurg.

Scire facias, Is a Writ judicial, most commonly to call a man to show cause to
the Court, whence it issues, why Execution of a Judgment passed should not go
out. This Writ is not granted before a year and a day be passed after the
Judgment given. Old Not. Br. fo. 151. See Anno 25 Edw. 3. Stat. 5. ca. 2. and
39 Eliz. ca 7. And see other diversities of this Writ in Reg. of Writs, and new
Book of Entries.

Site, (Anno 32 Hen. 8. ca. 20.) See Site.

Skarkalla, or Scarkella. -- It was especially given in charge by the Justices
in Air, that all Juries should inquire de hiis qui piscantur cum Kiddellis and
Skarkallis. Cokes 2 Part Inst. fo. 38. But, he does not declare what Skarkalla
is.

Scot, (Sax. sceat, i. A part or portion) Is (according to Rastal) A certain
custom, or common Tallage, made to the use of the Sheriff, or his Bailiffs.
Scot (says Camden out of Matthew. Westminster.) illud dicitur, quod ex diversis rebus
in unum acervum aggregatur. Anno 22 Hen. 8. ca. 3. -- Bearing neither Scot, Lot
nor other charges, etc. Anno 33 Hen. 8. ca. 9. In Records it is sometimes
written Scoth.

Scot and Lot, (Anno 33 Hen 8. ca. 9.) Signifies a custumory contribution laid
upon all Subjects, according to their ability. Hoveden, (in principio Hen. 2.)
writes it Anlote and Anscote. In the Laws of William the Conqueror set forth
by Lambert, you have these words, (ca. 125.) Et omnis Francigena, qui tempore
Edwardi propinqui nostri fuit in Anglia, particeps Consuetudinum Anglorum, quod
dicunt Anhlote and Anscote per solvantur secundum legem Anglorum. Again -- Rex
omne injustum Scottum interdixit. Hoveden, in Anno 1088. Scot from the Sax.
sceat, ut supra; Lot, Sax. Llot, i. Sors.

WIllielmus Rex Anglorum Herberto Norwicensi Episcopo and omnibus Baronibus
suis de Norfolc and Suffolc salutem. Sciatis me dedisse Sanctae Trinitati
Norwicensi Ecclesiae, rogatu Rogeri Bigoti, terram Michaelis de Utmonasterio
and terram de Tanerham, quae ad eandem terram pertinet, quietam semper and
liberam ab omnibus Scotis and Geldis, and omnibus aliis Consuetudinibus. T.
Eudonc Dapifero apud Westminster. etc.

Scotal, or Scotale, (Scotalla and Scotalium) Is a word used in the Charter of
the Forest, ca. 7. Nullus Forestarius vel Bedellus faciat Scotallas, vel Garbas
colligat, vel aliquam Collectam faciat, etc. Manwood, Par. 1. pa. 216. defines
it thus. A Scotal, is where any Officer of the Forest keeps an Alehouse within
the Forest, by color of his Office, causing men to come to his House, and there
to spend their Money, for fear of displeasure. It is compounded of Scot and
Ale, which by transposition of the words is otherwise called an Aleshot, and by
the Welshmen Cymmorth.

MEmorandum, quod praedicti tenentes, (de South-malling) debent de consuetudine
inter eos facere Scotalium de xvi denariis and ob. Ita quod de singulis sex
denariis detur 1 denar. and ob. ad potandum cum Bedello Domini Archiepiscopi
super praedictum Feodum. Ex vetere Consuetudinario Manerii de Southmalling in
Archivis Archiep. Cantuar.

Scrudland, (Sax.) Terra cujus proventus vestibus emendis assignati sunt. Land
allotted for buying apparel or clothing. Ita Eadsius quidem Presbyter in
Charta sua Ecclesiae Cantuar. data. Dedit etiam terram illam apud Orpedingtunam
in vita sua, pro anima sua, Deo in Ecclesia Christi servientibus in Scrudland,
i. Fundum vestiarium. Sax. Dict.

Scutage, (Scutagium. Sax. Scildpenig) Hen. 3. for his voyage to the Holy Land,
had a Tenth granted by the Clergy, and Scutage, three marks of every
Knights-Fee by the Laity. Baker in Hen. 3. This was also granted to Henry the
Second, Richard the First, and King John.

Scutagio habendo, Was a Writ that lay for the King, or other Lord, against the
Tenant that held by Knights-Service, to serve by himself, or a sufficient man
in his place, in War against Scots or French, or else to pay, etc. Fitz. Not.
Br. fo. 83.

Scutum armorum, A Shield or Coat of Arms. Noverint universi per presents me
Johannam nuper uxorem Will. Lee de Knightley, Dominam and rectam haeredem de
Knightley dedisse -- Ricardo Peshale filio Humfridi Peshale Scutum armorum
meorum. Habend. and tenend. ac portand. and utend. ubicunque voluerit sibi and
haeredibus suis imperpetuum. Ita quod nec ego nec aliquis alius nomine meo
aliquod jus vel clameum seu calumpniam in praedicto Scuto habere potuerimus,
sed per presents sumus exclusi inperpetuum. In cujus -- Dat. apud Knightley --
(Anno 14 Hen. 6.

Scyre-gemot, (Sax. scyregemot) Was a Court held twice every year (as the
Sheriffs Turn is at this day) by the Bishop of the Diocese, and the Ealdorman,
(in Shires that had Ealdormen) and by the Bishops and Sheriffs, in such as were
committed to Sheriffs that were immediate to the King; wherein both the
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Laws were given in charge to the Country. Seldens
Titles of Honor, fo. 628. See Consistory.

Seal, (Sigillum) Is well known. The first sealed Charter we find extant in
England is that of King Edward the Confessor upon His foundation of Westminster
Abbey. Dugdales Warwickshire, fo. 138. b. Yet we read in the MS. History of
Offa, King of the Mercians -- Rex Offa literas Regii Sigilli sui munimine
consignatas eidem Nuncio commisit deferendas. And that Seals were in use in the
Saxons time, see Tailors History of Gavelkind, fo, 73. See Wang. Anno 1536.
Domini etiam atque Generosi, relictis imaginibus equitum in Sigillis, posuerunt
Arma sua in parvis Scutis. Chron. Joh. Rossi, in Bibl. Cotton.

Sealer, (Sigillator) Is an Officer in the Chancery; who is appointed by the
Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal of England, to Seal the Writs and
Instruments there made in his presence.

Seam. (Sax.) See Seem.

Sean fish, (Anno 1 Jac. Ses. 1. ca. 25.) Seems to be that sort of Fish, which
is taken with a great long Net, called a Sean.

Searcher. See Alneger.

Sea-rover, (Anno 16 Car. 2. ca. 6.) See Privateir.

Second Deliverance (Secunda Deliberatione) Is a Writ that lies (after a return
of Cattle replevied, adjudged to him that distrained them, by reason of a
default in the party that replevied) for the replevying the same Cattle again,
upon security, put in for the redelivery of them, in case the Distress be
justified. New Book of Entries, verbo, Replevin in Second Deliverance, fol.
522. Vide Dyer, fol. 41. number. 4, 5.

Secta ad Curiam, Is a Writ that iies against him, who refuses to perform his
Suit, either to the County or Court Baron. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 158.

Secta facienda per illam quae habet aeniciam partem, Is a Writ to compel the
Heir, that has the Elders part of the Coheirs, to perform service for all the
Coparceners. Reg. of Writs, fol 177. a.

Secta Molendini, Is a Writ lying against him, that used to grind at the Mill
of B. and after goes to another Mill with his Corn. Reg. of Writs, fol. 153.
Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 122. But it seems by him, that this Writ lies especially
for the Lord against his Frank-tenant, who held of him by making Suit to his
Mill. See the New Book of Entries on this word. Secta ad Molendinum, and
Assizes of Nuisance, are now much turned into Trespasses and Actions upon the
Case.

Secta ad justitiam faciendam (Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 16. number. 6.) Is a Service
which a Man is bound by his Fee to perform.

Secta Shirarum. Per Sectam Shirarum clamat esse quiet. de secta in Com.
Cestriae and Flint coram Justic. Domini Principis in Communi Aula placitorum.
Plac. in Itin. apud Cestriam. 14 Hen. 7.

Secta unica tantum facienda pro pluribus haereditatibus, Is a Writ that lies
for that Heir, who is distrained by the Lord to more Suits than one, in respect
of the Land of diverse Heirs descended to him. Reg. of Writs, fol. 177. 4.

Sectis non faciendis, Is a Writ that lies for a Woman; who, for her Dower,
ought not to perform Suit of Court. Reg. of Writs, fol. 174.

Secunda super oneratione Pasturae, Is a Writ that lies where Admeasurement of
Pasture has been made, and he, that first surcharged the Common, does it
again, notwithstanding the Measurement. Reg. of Writs, fol. 157. Old Not. Br.
fol. 73. Vide 13 Edw. 1. cap. 8.

Secundary (Secundarius) A Second Officer, who is next to the Chief Officer: As
the Secundary of the Fine Office. Secundary of the Compter, who is next to the
Sheriff of London in each of the two Compters. Secundary of the Office of the
Privy Seal. Anno 1 Edw. 4. cap. 1. Secundaries of the Pipe, two. Secundary to
the Remembrancers, which are two Officers in the Exchequer. Camden, page 113.

Securitatem inveniendi, quod se non divertat ad parts exteras sine Licentia
Regis, Is a Writ that lies for the King, against any of His Subjects, to stay
them from going out of His Kingdom. The ground whereof is, That every Man is
bound to serve and defend the Commonwealth, as the King shall think meet. Fitz.
Not. Br fol. 85.

Securitate Pacis, Is a Writ that lies for one (who is threatened death, or
danger) against him that so threatens, and is taken out of the Chancery,
directed to the Sheriff, whereof the form and farther use, you may see in Reg.
of Writs, fol. 88. b. and Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 79.

Se Defendendo, Is a Plea for him, who is charged with the death of another,
saying, He was forced to what he did in his own defense; the other, so
assaulting him, that if he had not done as he did, he must have been in danger
of his own life: Which danger ought to be so great, as that it appears to have
been otherwise inevitable. Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 1. cap. 7. And although he
justify it to be done in his own defense, yet is he driven to procure his
pardon of course from the Lord Chancellor, and forfeits, notwithstanding, his
Goods to the King.

Seignior (Dominus, Fr. Seigneur) Signifies generally as much as Lord; but
particularly it is used for the Lord of the Fee, or of a Manor, as Dominus or
Senior, among the Feudists, is he who grants a Fee or Benefit out of the Land
to another; and the reason is, because (as Hotoman says) having granted the use
and profit of the Land to another, yet the property (i. Dominium directum) he
still retains in himself.

Seignior in Gross. See Lord in Gross.

Seignory (Dominium, Fr. Seigneurie, i. Ditio, Dominatus, etc.) Signifies a
Manor or Lordship. Seignorie de Sokemans. Kitchen, fol. 80. Seignorie in
Gross, seems to be the title of him who is not Lord by means of any Manor, but
immediately in his own person: As Tenure in Capite, whereby one held of the
King, as of His Crown, was Seignorie in Gross. Idem, fol. 206.

Seignourage (Anno 9 Hen. 5. stat. 2. cap. 1.) Seems to be a Regality or
Prerogative of the King, whereby He challenges allowance of Gold and Silver,
brought in the Mass to His Exchange, to be coined.

Seisin (Seisina, Fr. Scisine) Possession; and Primier Seisin is the first
Possession. Seisin is twofold, in Fact, and in Law Perkins, Dower, 369 and 370.
Seisin in Fact, is, When an Actual Possession is taken: Seisin in Law, is, When
something is done, which the Law accounts a Seisin, as an Inrolment. Seisin in
Law, is as much as a right to Lands and Tenements, though the owner be by wrong
d^^^eised of them. Perkins, Tenant pur le Courtesy, 457, 478. Coke, lib. 4.
fol. 9. a. Calls it Seisin in Law, or Seisin Actual.

Seisina habenda, quia Rex habuit annum, diem, and vastum, Is a Writ that lies
for Delivery of Seisin to the Lord, of his Lands or Tenements, who was formerly
convict of Felony, after the King, in right of His Prerogative, has had the
Year, Day, and Waste. Reg. of Writs, fol. 165. a.

Selda. (From the Sax. Selde, a Seat, Stool, or Settle) -- Assisa Mensurarum
Anno 9 Rich. 1. apud Hoveden. -- Prohibemus ne quis mercator praetendat Seldae
suae rubros pannos vel nigros, vel scuta vel aliqua alia per quae visus
emptorum saepe decipiuntur, ad bonum pannum eligendum. In Majoribus Chronicis
ubi locus hic vertitur; Selda Window exponitur, says Spelman. But by what
follows, it seems clearly to signify a Shop, Shed, Standing, or Stall --
Sciant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Thomas Pencombe de Bromyard dedi --
Thomae Forsenet Vicario Ecclesiae de Bromyard unam Seldam meam jacentem in
Bromyard predict. apud le Cornechepynge, etc. Dat. die Lunae proxime post
Festum Sancti Egidii Abbatis, Anno 10 Hen. 6. -- Et medietatem unius Seldae,
vvcat. le Unicorne in London. Mon. Angl. 2 par. fol. 322. a. Sir Edward Coke
(on Littl. fol. 4. b.) takes, or rather mistakes Selda for a Salt-Pit.

Selion of Land (Selio terrae) Fr. Seillon, i. Terra elata inter duos sulcos,
in Latin Porca, in English a Stiche, or Ridge of Land, and in some places only
called a Land; and is of no certain quantity, but sometimes half an Acre, more
or less. Therefore Crompton in his Juris. fol. 221. says, That a Selion of Land
cannot be in demand, because it is a thing uncertain. It seems to come
originally from the Saxon rul or ryl, i. aratrum, whence also the Fr.
Seillonner, i. arare. -- Charta vetus Achronica makes six Selions and a half,
to be but one Acre. Sciant praesentis and futuri quod ego Margeria filia
Willielmi de Ryleia dedi, etc. Emmae filiae meae pro homagio and servitio suo
unam acram terrae in campo de Camurth, scil. Illas sex Seliones and dimid. cum
forera and sepe and fossato, quae jacent in Aldewic juxta terram, etc. See Hade.

Seem (Summa, summagium) A Horse-load: A Seem of Corn is eight Bushels. Fratres
Praedicator. (Heref.) pro 2 Sumagiis vocat. Semes de focali percipiend.
quotidie de bosco de Heywood pro termino 20 annorum. -- 3 Hen. 5. par. 2. m.
18. See Sumage. -- Habebunt etiam duas Summas frumenti, pro pastellis, cum
voluerint, faciendas. Mon. Angl. 2 par. fol. 935. a. -- Et sint quieti de
Summagiis and Murdro and Tennigges and Wapentake and auxiliis Vice-comitum.
Ibid. fol. 201. a. -- De quatuor Summis salis, continentibus quadraginta
bullones pro dimidia salina sua. Ibid. fol. 256. b.

Sendal (Anno 2 Rich. 2. cap. 1.) Seems to be fine Linen; bat Sandal is a
kind of Physical Wood brought out of the Indies.

Senege. -- There goes out yearly in Prorege and Senege 33 s. 6 d. History of
S. Paul's Church, fol. 272. Quaere, if it be not the Money paid for Synodals, as
Proxege for Proxies or Procurations.

Seneshal (Senescallus, is derived of Sein, a House or place, and Schalc, an
Officer or Governor. Coke on Littl. fol. 61. a. a Steward: As the High Seneshal
or Steward of England. Pl. Cor. fol. 152. High Seneshal or Steward, and South
Seneshal or under Steward, Kitchen, fol. 83. is understood of a Steward, and
under Steward of Courts. Seneshal de l'Hostel de Roy, Steward of the Kings
Household. Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 102. In Purificatione Beatae Mariae, fuit Filius
Regis Anglorum Parisiis and servivit Regi Francorum ad mensam, ut Senescallus
Franciae. Rob. de Monte. in Anno 1170. page 649.

Senescallo and Marshallo quod non teneant placita de libero tenemento, etc. Is
a Writ directed to the Steward or Marshal of England, inhibiting them to take
cognizance of an Action in their Court, that concerns either Freehold, Debt, or
Covenant. Reg. of Writs, fol. 185. a. 191. b.

Seneucia, Widow-hood. Si vidua dotata post mortem viri sui se maritaverit vel
filium vel filiam in Seneucia peperit, dotem suam amittet and forisfiet in
quocunque loco infra Com. Kant. Tenen. in Gavelkind. Plac. Trin. 17 Ed. 3.

Separation (Separatio) Of Man and Wife. See Mulier.

Septuagesima (Westminster. 1. cap. 51.) Is always the Fourth Sunday before
Quadragesima, or the First Sunday in Lent, from whence it takes its numeral
denomination; as Quinquagesima is the next before Quadragesima, then
Sexagesima, and then Septuagesima; which are days appropriated by the Church to
Acts of Penance and Mortification, and are a certain gradation or preparation
to the devotion of Lent, then approaching. See Quinquagesima.

Sequatur sub suo periculo, Is a Writ that lies where a Summons Ad
Warrantizandum is Awarded, and the Sheriff returns, that he has nothing
whereby he may be summoned; then goes out an Alias and Pluries, and if he come
not at the Pluries, this Writ shall issue forth. Old Not. Br. fol. 163. Coke on
Littl. fol. 10^ b.

Sequela Curiae, Suit of Court. -- Et quod sint libori a Sequela Curiae. Mon.
Angl. 2 par. fol. 253. a.

Sequestration (Sequestratio) Is a separating a thing in controversy from the
possession of both those that contend for it. And it is twofold Voluntary or
Necessary: Voluntary is, that which is done by the consent of each party;
Necessary is that which the Judge, of his authority does, whether the parties
will or not. It is also used for the Act of the Ordinary, disposing the Goods
and Chattels of one deceased, whose Estate no Man will meddle with. Dyer, fol.
232. number. 5. and fol. 256. number. 8. As also for the gathering the Fruits of a
Benefice void, to the use of the next Incumbent. Anno 28 Hen. 8. cap. 11.
Fortescu, cap. 50. And in diverse other Cases.

Sequestro habendo, Is a Writ Judicial for the dissolving a Sequestration of
the Fruits of a Benefice made by the Bishop, at the Kings Commandment, thereby
to compel the Parson to appear at the Suit of another: For the Parson, upon his
appearance, may have this Writ, for the Release of the Sequestration. Reg. of
Writs Judicial, fol. 36. a.

Sergeant (Serviens vel Serians) Is diversely used and applied to sundry Offices
and Callings. First, a Sergeant at Law (or of the Coyf) otherwise called
Sergeant Conutor, is the highest degree taken in that Profession, as a Doctor
in the Civil Law: And to these, as Men best learned, and best experienced, one
Court is severed, to plead in by themselves, which is that of the Common Pleas,
where the Common Law of England is most strictly observed; and where they are
not so limited exclusively to others, but they may likewise plead and be heard
in other Courts, where the Judges, (who cannot be Judges until they have taken
the degree of Sergeant at Law) do style them Brother, and hear them with great
respect, next unto the Kings Attorney, and Solicitor General. These are made
by the Kings Mandat, directed to them, commanding them upon a great penalty, to
take upon them that degree, by a day certain therein assigned. Dyer, fol. 72.
number. 1. And of these, one is the Kings Sergeant, being commonly chosen out of
the rest, in respect of his great learning, to plead for the King in all his
Causes, especially in those of Treason. (Pl. Cor. lib. 3. cap. 1.) Of which,
there may be more, if the King so please. In other Kingdoms he is called
Advocatus Regius. With what solemnity these Sergeants are created, read
Fortescu, cap. 50. Crokes third Part, fol. 1. and 2 Instit. fol. 213. These
were also anciently called Servientes Narratores. -- Et praedictus Thomas le
Marshall dicit, quod ipse est communis Serviens Narrator Coram Justic. and
alibi ubi melius ad hoc conduci poterit, and quod ipse in Placito praefatae
Assisae coram praefatis Justiciariis stetit cum praedicto Johanne, and de
concilio suo fuit, etc. Trin. 25 Edw. 1. Coram Rege, Oxon 22. -- Md. quod
Termino Trin. Anno 26 Hen. 8. Tho. Willoughby, and Johannes Baldwin, Sergeants
de Roy, fueront faits Chivaliers, and que null tiels Sergeants devant. fuer.
unques fait Chivaliers. Ex MS. Vocat. Spelmans Reports.

The next is a Sergeant at Arms, or of the Mace (Serviens ad Arma) whose Office
is to attend the person of the King. Anno 7 Hen. 7. cap. 3. to arrest Traitors
or Persons of Condition, and to attend the Lord High Steward of England,
sitting in Judgment upon any Traitor, and such like (Pl. Cor. lib. 3. cap. 1.)
Of these by the Statute 13 Rich. 2. cap. 6. there may not be above thirty in
the Realm. Two of them, by the Kings allowance, do attend on the Two Houses of
Parliament, whose office in the House of Commons, is the keeping of the doors,
and (as of late it has been used) the execution of such commands, especially
touching the apprehension of any offender, as that House shall enjoin him.
Crompt. Jur. fol. 9. Another of them attends on the Lord Chancellor or Lord
Keeper, in the Chancery. And one on the Lord Treasurer of England. One upon the
Lord Major of London, upon extraordinary solemnities; one attends upon the
Lord President of Wales, and another upon the Lord President of the North.

Another sort of Sergeants, are chief Officers, who execute several Functions
or Offices within the Kings Household; of which, you may read many in the
Statute of 33 Hen. 8. cap. 12.

There is also a more inferior kind of Sergeants of the Mace, whereof there is
a Troop in the City of London, and other Corporate Towns, that attend the
Major, or other Head Officer, chiefly for Matter of Justice. Kitchen, fol. 143.
And these are called Servientes ad Clavam. New Book of Entries, verbo, Scire
facias, in Mainpernors, cap. 3. fol. 538.

Sergeants of Peace. -- Et etiam habere ibidem (i. Dunham) sex Servientes qui
vocantur Sergeants of Peace, qui servient Cur. Manerii praedicti, and facient
Attach. and executiones omnium Placitorum and querelarum in dicta Curia
Placitorum, etc. Pl. de quo Warranto apud Cestriam, 31 Ed. 3.

Serjeanty (Serjantia) Is a Service that cannot be due to any Lord from his
Tenant, but to the King only; and it is divided into Grand Serjeanty and
Petit. The first is where one holds Land of the King by service, which he ought
to do in his own person, as to bear the Kings Banner, Spear, etc. Petit
Serjeanty is where a Man holds Land of the King, to yield him yearly some small
thing toward his Wars, as a Sword, Dagger, Bow, etc. of which read Bracton,
lib. 2. cap. 16. and 37. And Britton, c. 66. number. 1. and 2. Inter feodalia
servitia summum est and illustrissimum, quod nec Patronum aliquem agnoscit
praeter Regem, says the Learned Spelman. Lib. MS. Feodal. de Baldwino de
Pettour, qui tenuit terras in Hemingston in Com. Suff. per Serjantiam, pro qua
debuit facere die Natali Domini singulis annis coram Domino Rege Angliae,
Saltum, Sufflum, and Pettum, al. unum Saltum, unum Sufflatum, and unum
Bombulum. And Sir Rich. Rockesley held Lands at Seaton by Serjeanty to be
Vantrarius Regis, i. The Kings Fore-footman when he went into Qascoign, Donec
per usus fuit pari solutarum precii 4 d. until he had worn out a pair of shoes
of the price of 4 d. Which Service, being admitted to be performed, when the
King went to Gascoign to make War, is Knights Service. Coke on Littl. fol. 69.
b. See the Statute of 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. Whereby all Tenures of any Honors,
Manors, Lands, etc. are turned into Free and Common Soccage; but the Honorary
Services of Grand Serjeanty are thereby continued.

Servage (Anno 1 Rich. 2. cap. 6.) See Service.

Service (Servitium) Is that which the Tenant by reason of his Fee owes to his
Lord; which is sometimes called Servage, as Anno 1 Rich. 2. cap. 6. Our ancient
Law Books, make diverse Divisions of Service, as into Military and Base;
Personal and Real; Intrinsic and Extrinsick, etc. But since the Stat. 12 Car.
2. cap. 24. Whereby all Tenures are turned into Free and Common Soccage, much
of that learning is set aside. See Coke, lib. 4. Bevils Case, fol. 9. a. See
Soccage. Thomas Leigh Esquire (at the Coronation of King Charles the Second)
brought up to the Kings Table a Mess of Pottage called Dillogrout, which
Service had been adjudged to him by the Court of Claims, in right of the Manor
of Addington in Com. Surrey; whereupon the Lord High Chamberlain presented him
to the King, who accepted the Service, and afterward Knighted him.

Servientibus, Are certain Writs touching Servants, and their Masters,
violating the Statutes made against their abuses, which see in Reg. of Writs,
fol. 189. and 191.

Service secular (Anno 1 Edw. 4. cap. 1.) Worldly Service, contrary to
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical.

Servitium ferrandi, Of Shooing a Horse. See Palfrey.

Servitiis Acquietandis, Is a Writ Judicial that lies for one Distrained for
Services to A. who ows and performs to B. for the Acquittal of such Services.
Reg. of Writs Judic. fol. 27. a. and 36. b.

Servitors of Bills, Are such Servants or Messengers of the Marshal belonging
to the Kings Bench, as were heretofore sent abroad with Bills or Writs to
summon Men to that Court, being now called Tipstaffs. Anno 2 H. 4. cap. 23.

Session of Parliament. The passing any Bill or Bills, by giving the Royal
Assent thereto, or the giving any Judgment in Parliament, does not make a
Session, but the Session does continue till that Session be Prorogued or
Dissolved. See 4 Part Inst. fol. 27.

Sessions (Sessiones) Signifies a sitting of Justices in Court upon their
Commission; as the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer. Pl. Cor. fol. 67. Quarter
Sessions, otherwise called General Sessions, or Open Sessions. Anno 5 Eliz.
cap. 4. Opposite whereunto are Especial, otherwise called Privy Sessions, which
are procured upon some special occasion, for the more speedy dispatch of
Justice. Cromp. Just of Peace, fol. 109. Petit Sessions or Statute Sessions,
are kept by the High Constable of every Hundred for the placing of Servants.
Anno 5 Eliz. cap. 4. See Statute Sessions.

Sesseur (Anno 25 Edw. 3. cap. 6.) Seems to signify the assessing or rating of
Wages.

Severance, Is the singling or severing two or more, that join or are joined in
one Writ. As, if two join in a Writ De liberate Probanda, and the one
afterward be non-sute, here Severance is permitted, so as, notwithstanding the
non-sute of the one, the other may severally proceed. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 78.
and Brook, tit. Severance and Summons, fol. 238. There is also Severance of the
Tenants in an Assise, when one, two, or more Disseisors appear upon the Writ,
and not the other. New Book of Entries, fol. 81. And Severance in Attaints,
eodem, fol. 95. And Severance in Debt, fol. 220. where two Executors are named
Plaintiffs, and the one refuses to prosecute. Severance of Corn, is the
cutting and carrying it from off the Ground, and sometimes the setting out the
Tithe from the rest of the Corn is called Severance. See Crokes Rep. 2 Part,
fol. 325.

Several Tail (Tallium Separatum) Is that whereby Land is given and entailed
severally to two: For example, Land is given to two Men and their Wives, and to
the Heirs of their Bodies begotten, the Donees have joynt-estate for their two
lives, yet they have several inheritance; because the issue of the one shall
have his moiety, and the issue of the other, the other moiety.

Several Tenancy (Tenura Separalis) Is a Plea or Exception to a Writ, that is
laid against two, as Joint, who are indeed several. Brook hoc tit. fol. 273.

Sewer (Severa and Sewera) Est fossa in locis palustribus ducta ad aquas
eliciendas, etc. A Passage or Gutter to carry Water into the Sea, or a River.
Anno 6 Hen. 6. cap. 5. and 12 Car. 2. cap. 6. And Commissioners of Sewers are
such as, by authority under the Great Seal, see Drains and Ditches well kept
and maintained in the Marish and Fen Countries, for the better conveyance of
the Water into the Sea, and preserving the Grass upon the Land, for Food of
Cattle. See the Statutes 15 Car. 2. cap. 17. and 17 Ejusdem, cap. 11. Touching
the Draining the Great Level in the Fens, called Bedford Level, and the
authority of the Governor, Bailiff, etc. As Commissioners of Sewers.

Sextary (Sextarius) Was an ancient Measure, containing about our pint and a
half, (according to the Latin Dictionary) the City (now Town) of Leicester paid
(inter al.) to the King yearly Twenty five Measures called Sextaries of Honey;
as we read in Domesday, And in Claus. 4 Edw. 3. m. 26. we find mention of
Tresdecem Sextarios Vini. -- Et unum Sextrium Salis apud Wainflet. Mon. Angl. 2
par. fol. 849. b. December Mittas brasii, quatuor Sextarios Avenae ad praebendam.
Idem, 1 par. fol. 136. b. Where it seems to have been used for a much greater
quantity. A Sextary of Ale, contained xvi Lagenas. See Tolsester.

Sexagesima. See Septuagesima.

Shack, Is a Custom in Norfolk to have Common for Hogs, from the end of
Harvest, till Seed time, in all Men's Grounds without control. Cokes 7 Rep. fol.
5. Corbets Case. And in that County, To go at Shack, is as much as, to go at
large.

Shares. See Flotzon.

Sharping Corn, Is a Customary gift of Corn, which, at every Christmas, the
Farmers in some parts of England give to their Smith, for sharping their Plough
Irons, Harrow times, and such like, and exceeds not half a Bushel, for a
Plough-Land.

Sherbet (Anno 15 Car. 2. cap. 11.) Is a Compound Drink lately introduced in
England from Turkey and Persia, and is made of Juice of Lemmons, Sugar, and
other ingredients: Another sort of it is made of Violets, Honey, Juice of
Raisins, etc. Sherbert in the Persian Tongue, signifies pleasant Liquor.

Shermans Craft, Is a Craft or Occupation at Norwich, the Artificers whereof do
Shear as well Worsteads, Stamins, and Fustians, as all other Woollen Cloth; and
mentioned Anno 19 Hen. 7. cap. 17.

Showing, Is to be quit of Attachments in any Court, and before whomsoever in
Plaints showed, and not avowed. Terms Ley. See Scavage.

Shilling (Sax. scilling) Among our English Saxons, consisted but of Five
pence. Si in capillis sit vulnus longitudinis unius Unciae V. denariis, i. uno
solido componatur. LL. H. 1. c. 39.

Ship Money, Was an Imposition charged upon the Ports, Towns, Cities, Boroughs,
and Counties of this Realm, in the time of King Charles the First, by Writs
commonly called Ship-writs, under the Great Seal of England in the years 1635.
and 1636. for the providing and furnishing certain Ships for the Kings service,
etc. which (by Stat. 17 Car. 1. cap. 14.) was declared to be contrary to the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, the Petition of Right, Liberty of the
Subjects, etc.

Shipper (Anno 1 Jac. sess. 1. cap. 33.) Is a Dutch word, signifying the Master
of a Ship. We corrupt it into Skipper, and use it for any Common Seaman.

Shire (Comitatus) From the Saxon Scir or Scyre, i. To part or divide) Is well
known to be a part or portion of this Land, called also a County. Who first
divided this Land into Shires, see in Camd. Britan, page 102. Of which, there
are in England Forty, and in Wales Twelve. In privilegiorum Chartis ubi
conceditur quietum esse a Shiris, intelligendum est de immunitate, qua quis
eximitur a Secta vel clientela Curiis Vicecomitum (quas etiam Shiras ^^cant)
prestanda vel perficienda. Spel. The Assizes of the Shire, or the Assembly of
the people of a County, was called dcir-gemot by the Saxons.

Shirif or Shiref (Vicecomes) quasi, Shirereve. Sax. scire-gerefa, i. Pogi vel
Comitatus Praepositus, the Chief Offic^^, under the King, of a Shire or County.
Camden (in his Britan. page 104.) thus describes his Office,

SIngulis vero annis, Nobilis aliquis ex incolis praeficitur, quem Vicecomitem,
quasi Vicarium Comitis, and nostra lingua Shyref, i. Comitatus Praepositum,
vocamus: Qui etiam Comitatus vel Provinciae Quastor recte dici potest. Ejus
enim est publicas pecunias Provinciae suae conquirere, mulctas irrogatas vel
pignoribus ablatis colligere, and aerario infer, Judicibus praesto adesse and
eorum mandata exequi, duodecim viros cogere, qui in causis de facto cognoscunt,
and ad Judices referunt (Judices enim apud nos Juris solum, non facti sunt
Judices) condemnatos ad supplicium ducere, and in minoribus litibus cognoscere,
in majoribus autem jus dicunt Justiciarii, quos Itinerantes ad Assisas vocant,
qui quot annis hos Comitatus bis adeunt, ut de Causis cognoscant, and
Carceratis Sententiam ferant. Henricus secundus hos Itinerantes instituit, vel
potius restituit. Ille (ut inquit Matthew. Paris) consilio filii sui and
Episcoporum constituit Justiciarios, per sex parts Regni, in qualibet part
tres, qui jurarent, quod cuilibet jus suum conservarent illaesum.

Of the Antiquity and Authority of this Officer, read Cokes Rep. lib. 4.
Mittons Case, and Spelmans Glossarium, verbo, Vicecomes. The Shirif was
anciently chosen in the County Court by the Suffrages of the People, as Knights
of Parliament yet are, but is now nominated by the the King. See Fortescu, cap.
24. fol. 53. Vicecomes, dicitur, quod Vicem Comitis supplet in placitis illis
quibus Comes ex suae dignitatis ratione participat cum Rege. Niger lib.
Scaccarii. The Form of his Oath, see in the Reg. of Writs, fol. 331. b.

Shirif-tooth -- Per Shiriftooth Johannes Stanley Ar. clamat habere de quolibet
tenente infra feodum de Aldford unum denarium and quadrantem per annum,
exceptis Dominicis terris propriis and terrae in feodo and Manerio praedicto
Manner. and Hundred. de Macclesfeld. Rot. Plac. in Itin. apud Cestriam 14 Hen. 7.

Shireebe weke of Winchester and of Esser, (the compass or extent of a Sheriffs
authority) Anno 21 Rich. 2. cap. 10. and 11. Sherifwikes. Anno 13 Eliz. cap. 22.

Shirifalty (Anno 14 Car. 2. cap. 21.) The time of ones being Sheriff.

Shire Clerk, Seems to be the Undersheriff. Anno 11 Hen. 7. cap. 15. Sometimes
taken for a Clerk in the County Court, Deputy to the Undersheriff. See Cokes
Rep. lib. 4. Mittons Case.

Shire-mote. See Shire and Turn.

Shop (Shopa) -- Omnibus -- Johannes Horsenet de Hereford Bochour salutem.
Noveritis me praefatum Johannem dedisse, etc. Rogero Smyth de Bromeyard imam
Shopam cum pertin. suis in Bromeyard praedict. scituat. in le Marketplace
ibidem, etc. Dat. 27 Febr. 9 Edw. 4. See Selda.

Shorling and Morling, Seem to be words to distinguish Fells of Sheep: Shorling
signifying the Fells after the Fleeces are shorn off the Sheeps back; and
Morling alias Mortling, the Fells flean off after they die, or are killed. Anno
3 Edw. 4. cap. 1. and 4 Ejusdem, cap. 3. Howbeit in some parts of England they
understand by a Shorling, a Sheep whose Fleece is shorn off, and by a Mortling,
a Sheep that dies. See Morling.

Sich (Sichetum and Sikettus) A little Current of Water, which is dry in the
Summer. -- Inter duos Sikettos, quorum unus cadit inter -- Mon. Angl. 2 par.
fol. 426. b. Also a Water-Furrow or Gutter, accordingly in Worcestershire I
know a Moorish Ground called Blacksich.

Sicut alias, Is a Writ sent out in the second place, where the first was not
executed. Coke, lib. 4. fol. 55. b. It is so called of these words expressed in
it. As Carolus Dei gratia, etc. Vicecomiti Heref. salutem. Praecipimus tibi
(sicut alias praecipimus) quod non omittas propter aliquam libertatem in
Balliva tua, quin eam ingrediaris and capias A. B. de C. in Comitatu tuo genesis
etc. Lambert in this Tract of Processes in the end of his Eiren.

Sidemen alias Questmen, Are those that are yearly chosen, according to the
Custom of every Parish, to assist the Churchwardens in the Enquiry, and
presenting such offenders to the Ordinary, as are punishable in the Court
Christian.

Sigillum -- Notum sit omnibus Christianis, quod ego Johannes de Gresley non
habui potestatem Sigilli mei per unum annum integrum ultimo praeteritum, jam
notifico, in bona memoria and sana mente, quod scripta Sigillo meo contradico
and denego in omnibus a tempore praedicto usque in diem restaurationis Sigilli
praedicti. In cujus rei testimonium Sigillum Decanatus de Repingdon apposui.
Testibus Domino Thoma Stafford Milite, Johanne Arden, etc. Dat. apud Drakelew,
18 Rich 2. See Seal and Tabellion.

Significabit, Is a Writ which issues out of the Chancery, upon a Certificat
given by the Ordinary, of a Man that stands obstinately excommunicate by the
space of forty days, for the laying him up in prison without Bail or Mainprise,
until he submit himself to the authority of the Church. And it is so called,
because significavit, is an emphatical word in the Writ.

There is also another Writ of this name in the Register of Writs, fol. 7. a.
directed to the Justices of the Bench, willing them to stay any suit depending
between such and such, by reason of an Excommunication alleged against the
Plaintiff; because the sentence of the Ordinary that did excommunicate him, is
appealed from, and the Appeal yet depends undecided. See Fitz. Not. Br. De
Excommunicato capiendo, fol. 62. and 66. A. where you may find Writs of this
name in other Cases.

Signet (Signet) Is one of the Kings Seals, wherewith His Private Letters are
sealed, and is always in the Custody of the Kings Secretaries: And there are
four Clerks of the Signet Office attending them. 2 Inst. fol. 556.

Silk-thrower or Throwster (Anno 14 Car. 2. cap. 15.) Is a Trade, or Mystery,
that winds, twists, and spins, or throws silk, thereby fitting it for use, who
are incorporated by the said Act: Wherein there is also mention of Silk-winders
and Doublers, which are Members of the same Trade. Anno 20 Car. 2. cap. 6.

Silva Cedua. See Sylva Caedua.

Simnel, (Siminellus vel Symnellus) Panis purior, sic dictus, quod a simila,
hoc est, puriori farinae part efficitur. Panis similagineus, Simnel-bread. It
is mentioned in Assisa Panis, (and is still in use, especially in Lent.) Bread
made into a Simnel shall weigh two shillings less then Wastel bread. Stat. 51
H. 3. see Cocket.

Simony, (Simonia) Venditio rei sacrae, a Simone Mago dicta. It was agreed by
all the Justices Trin. 8. Jac. That if the Patron present any person to a
Benefice with Cure, for Money, That such Presentation, etc. is void, though the
Presentee were not privy to it; and the Statute gives the presentation to the
King. Cokes 12 Rep. fo. 74. Simony may be by compact betwixt strangers, without
the privity of the Incumbent or Patron. Croke 1 Part, fo. 331. Bawderokes Case.
Hob. Rep. fo. 165. Noys Rep. fo. 22. Pascals Case, and 3 Inst. fo. 153.

Simplex -- Carta simplex, A Deed-Poll, or single Deed -- Ricardus Mayhen de
Sutton per Cartam simplicem huic indenturae indentatam, dedit, etc. Dat. 22
Edw. 3.

Sine assensu Capituli, Is a Writ that lies where a Dean, Bishop, Prebendary,
Abbot, Prior or Master of Hospital, aliens the Land held in the right of his
House, without the consent of the Chapter, Covent or Fraternity; In which case
his Successor shall have this Writ, Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 195.

Sine die, i. Without day. When Judgment is given against the Plaintiff, he is
said to be In misericordia pro falso clamore suo, and eat inde sine die, i. He
is dismissed the Court.

Si non omnes, Is a Writ of association, whereby, if all in Commission cannot
meet at the day assigned, it is permitted that two or more of them may finish
the business. See Association, and Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 185. and 111, etc.

Si recognoscant, Is a Writ that lies for a Creditor against his Debtor, who
has, before the Sheriff in the County Court, acknowledged himself to owe his
Creditor such a sum received of him in pecuniis numeratis. The form of which
Writ is this -- Rex vicecom. salutem Praecip. tibi quod si A. recognoscat se
debere R. 40 solidos sine ulteriori dilatione, tunc ipsum distringas ad
praedictum debitum eidem R. sine dilatione reddendum, Test, etc. Old. Not. Br.
fo. 68.

Site, or Site, (Situs) The setting, or standing of any place, the Seat, or
Situation of a Capital House or Message; a Territory, or quarter of a
Country. As we often find the Site of the late dissolved Monastery of, i. The
place where it stood. -- The word is found in the Stat. 32 Hen. 8. ca. 20. and
22 Car. 2. ca. 11. and is there written Site. -- Dedi Situm loci, in quo domus
sua sita est. Mon. Angl. 2 Par. fo. 278. b.

Sithcundman, (Sax.) Sithcundus, custos paganus interpretatur. Lamb. expl.
verb. pa. 5. Such a gentleman as had the Office to lead the men of a Town or
Parish. E class nobilium erat, says Somner.

Scyvinage, (Anno 27 Hen. 6. ca. 2.) Signifies the precincts of Caleis.

Smalt (Anno 21 Ja. ca. 3. and Pat. 16 Feb. 16. Ja. Ital. smalto) Is that of
which Painters make Blew Color.

Smoke silver. Tenemenium Newstede cum pertinen. etc. in villa de Staplehirst
in Came. Cant. tenetur de manerio de East-greenwich per fidelitatem tantum in
libero Soccagio, per Pat. dat. 3 Febr. 4 Edw. 6. And by the payment for
Smoke-silver to the Sheriff yearly the sum of six pence. Notes for Lord
Wootons Office, 1628. There is Smoke-silver and Smoke-penny paid to the
Ministers of diverse Parishes, conceived to be paid in lieu of Tithewood, -- Or,
it may, as in many places at this day, be a continued payment of the Romescot,
or Peter Pence. See Chimney-money.

Soc, (Sax.) Signifies power, authority, or liberty to minister Justice, and
execute Laws: Also the Shire, Circuit, or Territory, wherein such power is
exercised by him that is endued with such a privilege or liberty. Whence our
Law Latin word Soca for a Seignory or Lordship, enfranchised by the King, with
the liberty of holding or keeping a Court of his Sockmen, or Socagers, i. His
Tenants, whose tenure is hence called Socage. This kind of liberty is in diverse
places of England at this day, and commonly known by the name of Soke, or
Soken. Skene says Sok, (an old word, used in Charters and Feoffments, which are
in sundry old Books, containing the Municipal Laws of this Realm) is called
Seda de hominibus suis in Curia secundum consuetudinem regni, etc. See Bracton,
lib. 3. Tract. 2. ca. 8. where he makes mention of these liberties, Soc, Sac,
Tol, Team, Infangthef, and Utfangthef. LL. Hen. 1. ca. 22. -- Sive Sacam
totaliter habent, sive non. Soca, id quod Franchesiam dicimus, i. Locus
privilegiatus, libertas, immunitas, refugium, asylum, sanctuarium, a Sax. Socn
and socne, haec ipsa significantibus.

Socage, or Soccage, (Socagium) From the Fr. Soc, i. Vomer, a Plowshare, or
Coulter) Is a tenure of Lands, by or for certain inferior or Husbandry services
to be performed to the Lord of the Fee. See Institutes of Common Law. 31.
Bracton, (lib. 2. ca. 35. nu. 1.) Describes it thus, Dici poterit Soccagium a
Socco, and inde tenentes qui tenent in Soccagio, Sockmanni dici poterunt, eo
quod deputati sunt, ut videtur, tantummodo ad culturam, and quorum custodia and
maritagia ad propinquiores parents jure sanguinis pertinebunt, etc. Skene
says, Soccage is a Tenure of Laws, whereby a man is infeoffed freely without
Wardship or Marriage, paying to his Lord some small rent, etc. which is called
free-socage, there was also base Soccage, otherwise called Villenage -- Bracton
adds -- Soccagium liberum est, ubi fit servitium in donariis Dominis
capitalibus, and nihil inde omnino datur ad scutum and servitium Regis. This
free Soccage is also called common Soccage, Anno 37 H. 8 ca. 20. Other
divisions there are in our Law, Writers of Soccage in Capite, etc. But, by the
Statute 12 Car. 2. ca. 24. all Tenures from and after 24 February, 1645, shall
be adjudged and taken for ever to be turned into free and Common Socage.

Socmans, alias Sokemans, (Socmanni) Are such Tenants as hold their Lands by
Soccage Tenure; But, the Tenants in ancient Demean seem most properly to be
called Socmans. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 14. b. Britton. ca. 66. n. 2. --
Progenitores Simonis Bokeley omnia sua in Houcton per liberum Sokagium tunc
tenebant, and quieti erant de Sectis Curiarum, Consuetudinibus, exactionibus
and demandis. Lib. -- S. Albani Tit. Houcton, ca. 1. The word Sokeman is found
in the Statute of Wards and Relief, 28 Edw. 1.

Socna, (Sax. Socne) A Privilege, Immunity, Liberty or Franchise. -- Volo, ut
ipsi sint eorum Sacae and Socnae; Theolonei etiam and Teami (privilegiorum
scilicet and jurium sic appellatorum) digni intra tempus and extra tempus, etc.
Char. Canuti Regis, in Hist. Eccl. Cath. S. Pauli, fo. 189. See Soc.

Socome, signifies a Custom of grinding at the Lords Mill; And there is
Bond-Socome, where the Tenants are bound to it, and Love-socome, where they do
it freely out of love to their Lord.

Soke, (Anno 32 Hen. 8. ca. 15. and 20.) Significat libertatem Curiae tenentium
quam Socam appellamus. Fleta, lib. 1. ca. 47. Sect. Soke. Soka, hoc ect quod
Prior habet sectam de homagiis suis ad Curiam suam, secundum communem
consuetudinem regni Angliae. M. S. de libertat. Priorat. de Cokesford. Per Soke
Will. Stanley in manerio suo de Knottesford clamat cognitionem Placitorum
debiti, transgressionis, conventionis and detentionis infra sum. 40 sol. de
aliis compactibus quibuscunque sine brevi. Pl. in Itin. apud Cestriam, 14 Hen.
7. Soke, i. Aver Fraunche Court de ses homes. MS. See Soc.

Soken, (Soca.) See Soc and Hamsoken.

Sokereeve Seems to be the Lords Rent-gatherer in the Soke or Soken. Fleta,
lib. 2. ca. 55.

Solda. -- Pateat -- quod nos Johannes Romayne senior de Leominstr. and
Johannes Romayne junior de eadem remisimus -- Johanni Meole vicario Ecclesiae
de Wygemore Ricardo Bocerell Constabular. Castri de Wygemore, and Fouke
Sprengehose totum jus nostrum and clamium -- in una Solda cum pertinenciis in
Leominstr. scituata in alto vico inter Soldam quondam Ricardi Spicer and Soldam
quae fuit Philippi Collinge, etc. Dat. 2. Octobre, 19 Ric. 2. It seems to be
the same with Solila, a Shop, or Shed.

Solet and debet. See Debet and Solet.

Soletenant, (Solus tenens) Is he or she that holds only in his or her own
right, without any other joined. For example, if a man and his wife hold land
for their lives, the remainder to their Son; Here the man dying, the Lord shall
not have Heriot, because he dies not sole-tenant, Kitchen, fo. 134.

Solicitor, (Solicitator,) Signifies a man employed to follow and take care of
Suits dedepending in Courts of Law or Equity; formerly allowed only to
Nobility, whose maenial servants they were; but now too commonly used by others
to the great increase of Champerty, and Maintenance and Damage of the People.

Solidata terrae. See Farding deal of Land. Solidata signifies also the pay or
stipend of a Soldier. Et qui terram non habent and arma habere possunt, illuc
veniant ad capiendum solidatas nostras. Breve Regis Johannis vicecomitatus
Angliae. Anno 1213.

Solinus terrae, In Domesday Book contains two Plowlands, and sometimes less
then a half; for there it is said Septem Solini terrae sunt, 17 Carucat.

Soller, or Solar, (Solarium) A Chamber, or upper room. Dedi -- unam Shoppam
cum Solario super aedificato. Ex vet. carta.

Solutione feodi militis Parliamenti, and Solutione feodi Burgen. Parliamenti,
Are Writs whereby Knights of the Shire, and Burgesses may recover their
allowance, if it be deny^d, Anno 35 Hen. 8. ca. 11.

Sommons. See Summons.

Sontage, Was a Tax of forty shillings laid upon every Knights Fee. Scow, pa.
284. In some places the word is used for course Cloth, as bagging for Hops, or
the like. Systema Agriculturae.

Sorcery, (Sortilegium) Witchcraft, or Divination by Lots: which is Felony, by
1 Jac. ca. 12. Sortilegus, quia utitur sortibus in cantationibus Daemonis. 3
Inst. fo. 44. Sorcery and devinal sont members de Heresy. Mirror, ca. 1. Sect.
5. Excepted out of the Act of General pardon. 12 Car. 2. ca. 11.

Sothale, In Bracton, (Lib. 3. Tract. 2. ca. 1.) It is written Sothail, but
both conceived to be mistaken for Scotale, which vide. Henrici autem tercii
aetate hoc sublatum esse constat ex Bracton.

South-Uicont, -- (sub-vicecomes) The Undersheriff, Cromp. Jur. fo. 5.

Sown, Is a corruption from the Fr. Souvenu, i. Remembered; For the Stat. 4 Hen.
5. ca. 7. in the Original French, has des Estreats nient souvenu, which, by
turning the two single u v, into w, was first made Sowenu, afterward Sown;
which properly signifies remembered; And such Estreats and Casualties as are not
to be remembered, run not in demand, that is, are not leviable. It is used as a
word of art in the Exchequer, where, Estreats that sown not, are such as the
Sheriff by his industry cannot get; and Estreats that sown, are such as he may
gather. 4 Part, Inst. fo 107.

Speaker of the Parliament, Is an Officer in that High Court, who is, as it
were the Common-Mouth of the rest, of which there are two, one termed, The Lord
Speaker of the House of Peers, who is most commonly the Lord Chancellor of
England, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; the other, (being a Member of the
House of Commons) is called the Speaker of the House of Commons. The duties of
which two you have particularly described in a Book, Entitled, The Order and
usage of keeping the Parliament. See Parliament.

Special matter in evidence. See General Iss^^, and Brook, tit. General Issue,
and Special Evidence.

Specialitas, A specialty, is usually taken for a Bond, Bill, or such like
Instrument. -- Presentatum fuit per Juratores -- quod quidam Johannes de Pratis
habuit quandam uxorem amicabilem de cujus specialitate, Willielmus, filius
Henrici Molendinarii, and similiter quidam alii malefactores fuerunt; Ita quod
predicti malefactores venerunt ad lectum ipsius Johannis, ubi jacebat, and
ipsum traxerunt ab eadem, and ipsum abinde duxerunt and tenuerunt, dum
praedictus Willielmus concubuit cum ea. Pl. coram Rege apud Ebor. Mich. 1 Ed.
3. Rot. 123. Here it seems to be used for special, or particular acquaintance.

Spinster. -- Pollard miles and Judic. habuit 11 filios gladiis cinctos in
tumulo suo, and totidem filias fusis depictas. Spelman in his Aspilogia, says
-- Antiquis temporibus ipsae Reginae fusis usae sunt, unde hodie omnes faeminae
Spinsters dictae sunt. It is the Addition usually given to all unmarried Women,
from the Viscounts Daughter downwards. Yet Sir Edward Coke says Generosa, is a
good addition for a Gentlewoman, and, if they be named Spinster in any Original
Writ, Appeal, or Indictment, they may abate, and quash the same. 2 Inst. fo.
668.

Spiritualities of a Bishop, (Spiritualia Episcopi) Are those Profits which he
receives, as he is a Bishop, and not as he is a Baron of the Parliament.
(Stamf. Pl. Cor. fo. 132.) Such are the duties of his Visitation, his benefit
growing from Ordaining and Instituting Priests, Prestation Money, that is,
subsidium charitativum, which, upon reasonable cause, he may require of his
Clergy, the benefit of his Jurisdiction, etc. Joachimus Stephanus de Jurisdict.
lib. 4. ca. 14. number. 14.

Spittle-house, (mentioned in the Act for Subsidies, 15 Car. 2. ca. 9.) is a
corruption from Hospital, and signifies the same thing; or, it may be taken
from the Teutonic Spital, an Hospital, or Almes-house.

Spoliation, (Spoliatio) Is a Writ that lies for an Incumbent against another
Incumbent, in case where the right of Patronage comes not into debate. As if a
Parson be made a Bishop, and has dispensation to keep his Rectory, and
afterward the Patron presents another to the Church, who is instituted and
inducted; The Bishop shall have against this Incumbent a Writ of Spoliation in
Court Christian. Fitz. Not. Br. fo 36. See Benevolence.

Spullers of Yarn, (Anno 1 Mariae. Parl. 1. ca. 7.) Are tryers of Yarn, to see
if it be well spun, and fit for the Loom.

Sqalley (Anno 43 Eliz. ca. 10.) See Rewey. It is a note of faltines in the
making of Cloth.

Stablestand, (Stabilis statio, vel potius, stans in stabulo) is one of the
four Evidences; or Presumptions, whereby a Man is convinced to intend the
stealing the Kings Dear in the Forest. Manwood, Par. 2. ca. 18. number. 9. the
other three are Dogdraw, Backbear, Bloudy-hand. This Stablestand is, when a Man
is found at his standing in the Forest, with a Cross, or Long-Bow bent, ready
to shoot at any Dear, or else standing close by a Tree with Greyhounds in a
Lease, ready to slip.

Stagnarium. (Rectius Stannarium) A Tinmine. Rex, etc. Roberto de Curtenay:
Concessimus Dominae Reginae matri nostrae Cuneum and Stagnarium Devon. ad se
sustinendum. Paten. Anno 1 Hen. 3.

Stagnes, (Stagna) Ponds, Pools, or standing Waters. -- mentioned, Anno 5 Eliz.
ca. 21.

Stalboat, A kind of Fishers-boat. Anno 27 Eliz. ca. 21.

Stalkers, A kind of Fishing-Nets; mentioned Anno 13 Rich. 2. Stat. 1. ca. 20.
and 17 ejusdem, ca. 9.

Stallage, (Stallagium) From the Sax. stal. i. Stabulum, statio) the liberty or
right of pitching or erecting Stalls in Fair or Market, or the Money paid for
the same. Quod si aliquis portaverit res suas ad forum and posuerit super
Stallas, faciet redemptionem pro eis qualibet die Lunae, vel semel pro toto
anno. Ex Registro Priorat. de Cokesford. See Scavage. In Scotland it is called
Stallange, and among the Romans it was termed Siliquaticum.

Standard. See Estandard.

Standel, Is a young store-Oake-tree, which may in time make Timber; twelve
such are to be left standing in every Acre of Wood, at the felling thereof.
Anno 35 Hen. 8. ca. 17. and 13 Eliz ca 25.

Stannaries, (Stannaria, from the Lat. Stannum, i. Tin,) Are the Mines and
Works where this Metal is got and purified, as in Cornwall and elsewere. Of
which read Came. Brit. pa. 119. The liberties of the Stannarymen, granted by
Edward the First, before they were abridg'd by the Statute of 50 Edward the
Third. See in Plowden, casu Mines, so. 327. and Cokes 12 Rep. fo. 9. And the
liberties of the Stannary-Courts, see Anno 17 Car. 1. ca. 15.

Staple, (Stapulum) Signifies this or that Town or City, whether the Merchants
of England were by Act of Parliament to carry their Wool, Cloth, Lead, Tyn, and
such like Staple Commodities of this Land, for the utterance of them by the
great. The word comes from the Fr. Fstape, i. Forum vinarium, a Market, or
Staple for Wines, which is the principal Commodity of France. And, in an old
French Book, thus -- A Calais y avoite Estape de la lain, etc i. The Staple
for Wool. You may read of many places appointed for this Staple in our
Statutes, according as the King thought fit to alter them, from 2 Ed. 3. ca. 9.
to 5 Ed. 6. ca. 7 What Officers the Staples had belonging to them, you may see
Anno 27 Ed. 3. Stat. 2. ca. 21. The Staple Commodities of this Realm are, Wool,
Leather, Woolfel^, Lead, Tin, Butter, Cheese, Cloth, etc. as appeas by the
Stat. 14 Ric. 2. ca. 1. though some allow only the five first. See 4 Inst. fo.
238.

Star Chamber, (Camera stellata, Otherwise called Chamber des Estoiels) Was a
Chamber at Westminster, so called, because at first all the roof thereof was
decked with Images of gilded Stars. Anno 25 Hen. 8. ca. 1. It is written the
Sterred Chamber. Henry the Seventh and Henry the Eighth ordained by two several
Statutes, (viz. 3 Hen. 7. ca. 1. and 21 Hen. 8. ca. 2.) That the Chancellor,
assisted by others there named, should have power to hear complaints against
Retainors, Embraceors, Misdemeanors of Officers, and such other offenses,
which, through the power and countenance of such as did commit them, did lift
up the head above other faults, and, for which, inferior Judges were not so
meet to give correction, and the Common Law had not sufficiently provided. And,
because that place was before dedicated to the like service, it was still used
accordingly. See Camden, pa. 112, 113. But, by the Stat. 17 Car. 1. ca. 10.)
the Court commonly called the Star Chamber, and all Jurisdiction, Power and
Authority thereto belonging, etc. are, from and after 1 August, 1641, clearly
and absolutely dissolved, and determined.

Starling. See Sterling.

Statute, (Statutum) Has diverse significations. First, it signifies an Act of
Parliament made by the King and his three Estates of the Realm; in which sense
it is either general or special. Coke, lib. 4. Hollands Case. Secondly, Statute
is a short Writing, called a Statute-Merchant, or Statute-Staple, which are in
the nature of Bonds, Anno 5 Hen. 4. ca. 12.) and are called Statutes, because
made according to the form expressly provided in certain Statutes, which direct
both before what persons, and in what manner they ought to be made. West, par.
1. Symbol. lib. 2. Sect. 151. defines a Statute-Merchant to be a Bond
acknowledged before one of the Clerks of the Statutes-Merchant, and Mayor of
the Staple, or chief Warden of the City of London, or two Merchants of the said
City for that purpose assigned, or before the Mayor, chief Warden, or Mayor of
other Cities or good Towns, or other sufficient Men for that purpose appointed;
sealed with the seal of the Debtor, and of the King, which is of two pieces,
the greater is kept by the said Mayor, etc. and the less by the said Clerk. The
form of which Bond Fleta, (lib. 2. ca. 64. Sect. 2.) thus delivers -- Noverint
universi me N. de tali Comitatu teneri M. in Centum Marcis, solvendis eidem M.
ad Festum Pent. Anno Regni Regis, etc. Et nisi fecero, concedo quod current
super me and haeredes meos districtio and pena provisa in Statuto Domini Regis
edito apud Westminster. Datum London. tali die. -- The Fee for the Seal is, for
Statutes acknowledged in Fairs, for every pound a half penny, and out of Fairs
a farthing. The execution upon Statute-Merchant is first to take the Body of
the Debtor, if he be lay, and can be found, if not, his Lands and Goods; and is
founded on the Statute 13 Ed. 1. Stat. 4. See New Book of Entries, verbo,
Statute-Merchant.

Statute-Staple is either properly so called, or improperly; Properly, is a
Bond of Record acknowledged before the Mayor of the Staple, in the presence of
one of the two Constables of the same Staple; The Fee for the Seal is, of every
pound, (if the same exceed not 100 l.) a halfpenny, and if it exceed 100 l. a
farthing; By virtue of which Statute the Creditor may forthwith have execution
of the Body, Lands and Goods of the Debtor, and this is founded on the Statute
23 Ed. 3. ca. 9. A Statute-Staple improper, is a Bond of Record, founded upon
the Statute 23 Hen. 8. ca. 6. of the nature of a proper Statute-Staple, as to
the force and execution of it, and acknowledged before one of the Chief
Justices, and in their absence before the Mayor of the Staple and Recorder of
London. The forms of all which Bonds or Statutes see in Westminster. Part 1. Symbol.
lib. 2. Sect. 152 -- 154, etc.

Statutes, Is also used in our vulgar Discourse, for the petite Sessions, which
are yearly kept for the disposing of servants in service, by the Statute 5
Eliz. ca. 4. See Recognizance.

Statute-Sessions, Otherwise called Petty-Sessions, are a meeting in every
Hundred of all the Shires in England, where, by custom, they have been used,
whereunto the Constables do repair, and others, both Householders and Servants,
for the debating of differences between Masters and their Servants, the rating
of Servants Wages, and the bestowing such People in service, as being fit to
serve, either refuse to seek, or cannot get Masters, Anno 1 Eliz. ca. 4.

Statuto Stapulae, Is a Writ, that lies to take his Body to Prison, and to
seize upon his Lands and Goods who has forfeited the Bond, called
Statute-Staple. Reg. of Writs, fo. 151.

Statutum de laboraiis, Is a Writ Judicial, for the apprehending such
Laborers, as refuse to work according to the Statute. Reg. Judic. fo. 27. b.

Statutum mercatorium, Is a Writ for the Imprisoning him, that has forfeited a
Bond called Statute-Merchant, until the Debt be satisfied. Reg. of Writs, fo.
146. b. and of these there is one against Lay-persons, another against
Ecclesiastical.

Stemnifreoch, -- Nec non liberate multurae suae in molendixo ipsius Roberti,
etc. quod sint Stemnefreoch and Cholfreoch. Mon. Angl. 2 Par. fo. 293. b.
quaere.

Stennerie, Is used for the same with Stanneries in the Statute 4 Hen. 8. ca.
8. See Stanneries.

Sterbrech, alias Strebrech, Is the breaking, obstruction, or diminution of a
way, or the turning it out of its right course; from the old English word Stre,
i. Via, and Brech, fractio, violatio; hence to go astrey, or as we now write it
stray, i. To go out of the way. Strebrech 100 sol. omendet. Leg. Hen. 1. ca.
81. Strebrech est, si quis viam frangat, concludendo, vel avertendo, vel
fodiendo. MS.

Sterling, (Sterlingum, and in old Records Sterilensis) Was the ancient
Epitheton for money (properly of Silver) current in this Realm; Stat. of
Purveyors, ca. 13. and took name from this, that there was a certain pure Coin,
stamped first in England by the Easterlings, or Merchants of East-Germany, by
the command of King John. Accordingly Hoveden writes it Esterling: And, in
several old Deeds I have seen vint livres d'Esterlinges. By the Stat. 31 Ed. 1.
the Penny, which is called the Sterling, round, and without clipping, weighes 32
grains of Wheat, well dried, and twenty pence make an ounce, and twelve ounces
a pound, and eight pound a Gallon of Wine, and eight Gallons a Bushel, which is
the eighth part of a Quarter. -- The word Sterling is now much disused, in
stead of five pound sterling; we say five pound of current, or lawful English
Money. See more of this word in the Sax. dict. verbo, Steoran.

Stews, or Stues, Are those places, which were permitted in England to Women of
professed incontinency, for the profer of their bodies to all comers; and is
derived from the Fr. Estuves, (i. Thermae, Balneum) because wantons are wont to
prepare themselves for venereous acts, by bathing; And, that this is not new,
Homer shows in the eighth Book of his Odyss. where he reckons Hot Bathes among
the effeminate sort of pleasures. See the Statute of 11 Hen. 6. ca. 1. -- Henry
the Eighth about the year 1546, forbad them for ever.

Steward, (Senescallus) Is compounded of the Sax. Steda, i. Room, Place or
Stead, and Ward, as much as to say, a man appointed in my place or stead; and
has many applications, yet always signifies an Officer of chief account
within his Jurisdiction. The greatest of these is the Lord High-Steward of
England, which was anciently the inheritance of the Earls of Leicester, till
forfeited to Henry the Third by Simon de Mountfort; but, the power of this
Officer being very great, of late he has not usually been appointed for any
long time, but only for the dispatch of some special business, at the
Arraignment of some Nobleman in case of Treason, or such like, which once
ended, his Commission expires. Of the High-Steward of Englands Court you may
read 4 Inst. fo. 59. Then is there the Steward of the Kings Household, Anno 24
Hen. 8. ca. 13. whose name was changed to that of Great-Master, Anno 32
ejusdem, ca. 39. But, this Statute was repealed by 1 Mar. 2 Parl. ca. 4. and
the Office of Lord Steward of the Kings Household revived, where you may read
much of his Office; as also in Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 241. b. Of this Officers
ancient power read Fleta, lib. 2. ca. 3. This wordis of so great diversity,
that there is in many Corporations, and in all houses of Honor, throughout the
Realm, an Officer of this name and authority. What a Steward of a Manor or
Household is, or ought to be, Fleta fully describes, lib. 2. ca. 71, and 72.
Though Senescallus be now the usual Latin for Steward, yet I have seen a Copy
of Court-Roll of Mardyn in Herefordshire, (17 Edw. 4.) concluding thus, -- Et
huic Copiae sigillum Locumtenentis est appensum.

Stilyard, (Guild-halda Teutonicorum) Anno 19 Hen. 7. ca. 23. -- 22 Hen. 8. ca.
8. and 32 ejusdem, ca. 14.) Was a place in London, where the fraternity of the
Easterling-Merchants, otherwise called the Merchants of Hawnse and Almain,
(Anno 1 Edw. 6. ca. 13.) had their abode. See Geld. It was so called of a broad
place or Court, wherein Steel was much sold, upon which place that House was
founded. See Hawnse.

Stoc and Stovel, -- Praeterea si homines de Stanhal dicti Abbatis inventi
fuerint in bosco praedicti W. cum forisfacto ad Stoc and ad Stovel, (al.
Stovene) and aliquis quaerens corporaliter in terram per eos seisa fuerit,
malefacto pro delicto, qui taliter inventus est, reddet tres solidos --
Similiter concessum est, quod si aliquis inventus fuerit cum branchiis
quercuum, vel cum aliis minutis boscis, cum forisfacto illo ad Stoc and ad
Stovel, malefactor ille reddet sex denarios. E quadam Carta conventionum inter
Will. de Bray and Abbat. and Conv. de Osiney. See Zuche.

Stockikind. See Gavelkind.

Stotall. -- Also moreover we have granted, in amendment of the City, that they
bin all quit of Bryztchel, of Childwit, Zeresgen, and of Stotall; So that no
Sheriff of London, neither none other Bailey, make Stotal in the Francheis
aforesaid, etc. This I find in an old Printed Book, which delivers it (inter
al.) As the Charter of Hen. 1. to the City of London; but, the word is without
doubt mistaken for Scotale.

Stone of wool, (petra lanae, Anno 11 Hen. 7. ca. 4.) Ought to weigh fourteen
pounds, yet in some places by Custom it is more, and in some places it is but
twelve pounds and a half. Le Charre de plumbo constat ex 30 formellis and
quaelibet formella continet 6 petras exceptis duabus libris, and quaelibet
Petra constat ex 12 libris. Compositio de ponderibus. A Stone of Wax is eight
pound. And, at London, the Stone of Beef is no more. See Weights and Sarpler.

Stovene. See Zuche.

Stowage, (From the Sax. stow. Locus,) Is the Room or place where Goods are
laid, or the money that is paid for such place.

Straits or Streits (Anno 18 Hen. 6. cap. 16. and 1 Rich. 3. cap. 8.) A sort of
narrow, Course Cloth, or Kersey, anoiently so called.

Stranded (from the Sax. Strand, i. A Shore or Bank of the Sea, or great River)
Is when a Ship is by tempest, or ill steerage run on Ground, and so perishes.
Stat. 17. Car. 1. cap. 14. See Strond.

Stray. i. Si aliquod animal casu erraverit, and infra libertatem Prioris
advenerit, and a Ballivis ejus captus fuerit, ducetur ad Pynfoldam, and ibi
servabitur per unum annum and unum diem; si nemo illud clamaverit infra illud
tempus, erit Priori: Si autem venerit quis and legitime probaverit illud esse
suum, dabit pro quolibet pede unum denarium, and solvet expensas quae factae
fucrant, and rehabebit bestiam suam. Ex Regi str o Priorat. de Cokesford, see
Estray.

Stranger (Fr. Estrangi^r) Signifies generally a Man born out of the Realm, or
unknown; but in Law it has a special signification for him that is not privy,
or party to an Act: As a Stranger to a Judgment, (Old Not. Br. fol. 128.) is he
to whom a Judgment does not belong, and herein it is directly contrary to party
or privy. See Privy.

Stream-works (Anno 27 Hen. 8. cap. 23) Is a kind of work in the Stanneries.
Of these Mines or Tinworks (says Camden in his Britan. fol. 184.) there are two
kinds; the one called Lodeworks, the other Stream-works: This lies in lower
Grounds, when by Trenching they follow the Veins of Tin, and turn aside now and
then, the streams of Water coming in their way: The other is in higher places,
when upon the Hills they dig very deep Pits, which they call Shafts, and
undermine.

Streetgavel or Stretgavel, i. Quilibet tenens in Manerio de Cholinton dabit 2
s. pro itu and reditu. MS. de temp. E. 1. Every Tenant of that Manor (in Com.
Sussex) paid yearly 2 s. (for his going out, and returning into it) to the Lord
of the Manor, by the name of Stretgavel. Mich. 4 Edw. 1. Coram Rege. Antiquity
of Pourveyance, fol. 222.

Strip (Strepitus) Destruction, Mutilation; from the Fr. Estropier, i.
Mutilars, detruncare radicitus -- Strepitum and vastum facere, i. To make Strip
and Waste, or Strop and Waste. See Estreapment.

Streteward. Per Streteward Johannes Stanley Ar. clamat quod Scrvientes pacis
and Ministri sui in fra Feodum de Aldford capere debent de qualibet fuga
catallorum iv d. Rot. Pla. in Itinere apud Cestriam 14 H. 7. See Marketzeld.

Strond (Sax) A Shore or Bank of the Sea or great River. Ricardus Rex -- Notum
facimus vobis nos concessisse -- Deo and Sancto Albano Ecclesiae suae Sancti
Oswyni de Tynemuth, Cellae S. Albani and Monachis ibidem Deo servientibus omnes
terras suas and omnes homines suos, cum Sacha, Soca, Over Strond and Streme, on
Wode and Field, Toll, Them, and Grithburg, Hamsocne, Murdrum and Forestal,
Danegeld, Infangenethef, and Utfangenethef, Flemnensfrenieth, Blodwit, Wrec,
etc. Dat. 4 Nov. Anno 1 Regni nostri apud Cant. On Stronde et Stream, on Wde
et Feld. -- Voces Anglicae veteres, and in antiquioris avi Chartis crebro
repertae; Privilegium sapiunt, seu potius privilegii latitudinem sive
amplitudinem, and sic Latin Iegantur, in litore, in fluvio, in sylva and
Campo. Gloss. in. x Scriptores.

Strumpet (Meretrix) Was heretofore used for an Addition. -- Jur. praesent,
etc. Quod Johannes le Maynwarynge de Whatcroft de Cum. Cestriae Esquire Laurentius
le Waren de Davenham Esquire etc. Hugo de Sondebache Yoman, Hopkin, Norman de Com.
Cestr. Husband-Knave, Willielmus le Birchewode de Clyve-Knave, cum plurimis
aliis, and Agnes Cawes de Medio Wico de Comitatu Cestr. Strumpet. -- Tali die
domum Ranulphi Madock vi and armis -- fregerunt, etc. Pla. apud Cestriam 6 Hen.
5. m. 2. in dorso.

Stud -- Libere vendendi and emendi, tam in Cestria, quam in Comitatu and
Wycis, ubi non fuit Lexulla, omnia fine Toll and Stud, praeter sal and equos,
etc. Mon. Angl. 2 Par. fol. 187. b. It is probable this is the same, which is
elsewhere written Stuth.

Stuth, -- Per Stuth clamat esse quiet. de exactione pecuniae a singulis villis
-- Per Vicecom. Comitat. Cestriae. Pl. in Itin. ibid. 14 Hen. 7.

Submarshal (Submarescallus) Is an Officer in the Marshalsea, who is Deputy to
the Chief Marshal of the Kings-house, commonly called the Knight Marshal, and
has the custody of the Prisoners there. Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 104. He is
otherwise called Under Marshal.

Subornation (Subornatio) A secret or underhand preparing, instructing, or
bringing in a false witness; or corrupting or alluring unto leudness. Hence
Subornation of Perjury (mentioned in the Act of General Pardon. 12 Car. 2. cap.
8.) is the preparing, bringing in or alluring unto Perjury. Subornation of
Witnesses. 32 Hen. 8. cap. 9. -- 3 Part. Instit. fol. 167.

Subpaena, Is a Writ whereby common persons are called into Chancery, in such
Case only, where the Common Law fails, and has not provided: So as the party,
who, in equity has wrong, can have no ordinary remedy by the Rules and course
of the Common Law; many examples whereof you may read in West, Par. 2. Symbol.
tit. Proceedings in Chancery, sect. 18. But Peers of the Realm in such Cases
are called by the Lord Chancellors Letter, giving notice of the Suit intended
against them, and requiring them to appear. There is also Subpaena ad
Testificandum, which lies for the calling in of Witnesses to testify in any
Cause, as well in Chancery as other Courts. And the name of both proceeds from
words in the Writ, which charge the party called to appear, at the day and
place assigned, Sub paena Centum librarum, etc. Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 33. Anno 15
Hen. 6. cap. 4.

Subsidium Cathedraticum. See Cathedratic.

Subsidy (Subsidium) Signifies an Aid, Tax, or Tribute, granted by Parliament
to the King, for the urgent occasions of the Kingdom, to be levied of every
Subject of ability, most commonly after the rate of 4 s. in the pound for Land,
and 2 s, 8 d, for Goods.

I Do not find, that the Saxon Kings had any Subsidies collected after the
manner of those this day; but they had many Customs whereby they levied Money
of the people, or personal service toward the building and repairing of Cities,
Castles, Bridges, Military Expeditions, etc. which they called Burgbote,
Brigbote, Herefare, Heregeld, etc. But, when the Danes oppressed the Land, King
Egelredus in the year 1007 yielded to pay them for redemption of Peace 10000 l.
which after was increased to 36000 l, then to 113000 l, and at last to a yearly
tribute of 48000 l. This was called Danegeld, i. Danica solutio. And, for
levying it; every Hide of land, that is, every Plough-land was cessed 12 d.
yearly, the Church Lands excepted; and thereupon it was after called Hydagium,
which name remained afterward upon all Taxes and Subsidies imposed upon Lands;
for, sometimes it was imposed upon Cattle, and was then called Hornegeld. The
Normans called both these sometimes, according to the Latin and Greek word
Taxes, sometimes, according to their own language Tallagium, of talier, to cut
or divide; And sometimes, according to the word usual beyond the Seas, auxilia
and subsidia. The Conqueror had these kind of Taxes or Tallages, and made a Law
for the manner of levying them, as appears in Emendationibus ejus, pa. 125.
Sect. volumus and hoc firmiter, etc. After the Conquest these Subsidies seem to
have been granted in other manner then now they are; as, every ninth Lamb,
every ninth Fleece, and every ninth Sheaf, Anno 14 Edw. 3. Stat. 1. ca. 20. Of
which you may see great variety in Rastals Abr. Tit. Taxes, Tenthes,
Fifteenths, Subsidies, etc. and 4 Inst. fo. 28. and 33. whence you may conclude
there is no certain rate, but as the Parliament shall think fit. Subsidy is, in
our Statutes, sometimes confounded with Custom. Anno 11 Hen. 4. ca. 7. See
Benevolence, and 15 Car. 2. ca. 7.

Sucking. Per Sucking, hoc est fore quiet de illis amerciamentis quando le
Burlimen, id est, supervisores del Ringyord, id est Clausur. quae vocat. le
Chiminfildes vel common Medows, and praemonit. fuerint ad imparcand. and
faciend. clausuras illas simul cum vicinis suis, ille qui non venit ad talem
praemonitionem amerciatus erit ad pretium unius vomeris, Anglice a Suck,
praetii quatuor denar. and hoc quotiescunque praemonit. non venerit. Pla. in
Itin. apud Cestriam, 14 Hen. 7.

Surety of peace, (Securitas pacis, so called, because the party that was in
fear is thereby secured) Is an acknowledging a Bond to the Prince, taken by a
competent Judge of Record, for the keeping of the Peace. This peace a Justice
of Peace may command, either as a Minister, when he is willed so to do by a
higher Authority, or as a Judge, when he does it of his own power, derived from
his Commission. Of both these see Lamb. Eiren. lib. 2. ca. 2. pa. 77. See Peace
and Supplicavit. It differs from Surety of good abearing in this, that whereas
the Peace is not broken without an affray, battery, or such like; Surety de
bono gestu may be broken by the number of a man's company, his Weapons or
Harness.

Suffragan, (Suffragnus) Is a titular Bishop, ordam'd to assist the Bishop of
the Diocese in his Spiritual Function. Sir Edw. Coke, (2 Inst. fo. 79.) calls
him a Bishops Vicegerent. -- Dicuntur (Episcopi) qui Archiepiscopo suffragari
and assistere tenentur, says Spelman. Et Suffraganei dicuntur, quia eorum
suffragiis causae Ecclesiasticae judicantur. It was enacted, (Anno 26 Hen. 8.
ca. 14.) that it should be lawful for every Diocesan at his pleasure to elect
two honest and discreet Spiritual persons within his Diocese, and to present
them to the King, that he might give the one of them such Title, Style, Name
and Dignity of such of the Sees in the said Statute specified, as he should
think convenient, etc. and that every such person shall be called Bishop
Suffragan of the same See, etc. Came. in his Britan. Tit. Kent. speaking of the
Archbishop of Canterburies Suffragans, says, When the Archbishop is busied
in weightier Affairs, they manage for him matters that pertain to Orders only,
and not to the Episcopal Jurisdiction.

Suite, or Suit, (Secta) Fr. Suite, i. Consecutio, sequela) Signifies a
following another, but in diverse senses; the first is a Suit in Law, and is
divided into suit real and personal, which is all one with Action real and
personal. 2. Suit of Court, or Sute-service, is an attendance which a Tenant
owes to the Court of his Lord, (Anno 7 Hen. 7. ca. 2.) 3. Sute-Covenant, is,
when your Ancestor has Covenanted with mine to su^ to his Court. 4.
Sute-Custome, when I and my Ancestors have been seized of your and your
Ancestors Suit time out of mind. 5. Sutereal, or regal, when men come to the
Sheriffs Turn, or L^et,. 6. Suit signifies the following one in Chase, as
fresh-sute, Westminster. 1. ca. 46. Lastly, it signifies a Petition made to the King,
or any great person.

Suite of the Kings Peace, (Secta pacis Regis) Is the pursuing a man for breach
of the Kings Peace, by Treasons, Insurrections, or Trespasses, Anno 6 Rich. 2.
Stat. 2. ca. 1. and 27 ejusdem, ca. 15. and 5 Hen. 4. ca. 15.

Suit-silver. See Sute-silver.

Suling. See Swoling.

Summage. See Sumage, and Seem.

Sumage, or Summage, (Sumagium and Summagium, a Horscload) Toll for carriage on
Horseback. Cromp. Jur. fo. 91. Forestarius capiat -- pro uno equo qui portat
summagium, per dimidium anni obolum. -- Charta de Foresta, cap. ante-penult,
and Char. Edw. 1. number. 17.

Summoneas, Is a Writ Judicial of great diversity, according to the diverse
cases wherein it is used; which see in the Table of the Reg. judicial.

Summoner, (Summonitor) Is a small Officer that calls or cites men to any
Court; These ought to be boni homines, that is in Fleta's Judgment, liberi
homines, and ideo boni, quia terras tenentes, quod sint coram talibus
Justiciariis ad certos diem and locum, secundum mandatum Justiciariorum
vicecomiti directum, parati inde faceri recognitionem, lib. 4. ca. 5.

Summons, (Summonitio) Signifies with us, as much as vocatio in jus, or Citatio
among the Civilians; and thence is our word Sumner, which in French is
Somoneur, (i. Vocator, Monitor.) Summons of the Exchequer, Anno 3 Edw. 1. ca.
19. How Summons is divided, and what circumstances it has to be observed. See
Fleta, lib. 6. ca. 6, 7.

Summons in terra petita, (Kitchen, fo. 286.) Is that Summons which is made
upon the land, which the party (at whose Suit the Summons is sent forth) seeks
to have.

Summons ad Warrantizandum, (Dyer, fo. 69 nu. 35.) Summoneas ad warrantizandum,
Is the Process whereby the vouchee is called. See Coke on Litt. fo. 101. b.

Sumptuary Laws, Are Laws made to restrain excess in Apparel, and prohibit
costly Clothes, of which we have anciently had many in England, but all
repealed, Anno 1 Jac. See 3 Inst. fo. 199.

Super institution, (Super institutio) One Institution upon another, as where
A. is admitted and instituted to a Benefice upon one Title, and B. is admitted,
instituted, etc. by the presentment of another. See Hutchins Case in Crokes
Rep. 2 Par. fo. 463.

Superoneratione pasturae, Is a Writ Judicial that lies against him, who is
impleaded in the County, for the over-burdening a Common with his Cattle, in
case where he was formerly impleaded for it in the County, and the Cause is
removed into the Kings Court at Westminster.

Super praerogativa Regis, Is a Writ which lay against the Kings Widow, for
Marrying without his License. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 173.

Supersedeas, Is a Writ, which lies in diverse cases, and signifies in general a
Command to stay or forbear the doing of that which ought not to be done, or, in
appearance of Law, were to be done, were it not for the cause whereon the Writ
is granted. For example, a man regularly is to have surety of Peace against
him, of whom he will Swear he is afraid, and the Justice, (if required) cannot
deny it; yet, if the party be formerly bound to the Peace, either in Chancery,
or elsewhere, this Writ lies to stay the Justice from doing that, which
otherwise he might not refuse. See the Table of the Reg. of Writs, and Fitz.
Not. Br. fo. 236. for preventing the superseding Executions. See the Statute 16
and 17 Car. 2. ca. 8.

Super Statuto Edw. 3. versus Servants and Laborers, Is a Writ that lies
against him, who keeps my Servants departed out of my service against Law.
Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 167.

Super Statuto de York, quo null serra viteller, etc. Is a Writ lying against
him, that uses Victualling, either in Gross, or by Retail, in a City, or
Borough-Town, during the time he is Mayor, etc. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 172.

Super Statuto, 1 Edw. 3. ca. 12 and 13. is a Writ that lay against the Kings
Tenant holding in Chief, who alienated the Kings Land without his License.
Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 175.

Super Statuto facto pour Seneshal and Marshal de Roy, etc. Is a Writ lying
against the Steward or Marshal, for holding Plee in his Court of Freehold, or
for trespass, or contracts, not made within the Kings household. Fitz. Not. Br.
fo. 241.

Super Statuto de articulis Cleri, ca. 6. Is a Writ against the Sheriff, or
other Officer, that distrains in the Kings Highway, or in the Glebeland,
anciently given to Rectories. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 173.

Supervisor, (Lat.) A Surveyor, or Overseer: It was anciently, and still is a
Custom among some, especially of the better sort, to make a Supervisor of a
Will; an Office or Title (as it is now carelessly executed) to little purpose,
and of as little use; however the intendment may be good, viz. That he should
supervise the Executors, and see the Testators will punctually performed.

Supervisor of Highways, (Anno 5 Eliz. ca. 13.) Is otherwise called Surveyor.
See Surveyor.

Supplicavit, Is a Writ issuing out of the Chancery, for taking the surety of
Peace against a Man; It is directed to the Justices of Peace and Sheriff of the
County, and is grounded upon the Statute 1 Edw. 3. ca. 16. which ordains, that
certain persons shall be assigned by the Chancellor to take care of the peace.
See Fitz. Not. Brev. fo. 80. This Writ was of old called Breve de minis, as
Lam. in his Eiren. notes out of Reg. of Writs, fo. 88.

Sur cui in vita, Is a Writ that lies for the heir of that Woman, whose Husband
has alienated her Land in Fee, and she brings not the Writ Cui in vita, for the
recovery of her own Land; in this case her heir may have this Writ against the
Tenant after her decease. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 193.

Surcharge of the Forest, (Superoneratio Forestae) Is, when a Commoner puts on
more Beasts in the Forest, than he has right unto. Manwood, Par. 2. ca. 14. nu.
7. and is taken from the Writ De secunda superoneratione pasturae in the same
sense, when the Commoner surchargeth. 3 Inst. fo. 293.

Surplusage, (Fr. Surplus, i. Corollarium, additamentum) Signifies a
superfluity, or addition more than needs, which sometimes is a cause that a
Writ abates. Brook, tit. Nugation and Superfluity, fo. 100. Plowden, Casu,
Dives contra Maningham, fo. 63. b. It is sometime also applied to matter of
account, and signifies a greater disbursment, than the Charge of the Accountant
amounts unto: Satisfaciant in omnibus quod conjunctum fuerit per praedictum
computum inter eos de surplusagio recepto de averiis venditis, etc. Ordinatio
de marisco Romeneiensi. Pa. 38.

Surrejoynder, Is a second defense of the Plaintiffs Action, opposite to the
Defendants Rejoinder. West, Part 2. Symbol. tit. Supplications. Sect. 57. And
therefore Hotoman calls it Triplicationem, quae est secunda Actoris defenfio,
contra Rei duplicationem appusita.

Surrebutter, A second Rebutter, or a Rebutting more then once. See Rebutter.

Surrender (Sursum redditio) Is an Instrument in Writing, testifying with apt
words, that the particular Tenant of Lands, or Tenements for Life or Years,
does sufficiently consent and agree, that he, who has the next or immediate
Remainder or Reversion thereof, shall also have the present estate of the same
in Possession, and that he yields and gives up the same unto him: For every
Surrender ought forthwith to give a possession of the thing surrendered. West,
Par. 1. lib. 2. sect. 503. where you may see diverse Presidents. And a Surrender
may be of Letters Patent to the King, to the end he may grant the estate to
whom he pleases. But there may be a Surrender without writing; and therefore
there is said to be a Surrender in Deed, and a Surrender in Law: The first is
that which is really and sensibly performed; the other is, in intendment of
Law, by way of consequent, and not actual. Perkins, Surrender, fol. 60^ As, if
a Man have a Lease of a Farm, and during the term, he accept of a new Lease,
this Act is in Law, a Surrender of the former. Coke 6 Rep. fol. 11. b. There is
also a Customary Surrender of Copihold Lands, for which see Coke on Littl.
sect. 74.

Surrogate (Surrogatus) One that is substituted or appointed in the room of
another, most commonly of a Bishop, or the Bishops Chancellor.

Sursise (Supersisae) Seems to be an especial name used in the Castle of Dover,
for such Penalties and Forfeitures, as are laid upon those that pay not their
Duties or Rent for Castleward at their days. Anno 32 Hen. 8. cap. 48. Bracton
has it in a general signification. Lib. 5. tract. 3. cap. 1. number. 8. and
Fleta, lib. 6. cap. 3.

Surveyor (Supervisor) Is compounded of two French words, Sur, i. Super, and
Veois, i. Cernere, intueri) Signifies one that has the over-seeing, or care of
some great persons Lands or Works. As the Surveyor-General of the Kings
Manors. Cromp Jurisd. fol. 106. And, in this signification, it is taken Anno
33 Hen. 8. cap. 39. where there is a Court of Surveyors erected.

Surveyor of the Kings Exchange (An. 9 Hen. 5. stat. 2. cap. 4.) Was an
Officer, whose name seems in these days to be changed into some other; or the
Office it self (being very ancient, legal, and profitable for the Commonwealth)
disused.

Survivor (from the Fr. Survivre, i. Superesse) Signifies the longer liver of
two Joynttenants. See Brook, tit. Joynt-tenants, fol. 33. or of any two joined
in the right of any thing.

Suskin. See Galli halfpence.

Suspense or Suspension (Suspensio) Is a Temporal stop or hanging up, as it
were, of a Man's right; as when a Seignory, Rent, etc. by reason of the Unity of
Possession thereof; and of the Land, out of which they issue, are not in esse
for a time, and tunc dormiunt, but may be revived or awaked, and differs from
Extinguishment, which dies for ever. Coke on Littl lib. 3. cap. 10. sect. 559.
Brook, tit. Extinguishment and Suspension, fol. 314. Suspension, Is also
sometimes used by us, as it is in the Cannon Law, Pro minori Excommunicatione,
Anno 24 Hen. 8. cap. 12.

Suspiral (from the Lat. Suspirare, ^i. Ducere suspiria) Seems to be a Spring
of Water, passing under the Ground toward a Conduit or Cistern Anno 35 Hen. 8.
cap. 10.

Suit. See Suite.

Sute-silver, Is a small Rent or sum of Money, which, if paid, does excuse the
Freeholders from their appearance at the Court Barons within the Honor of Clun
in Shropshire.

Swan-heard. See Kings Swan-heard.

Swanimote or Swainmote (Swainmotus) From the Sax. swang, i. (as we now call
our Rusticks) A Country Swain, a Boclandman, A Freeholder, and gemote, i.
Conventus; (the Sax. g, being usually turned into i or y) signifies a Court
touching matters of the Forest, kept by the Charter of the Forest thrice in the
year, before the Verderors, as Judges. Anno 3 Hen. 8. cap. 18. What things are
inquirable in the same you may read in Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 180. And is as
incident to a Forest, as a Court of P^e powder to a Fair. See Lamberts
Explication of Saxon words, verbo, Conventus. -- Nullum Swainmotum de caetero
teneatur in Regno nostro, nisi ter in Anno, viz. In Principio quindecim dierum
ante Festum Sancti Michael. etc. Circa Festum S. Martini, and initio quindecim
dierum ante Festum Sancti Johannis Baptistae, etc. Charta de Foresta tam Regis
Johan. quam Hen. 3. cap. 9. See 4 Inst. fol. 289.

Swarff-money. The Swarff-money is one penny halfpenny, it must be paid before
the rising of the Sun, the party must go thrice about the Cross, and say the
Swarffmoney, and then take witness, and lay it in the hole; and when ye have so
done, look well that your witness do not deceive you; for if it be not paid, ye
give a great forfeiture xxx s. and a White Bull. This Exposition was found in
an old MS. containing the Rents due to the Catesbies in Lodbroke, and other
places in Warwickshire. But conceived to be mistaken for, or to signify the
same with Warth-money. See Ward-penny.

Swepage. (Coke on Littl. fol. 4. b.) Is the crop of Hay got in a Meadow,
called also the Swepe in some parts of England.

Swoling or Suling of Land (Sulinga, Solinga, vel Swolinga terrae), Sax.
Sulung, from sul vel sulh, i. Aratrum, as to this day in our Western Parts, a
Plough is called a Sul, and a Plough-staff, a Sul-paddle) Is the same with
Carucata terrae, that is, as much as one Plough can Till in a year; a Hide of
Land, others say it is Quantitas incerta. -- Dedit ctiam idem inclitus Rex
Willielmus (Conquestor) cidem Ecclesiae de Bello in Cantia, Regale Manerium,
quod vocatur Wy, cum omnibus appendiciis suis septem Swolingarum, id est,
Hidarum, ex sua Dominica Corona, cum omnibus libertatibus, and regalibus
consuetudinibus, etc. Rentale MS. de Wy tempore Ven. Patr. Tho. Ludlowe
Abbatis, fol. 1. -- Terram trium aratrorum, quam Cantiani Anglice dicunt Three
Swolings. Carta pervetusta Eccles. Cantuar. de qua vide Somne^rum in
Antiquitat. loci, page 211.

Syb and Some (Sax.) Pax and securitas. -- Eallum Cristenum Mannum syb and some
gemene. id est, -- Omnibus Christianis Pax and securitas communis esto. LL.
Eccles. Canuti Regis, cap. 17.

Sylva Caedua (Lat.) Wood under Twenty years growth: Coppice-wood. See the
Stat. 45 Edw. 3. cap. 3. It is otherwise called Subbois. 2 Inst. fol. 642.

Synod (Synodus) A Meeting or Assembly of Ecclesiastical Persons for the Cause
of Religion; of which, there are four kinds. 1. A General, Occumenical, or
Universal Synod or Council, where Bishops, etc. of all Nations meet. 2.
National Synod, where those of one only Nation meet. 3. A Provincial Synod,
where Ecclesiastical Persons of one only Province meet. 4. Diocesan Synod,
where those of but one Diocese meet. See Convocation: Which is the same thing
with a Synod; this being a Greek, that a Latin word.

Synodal (Synodale) Is a Cense or Tribute in Money paid to the Bishop, or
Archdeacon by the Inferior Clergy at Easter Visitation; and it is called
Synodale or Synodaticum, Quia in Synodo frequentius dabatur. The Impropriation
of Derehurt in Com. Gloc. pays yearly vii s. ix d. Pro Synodalibus and
Procurationibus. Pat. 20 July, 34 Hen. 8. -- Et quod sint quieti a Synodalibus,
and ab omni Episcopali consuetudine, excepto denario Beati Petri. Mon. Angl. 2
Par. fol. 276. b. See Historical Discourse of Procurations and Synodals, page
66. and 98. These are called otherwise Synodies in the Statute of 34 Hen. 8.
cap. 16. Yet in the Statute of 25 Hen. 8. cap. 19. Synodals Provincial seem to
signify the Canons or Constitutions of a Provincial Synod. And sometimes
Synodale is used for the Synod it self.

T.
T. Every Person convict of any other Felony (save Murder) and admitted to the
benefit of his Clergy, shall be marked with a T. upon the Brawn of the Left
Thumb. Anno 4 Hen. 7. cap. 13.

Tabellion (Tabellio) A Notary Public or Serivener, allowed by Authority to
Engross and Register private Contracts and Obligations: His Office in some
Countries did formerly differ from that of Notary, but now they are grown, or
made one. Quoniam Tabellionum usus in Regno Angliae non habetur, propter quod
magis ad Sigilla authentica credi est necesse, ut eorum copia facilius
habeatur, statuimus ut Sigillum habeant non solum Archiepiscopi and Episcopi,
sed eorum Officiales. Matthew. Paris, fol. 454. de Anno 1236.

Tabling of Fines, Is the making a Table for every County where His Majesty's
Writ runs, containing the Contents of every Fine, passed in any one Term, as
the name of the County, Towns, and places, wherein the Lands or Tenements lie,
the name of the Demandant and Deforceant, and of every Manor named in the
Fine. This is properly to be done by the Chirographer of Fines of the Common
Pleas, who every day of the next Term, after the engrossing any such Fine, does
fix every of the said Tables, in some open place of the said Court, during its
sitting. And the said Chirographer is to deliver to the Sheriff of every
County, his Undersheriff or Deputy, fair written in Parchment, a perfect
content of the Table, so made for that Shire in the Term next before the
Assizes, or else between the Term, and the Assizes, to be set up every day of
the next Assizes in some open place of the Court, where the Justices sit, to
continue there so long as they shall sit, etc. If either the Chirographer or
Sheriff fail herein, he forfeits 5 l. And the Chirographers Fee for every such
Tabling is 4 d. Anno 23 Eliz. cap. 3.

Tail (Fr. Taille, i. Sectura) Signisies two things grounded upon one reason.
(Plowden, Casu Willion. fol. 251.) First, it is used for the Fee, which is
opposite to Fee-simple, by reason it is so minced (as it were) or pared, that
it is not in the owners free power to dispose, but is by the first giver cut or
divided from all others, and tied to the issue of the Donee. Coke, lib. 4. in
Proamio. And this limitation or Tail is either General or Special.

Tail General, Is that whereby Lands or Tenements are limited to a Man, and to
the Heirs of his Body begotten, and it is General, because how many Women
soever the Tenant, holding by this title, shall take to his Wives one after
another, his issue by them all have a possibility to inherit one after another.

Tail Special, Is that whereby Lands or Tenements are limited to a Man and his
Wife, and the Heirs of their two bodies begotten; because, if the Man bury his
Wife, before issue, and take another, the issue by his second Wife cannot
inherit the Land. Also, if Land be given to A. and his Wife B. and to their Son
C. for ever; this is Tail Special. See Fee, and Littl. lib. 1. cap. 2. and New
Book of Entries, ^erbo Tail.

Tail, in the other signification, is that we vulgarly call a Talley: For, Une
Taille de Bois is a cloven piece of Wood to nick up an account upon: For in the
Stat. 10 Edw. 1. cap. 11. it is termed a Tail; and so in Brooks Abridg. tit.
Tail d'Exchequer, fol. 247.

Tails (Talliae) Are in these days called Tallies, explicated before: Of these
we read in our Statutes two sorts, long used in the Exchequer. The one Tails
of Debt (Anno 1 Rich. 2. cap. 5.) which are a kind of Acquittance for Debt
paid to the King. For example, the University of Cambridge pays yearly 10 l.
for such things as are by their Charter granted them in Fee-farm, 5 l. at the
Annunciation, and 5 l. at Michaelmas. He that pays these, receives at each day
a Tail or Talley for his discharge; with both which, or notes of them, he
repairs to the Clerk of the Pipes Office, and there in stead of them receives
an Acquittance in Parchment for his full discharge. The other, Tails of Reward,
(mentioned Anno 27 Hen. 8. cap. 11. and in other Statutes) which seem to be
Tails or Tallies of allowances or recompense made to Sheriffs, for such
Matters, as (to their charge) they have performed in their Office, or for such
Moneys as they, by course, have cast upon them in their accounts, but cannot
levy, etc. See Anno 2 and 3 Edw. 6. cap. 4.

There are also Tallies of Debt used among Subjects. -- Et si creditor habeat
Talleam, oportet creditorem probare illam per convicinos suos vel per alios,
per quorum fidelitatem Balivi and alii praesentes illo tempore in Curia
noticiam habere possunt, and si Creditor petat debitum per vocem suam
simplicem, tunc debtor potest esse ad suam legem manifestatam. MS. Codex de
LL. Statutis, etc. Burgivillae Mountgomer. a Temp. Hen. 2.

Tailage. See Tallage.

Taint (Attinctus, Fr. Teinct, i. Infectus, Tinctus) Signifies either a
Conviction; or a person convict of Felony or Treason, etc. See Attaint.

Tales (a Latin word of known signification) Is used for a supply of Men,
impannelled on a Jury or Enquest, and not appearing, or at their appearance,
challenged by either party, as not indifferent; in which case, the Judge upon
motion grants a supply to be made by the Sheriff of one or more such there
present, equal in reputation to those that were empannelled. Whereupon the very
act of supplying is called a Tales de Circumstantibus. But he that has had one
Tales, either upon default or challenge may not have another to contain so many
as the former: For the first Tales must be under the principal Panel, except
in a Cause of Appeal, and so every Tales less then other, until the number be
made up of such as are without exception: Yet you may find some exceptions to
this general Rule in Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 3. cap. 5. These commonly called
Tales may in some sort, and indeed are called Meliores, viz. When the whole
Jury is challenged, as appears by Brook, tit. Octo tales and auter tales, fol.
105.

Tales, Is also the name of a Book in the Kings Bench Office (Coke, lib. 4.
fol. 93. b.) Of such Jurymen as were of the Tales.

Tallage (Tallagium) From the Fr. Taille; which originally signifies a piece
cut out of the whole, and metaphorically a share of a Man's substance paid by
way of Tribute, Toll, or Tax. Stat. De Tallagio non concedendo. Tempore Edw. 1.
And Stows Annals, page 445. Thence comes Tailaigiers in Chawoer for Tax or
Tollgatherers. See Subsidy. These Tallages were anciently called Cuttings,
which word is still retained in Ireland, in a not much different sense. Tallage
(says Sir Edward Coke) is a general word, and includes all Taxes. 2 Instit.
fol. 532.

Talleys. See Tails.

Talsbide or Talwood, (Taliatura) Is Firewood, cleft and cut into Billets of a
certain length. Anno 34 and 35 Hen. 8. cap. 3. and An. 7 Edw. 6. cap. 7. Every
Talshide marked one, being round bodied, shall contain sixteen inches of Assise
in compass, etc. Anno 43 Eliz. cap. 14.

Tangier, An ancient City of Barbary, lying within the Kingdom of Fesse, and
distant from the Streights about Thirty Miles; mentioned in the Statute of 15
Car. 2 cap. 7. And is now part of the Dominion belonging to the Crown of
England.

Tanistry, Is a Law, Tenure, or Custom in some parts of Ireland; of which thus,
Sir John Davies in his Reports, fol. 28. b. Quant ascun person morust seisie
des ascuns Castles, Manors, terres ou tenements del nature and tenure de
Tanistry, que donques mesme les Castles, etc. doent descender, and de temps
don't memory ne court ont use de descender Seniori and dignissimo viro sanguinis
and cognominis de tiel person issint morant seisie, and que le file ou le files
de tiel person issint morant seisie de touts temps avantdit, ne fueront
inheritables de tiels terres ou tenements, ou de ascum part de eux. The name
seems to be derived a Thanis. See Sir James Wares Antiquitates Hibernia, page
38.

Tappa. See Bosinnus.

Tare and Tret. The first is the weight of Box, Straw, Clothes, etc. wherein
Goods are packed. The other is a consideration allowed in the weight for wast,
in emptying and reselling the Goods. Book of Rates.

Tasels, Is a kind of hard Bur used by Cloathiers and Cloath-workers in the
dressing of Cloth. Anno 4 Edw. 4. cap. 1.

Tassum, A Mow or Heap; from the Fr. Tasser, to heap or pile up. Commissio
facta fuit Roberto Hadham ad vendend. blada and alia bona diversarum Abbatiarum
alienigenarum, qui venit and cognovit quod vendidit blada Prioris de Tickford
in garbis in duabus Tassis existen. pro 10 l. etc. Hill. 25 Edw. 3. Coram Rege.
Rot. 13.

Tax (Taxa, from the Gr. (...), Quod non solum ordinem, sed and modum ratione
temperatum significat, atque ob id etiam taxationem and tributum, unde (...)
dicuntur qui tributum imponunt) Was such a Tribute, as being certainly rated on
every Town, was wont to be yearly paid, but now not without consent in
Parliament, as the Subsidy is. And it differs from Subsidy in this, that it is
always certain, according as it is set down in the Exchequer Book, and levied
in general of every Town, and not particularly of every Man. It is also called
a Fifteenth, Anno 14 Edw. 3. stat. 1. cap. 20. and 9 Hen. 4. cap. 7. It seems,
that in ancient time, this Tax was imposed by the King at His pleasure, but
Edward the First bound Himself and His Successors from that time forward, not
to Levy it, but by consent of the Realm. Anno 25 Edw. 1. cap. 5. See Gild,
Subsidy, and Fifteenth.

Taxatio bladorum, An Imposition on Corn.

Taxers, Two Officers yearly chosen in Cambridge, to see the true gage of all
Weights and Measures: The name took beginning from Taxing or Rating the Rents
of Houses, which was anciently the duty of their Office.

Tea (Anno 12 Car. 2. cap. 15.) Is a kind of potable liquor, lately introduced
in England from China, and the East Indies, and is made of the Leaf of a Shrub,
growing in those parts.

Team and Theme, or Tem and Theme (from the Sax. tyman, i. Propagare, to teem,
or bring forth) Signifies a Royalty granted by the Kings Charter to the Lord of
a Manor, for the having, restraining and judging Bondmen, Neifs, and Villains,
with their Childrens Goods and Chattels in His Court.

THeme est, quod habeatis totam generationem villanorum vestrorum, cum little
Sectis and catallis ubicunque inventi fuerint in Anglia. -- Qui autem
jurisdictionem habent bujusmodi, curiani de Theme, i. De nativis vel servis,
dicuntur babore, in qua olim licuit inter caeteros cognoscere de statu vassalli
sui, utrum liber esset an servus. Anonymus in MS. Theme (says the Learned
Spelman) in the Laws of Edw. Conf. cap. 21. and 25. Significare videtur
jurisdictionem cognoscendi in Curia sua de advocationibus, sive intertiatis,
hoc est, de vocatis ad Warrantiam. See Glanvile, lib. 5. cap. 2. And Glossarium
in x. Scriptores.

Them, i. Quod Prior habet totam generationem Villanorum suorum, cum eorum
secta and catallis ubicunque in Anglia inventae fuerint. Ex Registro Priorat.
de Cokesford.

Teinland (Teinlanda) Tainland, Teimland vel Thainland, quasi terra Thani vel
nobilis. th^n, i. Minister and Landa, i. terra. Breve Regis Willielmi junioris
lib. Rames. sect. 178. -- Willielmus Rex Anglia W. de Cabuniis salutem.
Praecipio tibi ut facias convenire shiram de Ha(...), and judicio ejus cognosce
si terra de Isham ^^ddidit sirmam Monachis Sancti Benedicti tempore Patris mei;
and si ita invent. fuerit, sit in Dominio Abbatis. Si verd Teinlanda tunc
suisse invenietur, qui eam tenet de Abbate, te(...) and (...)scat, quod si
noluerit, eam Abbas in Dominio habeat, and vid^ ne clamor inde amplius ad nos
redeat. Test W. Episc. Dunelm. Where Teinlanda seems to signify, Terra
haereditaria and colonorum servituti non obnoxia. In Domesday, Land holden by
Knights-service was called Tainland, and Land holden by Soccage, Keveland. Coke
on Littl. sect. 117.

Teirs, Is the third part of a Pipe, viz. Forry two Gallons. See Tierce.

Teller, Is an Officer in the Exchequer, of which there are four, whose office
is to receive all Moneys due to the King, and to give the Clerk of the Pell a
Bill to charge him therewith. They also pay to all persons any Money payable by
the King, by Warrant from the Additor of the Receipt, and make weekly and
yearly Books, both of their Receipts and Payments, which they deliver to the
Lord Treasurer.

Telonium. See Theloni^^

Templers, or Knights of the Temple (Templarii) Was a Religious Order of
Knighthood, instituted about the year 1119. and so called, because they dwelt
in a part of the Buildings belonging to the Temple at Jerusalem, and not far
from the Sepulcher of our Lord: They entertained Christian-strangers and
Pilgrims charitably, and in their armor led them through the Holy Land, to view
the Sacred Monuments of Christianity, without fear of Insidels. This Order
continuing and increasing for near Two hundred years, was far spread in
Christendom, and particularly here in England. But at length some of them at
Jerusalem, falling away (as some Authors report) to the Saracens from
Christianity, or rather because they grew too potent, the whole Order was
supp^^ssed by Clemens Quintus, Anno 1309. And by the Council of Vienna, 1312.
And their substance given, partly to the Knights of Saint John's of Jerusalem,
and partly to other Religious. Cassan. de gloria mundi, par. 9. Consid. 5. And
see Anno 1 Edw. 1. cap. 24. These flourished here in England from Henry the
Seconds days, till they were suppressed. They had in every Nation, a particular
Governor, whom Bracton, lib. 1. cap. 10. calls Magistrum Militiae Templi. The
Master of the Temple here was summoned to Parliament, 49 Hen. 3. m. 11. in
Schedula. And the chief Minister of the Temple-Church in London is still called
Master of the Temple. Of these Knights, read Mr. Dugdales Antiquities of
Warwickshire, fol. 706. In ancient Records, they were also called Fratres
Militiae Templi Solomonis. Mon. Angl. 2 par. fol. 554. b.

Temporalties of Bishops (Temporalia Episcoporum) Are such Revenues, Lands,
Tenements, and Lay-Fees, as have been laid to Bishops Sees, by Kings, and other
great Personages of this Land, from time to time, as they are Barons of
Parliament. See Spiritualties of Bishops.

Tempus pinguedinis and firmationis* -- Et sciendum quod Tempus pinguedinis hic
computatur inter Festum Beati Petri ad Vincula and Exaltationem Sanctae Crucis:
Et Tempus firmationis inter Festum S. Martini and Purificationem Beatae Mariae.
MS. Penes Gul. Dugdale Arm. de Temp. Hen. 3. The first is the season of the
Buck, the later of the Do. See Fermisona.

Tenancies (Anno 23 Eliz. cap. 4.) Are Houses for Habitation, Tenements, or
places to live in, held of another.

EDwardus illustris Regis Angliae primo genitus omnibus, etc. Salutem and
amorem. Sciatis quod dedimus and assignavimus in Tenenciam dilecto and fideli
nostro Yvoni Pauntun omnes terras cum suis juribus and pertin. quae fuerunt
Hugonis Bedelli inimici nostri in Villa de Ashele. Tenendas ad nostrae
beneplacitum voluntatis, nisi aliquis qui nobiscum personaliter interfuit in
conflictu apud Evesham, quarto die Augusti, manus prius posuerit ad easdem. Et
ideo vobis mandamus, etc. Dat. Cestriae 14 Augusti, Anno Regni Domini Regis
Patris nostri 49.

Tend, Seems to signify as much as to endeavor, offer, or show forth; as to
tend the estate of the party of the Demandant. Old Not. Br. fol. 123. b. To
tend an Averment. Britton, cap. 76.

Tender (Fr. Tender) Signifies carefully to offer, or circumspectly to endeavor
the performance of any thing belonging to us; as to tender Rent, is to offer it
at the time and place, where and when it ought to be paid. To tender his Law of
Non Summons (Kitchen, fol. 197.) is to offer himself ready to make his Law,
whereby to prove, that he was not summoned. See Law, see Make.

Tenementis Legatis, Is a Writ that lies to London, or other Corporation,
(where the Custom is, that Men may demise Tenements, as well as Goods and
Chattels by their Last Will) for the hearing any Controversy touching the
same, and for rectifying the wrong. Reg. of Writs, fol. 244. b.

Tenent or Tenant (Tenens) Signifies him that holds or possesses Lands or
Tenements by any kind of Right, be it in Fee, for Life, Years, or at Will.
Tenant in Dower, is she that possesses Land by virtue of her Dower. Kitchen,
fol. 160. Tenant by Statute Merchant, that holds Land by virtue of a Statute
forfeited to him. Tenant in Franc-marriage (Idem, fol. 158.) that holds Land by
virtue of a Gift thereof, made to him upon marriage. Tenant by the Courtesy,
that holds for his life, by reason of a Child born alive, and begotten by him
of his Wife, being an Inheritrix. Tenant per Elegit, that holds by virtue of
the Writ Elegit. Tenant in Morgage, that holds by virtue of a Morgage. Tenant
by the Verge in Ancient Demesne (Kitchen, fol. 81.) is he that is admitted by
the Rad in a Court of Ancient Demesne. Tenant by Copy of Court Roll, is one
admitted Tenant of any Lands, etc. within a Manor, which time out of mind
have been demisable, according to the Custom of the Manor. West, Par. 1.
symbol. lib. 2. sect. 646. Tenant by Charter, is he that holds by Feoffment, or
other Deed in Writing. Very Tenant, that holds immediately of his Lord; for if
there be Lord, M^sn, and Tenant, the Tenant is Very Tenant to the Mesn, and not
to the Lord above. Kitchen, fol. 99. Tenant Paravail, see Paravail.
Joynttenants, that have equal Right in Lands, by virtue of one Title. Littl.
lib. 3. cap. 3. Tenants in Common, that have equal right, but hold by diverse
Titles. Particular Tenant, Stamf. Praerog. fol. 13. is he who holds only for
his term. See Coke in Sir Will. Pelhams Case, Lib. 1. fol. 15. called also
Termor for Life or Years. See Plowden, Casu, Colthirst, fol. 23. b. Sole
Tenant, Kitchen, fol. 134. he that has no other joined with him. Several
Tenant is opposite to Joynttenant or Tenant in Common. Tenant al Praecipe, is he
against whom the Writ Praecipe is brought. Coke, lib. 3. Case of Fines, fol.
88. Tenant in Demesne (Anno 13 Edw. 1. cap. 9) is he that holds the Demesns of a
Manor for a Rent without Service. Tenant in Service (An. 20 Edw. 1. stat. 1.)
is he that holds by Service. See Britton, cap. 39 and 96. Tenant by Execution
(Anno 32 Hen. 8. cap. 5.) is he that holds Land by virtue of an Execution upon
any Statute, Recoguizance, etc. Tenant in Fee-simple (Kitchen, fol. 150.)
Tenant in Fee-tail. Tenant at the Will of the Lord, according to the Custom of
the Manor. Tenant at Will by the Common Law. Idem, fol. 165. Tenant upon
Sufferance. Tenant of Estate of Inheritance. Stamf. Praerog. fol. 6. Tenant in
Burgage. Tenant in Soccage. Tenant in Franck-fee, etc. with diverse others.

Tenement (Tenementum) Signifies most properly a House or Homestal, but in a
larger sense it is taken, either for House or Land that a Man holds of another;
and joined with the Adjective Frank, it contains generally Lands, Houses, or
Offices, wherein we have Estate for Life, or in Fee. For Kitchen, fol. 41.
makes Frank-tenement, and base Estate, opposite; and in the same sense Britton
uses it, Chap. 27.

Tenheved (Sax. tienheofed, i. December habens capita) Decanus, Decemvir, caput
vel princeps Decaniae sive decuriae. LL. Edw. Confess. cap. 29. Statuerunt
Justiciarios super quosqne december friborgos, quos Decanos possumus appellare;
Anglice vero tienheofod dicti sunt.

Tenentibus in Assisa non onerandis, etc. Is a Writ that lies for him to whom a
Disseisor has alienated the Land, whereof he disseised another; that he be not
molested for the damages Awarded, if the Disseisor have wherewith to satisfy
them himself. Reg. of Writs, fol. 214. b.

Tenmantale (Sax. tienmantale, i. Sermo december hominum, vel decemvirorum
numerus) Decuria, Tithinga. LL. Edw. Conf. cap. 20. -- Et sint quieti de
Geldis, and Danegeldis, and Themanatale, and Concelationibus, and Scottis, etc.
Cart. 29 Edw. 1. n. 25. Abbat. de Thornton. See Friburgh.

Tenore indictamenti mittendo, Is a Writ whereby the Record of an Indictment,
and the Process thereupon is called out of another Court into the Chancery.
Reg. of Writs, fo. 169. a.

Tenths, (Decimae) Is that yearly portion or Tribute, which all Livings
Ecclesiastical yield to the King: For, though the Bishop of Rome does
originally pretend right to this Revenue, by example of the High Priest among
the Jews, who had Tenths from the Levites. Numb. ca. 8. Hieron. in Ezech. yet
we read in our Chronicles, that these were often granted to the King by the
Pope, upon diverse occasions, sometimes for one year, sometimes for more, until,
by the Statute 26 Hen. 8. ca. 3. they were annexed perpetually to the Crown See
Disms. It signifies also a Tax levied of the Temporalty. 4 Inst. fo. 34.

Tentor, A stretcher, tryer or prover, which Dyers and Clothiers used, Anno 1
Rich. 3. ca. 8. But prohibited by the Stat. 39 Eliz. ca. 20.

Tenure, (Tenura) Is the manner whereby Tenants hold Lands and Tenements of
their Lords. What makes a Tenure, and what not, see Perkins Reservations 70,
where you shall find most of those Tenures recited, which are now in England.
See Cromptons Jurisd. fo. 200. New Book of Entries, verbo Tenure. Mr. Fabian
Philips Book, entitled, Tenenda non Tollenda, and the Stat. 12 Car. 2. ca. 24.
The Family of Barnhams hold the Manor of Nether Bilsington in the County of
Kent, by this tenure; to carry the last Dish of the second Course to the Kings
Table at His Coronation, and presenting Him with three Maple-cups, which was
performed at the Coronation of King Charles the Second.

Term, (Terminus) Signifies commonly the bounds and limitation of time; as a
Lease for term of Life or Years. Bracton, lib. 2. ca. 6. nu. 4. But most
notoriously it is used for that time, wherein the Tribunals or places of
Judgment are open for all that list to complain of wrong, or to seek their
right by course of Law or Action. The rest of the year is called Vacation. Of
these Terms there are four in every year, during which time matters of Justice
are dispatched. One is Hillary Term, which begins the 23d of January, or, if
that be Sunday, the next day following, and ends the twelfth of February: The
next is Easter Term, which begins the Wednesday fortnight after Easter Day, and
ends the Monday next after Ascension-day. The third is Trinity Term, beginning
the Friday next after Trinity-Sunday, and ending the Wednesday Fortnight after.
The fourth is Michaelmas-Term, which anciently began the ninth of October, but
(by Stat. 17 Car. 1 ca. 6.) contracted to the 23d of October, and ending the
28th of November. Termini apud nos dicuntur c^rtae anni portiones agendis
litibus designatae. See Spel, de origin and ratione Terminorum forensium.

Termonland, Seems to be the Gleab-land, or Land of the Church; anciently so
called.

Termor, (Tenens ex termino) Is he that holds for term of years, or life.
Kitchen, fo. 151. Litt. fo. 100.

Terra Giliforata, Land held by the Tenure of paying a Gilly-flowre, MS.

Terra extendenda, Is a Writ directed to the Escheator, etc. willing him to
enquire and find out the true yearly value of any Land, etc. by the Oath of
twelve Men, and to certify the Extent into the Chancery, etc. Reg. of Writs,
fo. 293. b.

Terra frusca. -- Continens xl. acras terrae fruscae, pasturae, etc. Mon. Angl.
2 Par. fo. 327. b. Fresh-land, or such as has not been lately plowed. This is
elsewhere written Terra frisca.

Terra nova. Saepe legitur in Chartis feodalibus and in sensualibus schedulis,
vel proterra noviter concessa, vel noviter assarta. Prior. Lew. pa. 1. --
Reddat pro nova terra 2 sol. Spe(...).

Terra vestita, Is used in ancient Charters, for Land sown with Corn.

Terra sabulosa, (Lat.) Gravelly, or grossesandy land. -- Et praedictae xxiiii
acrae terrae valent per ann. xiii sol. and iv denar. and non plus, quia est
terra sabulosa. Inq. 10 Ed. 3. n. 3. Norf. in Turr. Land.

Terra puturata. See Putura.

Terra lucrabilis. -- Tam in Mora, quam in terra lucrabili and Marais, cum
omnibus piscariis suis. Mon. Angl. 1 Par. fo. 406. a. Land that may be gained
from the Sea, or enclosed out of a Wast, to particular use.

Terra excultabilis, -- Totam illam terram excultabilem, quam habuit apud
Norwicu(...) in Campis. Mon. Angl. 1 Par. fo. 426. b. Land that may be tilled
or plow d.

Terra culta, Land that is Tilled, or (...)nured; and terra inculta, the
contrary, see Wacnoth.

Terrage, (Terragium) Edward the Third granted by Patent to John of Gaunt and
Blanch his Lady, for their live, -- quod sint qui(...) de Theolonio, Savagio,
Passagio, Lastagio, Tallagi^, Carvagio, Prisagio, Pickagio and Terragio; which
seems to be an exemption, a Praecariis, viz. Boons of Plowing, Reaping, etc.
and perhaps from all Land-Taxes.

Terrar, (Terrarium, vel Catalogus ter(...)) Is a Book, Survey, or Land-Roll,
wherein the several Lands, either of a single person, or of a Town are
described; containing the quantity of Acres, boundaries, Tenants names, and
such like, Anno 18 Eliz. ca. 17. In the Exchequer there is a Terrar of all the
Glebe-lands in England made about 11 Edw. 3.

Terris, bonis and catallis rehabendis pest purgationem, Is a Writ that lies
for a C(...), to recover his Lands, Goods, or Chattels formerly seized on,
after he has cleared himself of that Felony, upon suspicion whereof he was
formerly convict, and delivered to his Ordinary to be purged. Reg. of Writs,
fo. 68. b.

Terris liberandis, Is a Writ, that lies for a Man convicted by attaint, to
bring the Record and Process before the King, and to take a Fine for his
Imprisonment, and to deliver him his lands and Tenements again, and to release
him of the Strip and Waste. Reg. of Writs, fo. 232. a.

Terris and catallis tentis ultra debitum levatum, Is a Writ Judicia, for the
restoring Lands or Goods to a Debtor that is distreined above the quantity of
the Debt. Reg. Jud. fo. 38. b.

Terre tenant, (Terrae tenens) Is he who has the natural and actual possession
of the Land, which we otherwise call the Occupation, Anno 39 Eliz. ca. 7. For
example, a Lord of a Manor has a Freeholder, who lets out his free-land to
another, this other (having the actual possession) Is called the Terre-tenant.
West. Par. 2. Symb. tit. Fines, Sect. 137. Cromp. Jurisd. fo. 194. Britton, ca.
29. Perkins Feoffments, 231.

Ters. See Tierce.

Tertian, A Measure, containing fourscore and four Gallons. Anno 1 Rich. 3. ca.
13. and 2 Hen. 6. ca. 11. So called, because it is the third part of a Tun.

Tertium denarium. See Third-peny.

Testament, (Testamentum) What it is in the common signification see in Will.
It was anciently used (according to Spelman) pro Scripto, charta vel
instrumento, quo praediorum rerumve aliarum transactiones perficiuntur: sic
dictum quod de ea re vel testimonium ferret, vel testium nomina contineret. --
siquis contra hoc meae authoritatis Testamentum aliquod machinari impedimentum
praesumpserit, etc. Charta fundationis Croylandiae ab Aethelbaldo Rege, Anno
Dom. 716.

Testator, (Lat.) He that makes a Testament. See Swinborn of Wills and
Testaments, and see Will.

Testatum, Is a Writ, in personal Actions; As if the Desendant cannot be
arrested upon a Capias in the County where the Action is laid, but is returned
non est inventus by the Sheriff; This Writ shall be sent out into any other
County, where such person is thought to have whence to satisfy; which is
termed a Testatum; because the Sheriff has formerly testified, that the
Defendant was not to be found in his Balywic. See Kitchins return of Writs, fo.
287. b.

Lest, Is a word commonly used in the last part of every Writ, wherein the
date is contained, which begins with these words, Test me ipso, etc. if it be
an original Writ, or if judicial, Test Johan. Keeling Milite or Iohanne
Vaughan Mil. according to the Court, whence it comes. Yet we read in Glanvile,
(lib. 1. ca. 6. and 13. and lib. 2. ca. 4.) The last Clause of an Original Writ
to be Test Radulpho de Glanvilla apud Clarendon, etc. and diverse times in the
Reg. of Writs, Test Custode Angliae, as namely in the Title Prohibition, fo.
42. a. and Consultation, fo. 54. b.

Testimonial, (Anno 39 Eliz. 17.) Is a Certificate under the hand of a Justice
of Peace, Testifying the place and time, when and where a Soldier or Mariner
landed, and the place of his dwelling and birth, unto which he is to pass, etc.
or such like, 3 Inst. fo. 85.

Teston, (Anno 2 and 3 Ed. 6. ca. 17.) A sort of Money, which, among the
French, did bear the value of 18 Denar. and so perhaps formerly in England;
but, in Henry the Eighths time, being made of Brass, lightly gilt with Silver,
it was reduced to 12 d, and, in the beginning of Edward the Sixth to 9 d,
afterterwards to 6 d.

Thack-tile, (Anno 17 Edw. 4. ca. 4. otherwise called Plain-tile, which are
laid on the side of a House.

Thanage of the King, (Thanagium Regis) Signified a certain part of the Kings
Lands, or Property, whereof the Ruler or Governor was called Thane. Domania
Regis, and Thanagia idem significant, Says Skaene.

Thane, or Theyn (Thanus, from th'Saxon thegen,) Signifies sometimes a
Nobleman, sometimes a Freeman, sometimes a Magistrate, but more properly an
Officer, or Minister of the King. This appellation was in use among us after
the Norman Conquest, as appears by Doinesday, and by a certain Writ of William
the First. Willielmus Rex salutat Hermannum Episcopum and Stewinum and Britwi
and omnes Thanos meos in Dorsestrensi pago amicabiliter. MS. de Abbotsburi.
Skaene says it is the name of a Dignity, equal with that of the Son of an
Earl. Cambden says, They were enabled only by the Office which they
administered. See Mills, de Nobilitate, fo. 132.

Theft, (Furtum) Is an unlawful Felonious taking away another man's moveable and
personable Goods against the owners will, with an intent to Steal them; which
is divided into Theft, simply so called; and, petit Theft, whereof the one is
of Goods above the value of 12 d, and is Felony, the other under that value,
and is no Felony, but called petit Larceny. See Larceny and Felony. Theft from
the person, or in the presence of the owner, is properly called Robbery. See
West, Part 2. Symb. Tit. Inditements, Sect. 58, 59, 60.

Theftbote, (Sax. theofte, i. Furtum and Bote, compensatio,) est quant home
prist chattel de Larone de luy faveurer and maintainer and nemy autrement. 42
Assis, pa. 5. the receiving goods from a Thief, to the end to favor and
maintain him, the punishment whereof is ransom and imprisonment, and not loss
of life or Member. Stanif. Pl. Cor. lib. 1. ca. 43. Antique dicebatur precium
quo furti reus se eximeret a dispendio vitae; hodie vero de iis dicitur qui
furtiva bona a latrone susceperint, sceleris sui fovendi gratia, quo sensu
Bote, pro praeda, ut alias solet intelligendum est. In Privilegiorum chartis
ubi Theftbote conceditur, intelligitur alias esse emenda furta sine
consideratione Curiae Domini Regis. Theftbote, (inquit Statutum Walliae. Anno
12. Ed. 1. -- hoc est, emenda furti, sine consideratione Curiae Domini Regis.
Spel. And see 3 Inst. fo. 134.

Thelonium, or Breve essendi quietum de Thelonio, Is a Writ lying for the
Citizens or any City, or Burgesses of any Town, that have a Charter or
Prescription to free them from Toll, against the Officers of any Town or
Market, who would constrain them to pay Toll of their Merchandise, contrary to
their said Grant or Prescription. Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 226.

Thelonio rationabili habendo pro Dominis habentivue Dominica Regis ad Firmam,
Is a Writ that lies for him that has of the Kings Demesne in Fee-farm, to
recover reasonable Toll of the Kings Tenants there, if his Demesne have been
accustomed to be tolled. Reg. of Writs, fol. 83. b.

Them. See Team.

Then, Significat seroum. Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 47

Thenecium. -- Quod Praedicti Parochiani -- Decimas inferius Annotatas
Ecclesiis suis persolvant, scil. Decimam lactis, ovorum, Thenecii agrorum,
apum, mellis, etc. Constable. Rob. Winchelsey Archiep. Cant. tit. de Decimis. Ibi
Lindewode Thenecii agrorum, i. Arborum crescentium circa agros, pro clausura
little. Vulgarly called Hedgerows or Dikerows.

Thewe. Georgius Gray Comes Cantii clamat, in Manner. de Bushton and Ayton,
punire Delinquentes contra Assisam panis and cervisiae per tres vices per
Amerciamenta, and quarta vice pistores per Pilloriam, Braciatores per
Tumbrellum, and Rixatrices per Thewe, hoc est ponere eas super scabellum vocat.
a Cuckingstoole. Pl. in Itin. apud Cestriam, 14 Hen 7. Perhaps from the Sax.
theo, a Slave or Captive.

Thingus (Thanus) A Nobleman, a Knight, or Freeman. Sciatis me concessisse
omnibus militibus and omnibus Thing is and omnibus libere tenentibus, qui
manent in Foresta mea de Honor de Lancaster, quod possunt, etc. Cromp. Jur.
fol. 197.

Thirdborow, Is used for a Constable, Anno 28 Hen. 8. cap. 10. which seems to
be corruptly used for the Sax. freoborg, i. Ingenuus fidejussor. Lambert in his
Duty of Constables, page 6.

Thirdings. The third part of the Corn or Grain growing on the Ground at the
Tenants death, due to the Lord for a Heriot within a certain Manor, and Lands
belonging to the Chapel of Turfat in Com. Heref.

Third night-awn-hynde (Trium noctium hospes) By the Laws of S. Edw. (cap. de
Hospitibus) if any guest lay a third night in an Inn, he was accounted a
Domestic, and his Host was answerable for what offense he should commit.
Forman night uncuth. Two night gueste. Third night awn hynde, i. Prima nocte
incognitus, secunda hospes, tertia domesticus censetur. Bracton, (lib. 3.
tract. 2. cap. 10. number. 2.) writes it Hoghenehyne pro Agenhyne.

ITem utimur, quod si extranei morantur in Burgo praedicto ultra tres dies,
invenient fidejussores de been gerendo se erga Burgenses and Communitatem, dum
moram inter ipsos fecerint. MS. Codex de LL. Statutis and Consuetud liberi
Burgi villae Mountgomer. fol. 26. b. See Uncuth.

Third-peny, Denarius tertius est ea pars mulctarum forensiumque molumentum,
quae in comitatu olim cedebat Comiti, Rege alias duas percipiente. LL. Edw.
Conf. cap 31. Rex habebit 100 solidos and Consul Comitatus 50. qui tertium
babebit Denarium de forisfacturis, etc. And was anciently so fixed and
appropriate to an Earldom, as the Earldom of Oxford, in the Reign of King Henry
the Second, passed by the Grant of Tertium Denarium Comitatus Oxon, ut fit inde
Comes. de quo vide Seldens Titles of Honor.

Thokes (Anno 22 Edw. 4. cap. 2.) Thokes or Fish with broken Bellies; are not
by the said Statute to be mixed or packed with Talefish.

Thol (Thollonium) Est libertas emendi and vendendi in terra sua. Arch. Lamb.
fol. 132. Thol, i. Quod Prior habet in Mercato suo dic Lunae quandam mensuram
de bladis venditis, and quoddam certum de animalibus and caeteris similibus
venditis. Reg. Priorat. Cokeford. See Toll.

Thorough Toll. -- Bowgh in Yorkshire, a little Village, where in times past
the Earls of Richmond had a pretty Castelet, and a certain Custom called
Thorough Toll (says Camden.) See Toll.

Thrave of Corn (from the Sax. threaf, i. a Bundle, or the British Drefa, i.
Twenty four) Is in most parts of England Twenty four Sheaves, or four Shocks,
six Sheaves to the Shock. Anno 2 Hen. 6. cap. 2. Yet in some Counties they
count but Twelve Sheaves to the Thrave. As in the Case of the Burgesses of
Derby. -- Hi autem ad Festum Sancti Martini reddebant Regi duodecim Trabes
annonae. Domes. de Burgensibus Derbiae. See Peter-Corne.

Thrimsa (from the Sax. thrim, quod ternos significat) Signified of old a piece
of Money of Three shillings, according to Lambert, or rather (according to
Seldom) the third part of a shilling. Tit. Of Honor, fol. 604. See Weregild.

Thrithing (Thrithingum) In the Statute of Merton, signifies a Court which
consists of three or four Hundreds. Cokes 2 Part. Instit. fol. 99.

Thrower. See Silkthrower.

Thwertnik -- Edwardus, etc. -- Concessimus etiam, quod Vicecomes noster aut
haeredum nostrorum, qui pro tempore fuerit in dicto Comitatu, de caetero faciat
executiones pro debitis recuperatis and recognitis in Comitatu vel Scaccario
Cestriae, aut in itinere Justiciariorum, qui pro tempore fuerit, absque aliquo
capiendo pro executione hujusmodi facienda, licet etiam praeteritis temporibus
usum sit, prout per cartam habet ipsa Communitas (scil. Cestrescirae) quod si
aliquis in Curia nostrae c^^patus fuerit, per Thwertnik se defendere possit;
quia haec defensio est contraria legi Communi, nutrix malorum, pacis emula and
damnosa populo pacifico. Volumus etiam de consensu and requisitione dictae
Communitatis, Ordinamus and praecipimus, quod dicta defensio per Thwertnik de
caetero non allocetur, sed annulletur totaliter and damnetur, etc. Rot. Cart.
de Anno 11, 12 and 13 Regis Ric. 2. number. 11. per Inspex.

Tidesmen (Anno 14 Car. 2. cap. 11.) Are certain Officers that belong to the
Custom-house, and are appointed to watch, or attend upon Ships till the Custom
of the freight be paid; and they are so called, because they go aboard the
Ships at their arrival in the Mouth of Thames, and come up with the Tide.

Tierce (Fr. Tiers, i. A Third, or third part) A measure of liquid things, as
Wine, Oil, etc. containing the third part of a Pipe, or forty two Gallons. Anno
32 Hen. 8. cap. 14.

Tigh or Teage (Sax. teag) A Close or Enclosure, a Croft. In veteri Charta
Ecclesiae Cantuar. Clausula. -- Mansionem quoque quae est in aquilonali part
Doroberniae and clausulam quam Angli dicunt Teage, quae pertinet ad praedictam
mansionem, etc. The word Tigh is still used in Kent in the same sense.

Timber of Skins, Is forty Skins. De qualibet Timber de Fitcheux venal. ob.
Pat. 10 Ric. 2. pars 1. m. 30. Haec civitas (sc. Cestriae) tunc reddebat de
firma 45 libras and tres Timbres pellium Martrinarum. LL. Ed. Conf.

Timberlode (Sax. Timbrelade) Servitutis genus, quo vassallus obligatur
materiam sive lignum de sylva, ubi prosternitur, ad Domini sui Domum defer.
Gloss. in x. Scriptores.

Tineman or Tienman, Was of old a Petty Officer in the Forest, who had the
Nocturnal care of Vert and Venison, and other servile employments.
Constitution. Forestae Canuti Regis, cap. 4.

Tipstaff (Saio, Sax. sagol, i. Fustis, Baculus) Is one of the Warden of the
Fleets men, that attends the Kings Courts with a Painted Staff, for the taking
such to Ward as are committed by the Court, and to attend such Prisoners as go
at large by License. These are otherwise called Bastons. Anno 1 Ric. 2. cap.
12. and 5 Eliz. cap. 23.

Tithes (Decimae, from the Saxon Teotha, i. The Tenth) Are the Tenth part of
all Fruits Predial, Personal, and Mixed, which are due to God, and consequently
to his Churches Ministers, for their maintenance. Levit. 27, 30. Omnium bonorum
licite quaesitorum quota pars deo, Divina constitutione, debita.

Pasche, 1 Jac. Rot. 1119. in Communi Banco.
It was resolved, QUod Decimarum tres sunt species, quaedam Personales, quae
debentur ex opere personali, ut Artificio, Scientia, Militia, Negotiatione,
etc. Quaedam Praediales, quae proveniunt ex praediis, i. Ex fructibus
praediorum, ut Blada, vinum, faenum, linum, cannabum, etc. seu ex fructibus
arborum, ut Poma, Pyra, Pruna, Volema, Cerasa, and fructus hortorum, etc.
quaedam Mixtae, ut de Caseo, lacte, etc. aut ex faetibus animalium, quae sunt
in pascuis, and gregatim pascuntur, ut in Agnis, Vitulis, Haedis, Capreolis,
Pullis, etc. Ex Praedialibus sunt quaedam Majores, quaedam Minutae. Majores, ut
frumentum, siligo, zizania, faenum, etc. Minores sive Minutae, quidam dicunt,
sunt qui proveniunt ex menta, aneto, oleribus, and similibus juxta illud dictum
Domini, Luc. 11. 42. Vae, qui Decimatis mentam and rutam, etc. Alii dicunt,
quod in Anglia consistunt Decimae minutae in lino, quae sunt Praediales, and
Lana, lacte, caseis and in Decimis animalium, agni, pullis, and ovibus; Decimae
etiam mellis and cerae numerantur inter Minutas, quae sunt Mixtae. Vide
Lindwood cap. de Decimis.

Laymen (in these later times) taking small occasions to withdraw their Tithes,
(as Sir Edward Coke observes, 2 Inst. fol. 648.) the Statutes of 27 Hen. 8.
cap. 20. -- 32 Ejusdem, cap. 7. and 2 Edw. 6. cap. 13. were made to enforce the
payment thereof; which former times required not, when more was often given,
then was either due or demanded, as appears by these, and many other Recorded
Donations.

EGo Willielmus de Braosa do and concedo Ecclesiae Sancta Mariae de Bergaveny
and Monachis ibidem Deo servientibus, omnem Decimam de Castello de Bergaveny,
sc. De Pane, de Vino, de Gervisia, and Sisera, and de omni genere potus, de
carnibus, de piscibus, de sale, de melle, de cera, de sevo, and omni expensa
generaliter, tam parva quam Magna Castelli jam praedicti, de Denariis
quoquomodo adquisitis and habitis, de placitis, de auxiliis, de prisonibus, de
bobus, de vaccis, de porcis, de ovibus, de capris, de equis, and de omnibus
rebus, and de omni eventu quoquomodo evenerit jam dicto Castello. Mon. Angl. 1
par. fol. 558. a. Et Decimas omnium proventuum Placitorum, Tolnetorum, Donorum,
Lucrorum and reddituum meorum, and totius panis and potus expensae de Castello
Brechoniae and de Haya. Carta Rogeri Comitis Herefordiae. Sine Dat.

And anciently many Men were so scrupulously careful in their payment of
Tithes, as they at their Death bequeathed a Soul sceat or Soot to theit Parish
Priest, in lieu of any Tithes forgotten; and at their Funerals caused their
best Ox or Horse to be led with the Corpse, and, as a Mortuary or Oblation,
given to the Priest, in recompense of any Tithes which might be forgotten.

Tithing or Trithing (Tithingum, from the Saxon Teothunge, which signifies
Decuriam) Is the number or company of ten men with their Families, cast or knit
together in a Society, all being bound to the King for the peaceable behavior
of each other. Of these companies there was one chief person, who of his office
was called Teothung-man, at this day in the West parts Tithingman, but now he
is nothing but a Constable; for that old discipline of Tithings is left long
since. Tithing is also used for a Court. Mag. Char. cap. 25. and Merton, cap.
10. See Cheif-Pledge, Frank-Pledge, Decennier, and Trithing.

Tithing-penny, alias Tith-penny, alias Thething-penny. -- Et sint quieti de
Thething-penny, Tympenny, and de omnibus forisfactis quacunque occasion
emerserunt, etc. In Mem. Scac. de Anno 20 Edw. 3. Trin. Rot. 3. Abbati and
Monachis Rading. Tithing-penny, hoc est quieti de Tallagio Decennae sive
Tithing per consuetudinem. MS. in Bibl. Cotton sub tit. Vitellius. C. 9. fol.
221. b.

Tod of Wool, Contains twenty eight pounds, or two Stone; Mentioned in the
Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 32. It comes from the Fr. Toilet, a Wrapper, within
which, by usage, two Stone of Wool is folded. 3 Inst. fol. 96.

Toft (Toftum) A Message or place where a Message has stood, but is decayed;
a word much used in Fines. West, par. 2. Symbol. tit. Fines, sect. 26. --
Capitale Toftum and Croftum quod fuit Walteri Patris sui. Carta Petri de Brus
in Bibl. Cotton. Scites and Tofts. Anno 22 Car. 2. cap. 11.

Toftman (Toftmannus) The owner or possessor of a Toft. Toftmanni similiter
operabantur a Sancto Michaele usque ad autumpnum, and in autumno per 6
hebdomadas, unaquaque hebdomade per 2 dies, etc. Pri. Lew. page 18. See Molman.

Tol (Tollere) As it is a Verb, signifies to defeat or take away. Anno 8 Hen.
6. cap. 9. As to Tol the Entry, i. To take away the right of Entry.

Toll (Tolnetum vel Theolonium) Is a Saxon word, and has two significations.
First, It is used for a liberty to buy and sell within the Precincts of a
Manor: Secondly, For a Tribute or Custom paid for Passage, Buying, Selling,
etc. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 24. number. 3. interprets it to be a Liberty as well to
take, as to be Free from Toll (for they who are enfeoffed with Toll are
Custom-free, (says Skene) Toll hoc est, quod vos and homines vestri de toto
Homagio vestro sint quieti de omnibus mercatis and de Tolneto de omnibus rebus
emptis and venditis. Of this freedom from Toll, the City of Coventry boasts of
an ancient Charter, granted by Leosric (or Luriche) Merciorum Comes, who at the
importunity of Godeva, his virtuous Lady, granted this Freedom to that City;
and in Richard the Seconds time (according to Mr. Dugdale in his Description of
Warwickshire) the Picture of him and his Lady was set up in the South-Window of
Trinity Church there, holding in his right hand a Charter, with these words
written thereon. I Luriche for the love of thee,
Do make Coventry Toll-free.


Some Authors make mention of Toll-through, which is Money paid for passage in,
or through some Highways, or over Ferries, Bridges, etc. Toll-travers, for
passing over a private Man's Ground; and Toll-turn, which is Toll paid at the
return of Beasts from Fair or Market, though they were not sold. Plowden, Casu
Willion. fol. 236. Kitchen, fol. 104. By the ancient Law of this Land, the
Buyers of Corn or Cattle, in Fairs or Markets ought to pay Toll to the Lord of
the Market, in testimony of the Contract there lawfully made in open Market,
because privy Contracts were held unlawful. Horns Mirror, lib. 1.

Tollage (Anno 17 Car. 1. cap. 15.) See Tallage.

Tolsester. -- Per Tolsester, clamat esse quiet. de reddend. unum Sextarium
Cervisiae quod continet xvi. Lagenas, de nova cervisia mensurata, desubtus le
Shakelif pro licencia braciandi cervis. per totum annum. Ex Roll. Plac. in Itin.
apud Cestriam, 14 Hen. 7. The same word occurs in Carta 55 Hen. 3. m. 6. See
Gavelsester.

Tolt (Tolta) Is a Writ, whereby a Cause, depending in a Court Baron, is
removed to the County Court, and so called because it does Tollere loquelam,
from the one Court to the other. Preface to Cokes 3 Rep. Plac. Coram Rege Pasc.
22 Edw. 1. Rot. 18. Tolta placiti significat processum per quem causa a
jurisdictione juris temporalis tollitur.

Toltray -- Venditio salis, quae debet solvi i. Bushel and dimid. salis per
mensuram 4 d. MS. de Temp. Edw. 1.

Tonne. See Tun.

Tort (Fr.) Injustice, injury. As, De son tort mesme, in his own wrong. Crokes
Rep. Whites Case, fol. 20. Wrong or injury is properly called Tort, because it
is wrested or crooked. Coke on Littl. fol. 158. b.

Tortfeasor (Fr. Tort faiseur) A Doer of wrong, a Trespasser. Croke 2 part,
fol. 383. number. 11.

Toties quoties (Anno 19 Car. 2. cap. 4.) As often as.

Totted, A good debt to the King, is by the Foreign Apposer, or other Officer
in the Exchequer, noted for such, by writing this word tot to it. Anno 42 Edw.
3. cap. 9. and 1 Edw. 6. cap. 15. See Practice of the Exchequer, page 71.

Totteray, Was a Customary payment of four pence for every Bushel and a half of
Corn, sold at Maldon in Essex. Hill 15 Edw. 1.

Tourn. See Turn.

Tout temps prist and uncore est, (i. Always ready, and is so at this present)
Is a kind of Plea in way of excuse, or defense for him that is sued for any
Debt or Duty belonging to the Plaintiff. See Brooks Abr. fol. 258.

Towage (Towagium, Fr. Touaige) Is the towing or drawing a Ship or Barge along
the Water by Men or Beasts on Land, or by another Ship or Boat fastened to her.
Also, that Money or other recompense, which is given by Bargemen to the owner
of the Ground, next a River where they tow a Barge, or other Vessel. The word
may probably be derived from the Saxon teon; Ducere, trahere. -- Dominus Rex
habeat and habere debeat Thowagium navium and batellorum majorum and minorum in
aqua de Tyne, etc. Pla. Coram Rege and ejus Council. Parl. 18 Edw. 1. in Turre
London.

Traylbaston. See Justices of Traylbaston, and see the Copies of several
Commissions granted to them by Edward the First in Spelmans Glossarium, verbo,
Traylbaston. The common people in those days called them Traybaston, quod
sonat, Trahe baculum. Edward the First in his Thirty second year (says Sir
Rich. Baker) sends out a new Writ of Inquisition, called Trailbaston, against
Intruders on other Men's Lands, who, to oppress the right owner, would make over
their Lands to great Men; against Batterers hired to beat men, Breakers of
Peace, Ravishers, Incendiaries, Murderers, Fighters, False Assisors, and other
such Malefactors; which Inquisition was so strictly executed, and such Fines
taken, that it brought in exceeding much Treasure to the King. Chron. fol. 111.
See Plac. Parliamentaria, fol. 211. and 280. and 4 Instit. 186. And in a
Parliament 1 Ric. 2. the Commons of England Petitioned the King, That no
Commission of Air, or Trayle Baston might be issued, during the Wars, or for
Twenty years to come. Rot. Parl. 1 Ric. 2.

Traitor (Traditor, Proditor.) See Treason.

Traitorous Position, Of taking Arms by the Kings Authority against his person,
and those that are commissionated by him; condemned by the Stat. 14 Car. 2.
cap. 3.

Transcript (Anno 34 and 35 Hen. 8. cap. 14.) Is the Copy of any Original,
written again or exemplified. As the Transcript of a Fine.

Transcripto Recognitionis factae coram Justiciariis itinerantibus, etc. Is a
Writ for the certifying of a Recognizance into Chancery, taken before Justices
in Air. Reg. of Writs, fol. 152. b.

Transcripto pedis Finis levati mittendo in Cancellariam, Is a Writ for the
certifying the Foot of a Fine, levied before Justices in Air, etc. into the
Chancery. Reg. of Writs, fol. 169. and Reg. Judic. fol. 14.

Transgressione, Is a Writ, commonly called a Writ or Action of Trespass. Of
which, Fitzherbert has two sorts; one, Vicountiel, so called, because it is
directed to the Sheriff, and is not returnable, but to be determined in the
County. The form whereof differs from the other, because it has not these
words Quare vi and Armis, etc. Not. Br. fol. 84. G. The other is termed a Writ
of Trespass, which is to be sued in the Common Pleas or Kings Bench. Not. Br.
fol. 92. E. See Trespass, and the diverse use of this Writ in the Table of Reg.
of Writs and 2 Inst. fol. 419.

Transire (Anno 14 Car. 2. cap. 11.) I used for a Custom-house Warrant, or
Let-pass; from transeo, to go forth, or let pass.

Transitory, Is the opposite to Local. See Local.

Trantery. So in some Manors they call the Money arising by Amercements of
Alesellers and Victuallers, for breaking the Assise of Bread and Ale, as at
Luston, and other Manors in Herefordshire, especially those belonging to the
Brishopric of Hereford. But why so called Quaere.

Travers (from the Fr. Traverser, i. Transfigere) Signifies sometimes to deny;
sometimes to overthrow or undo a thing, or to put one to prove some matter,
much used in answers to a Bill in Chancery; or it is that which the Defendant
pleads, or says in Bar to avoid the Plaintiffs Bill, either by confessing
and avoiding, or by denying and traversing the material parts thereof: The
formal words of which Travers are, in our French, sans ceo, in Latin absque
hoc, in English without that. See Kitchen, fol. 227. and 240. To Travers an
Office is nothing else but to prove, That an Inquisition made of Goods or Lands
by the Escheater, is defective and untruly made. So to Travers an Indictment,
is to take issue upon the chief matter, and to contradict or deny some point of
it. As in a Presentment against A. for a Highway overflown with Water, for
default of scouring a Ditch, etc. A. may Travers either the matter, that there
is no Highway there, or that the Ditch is sufficiently scoured; or otherwise
he may Travers the Cause, viz. That he has not the Land, or that he and they
whose estate, etc. have not used to scour the Ditch. Lamb. Eiren. lib. 4. cap.
13. page 521, 522. See the New Book of Entries, verbo, Travers.

Treason (Fr. Trahison, i. Proditio) Is divided into high and petit. Anno 25
Edw. 3. stat. 3. cap. 4. High Treason is defined to be an offense committed
against the Security of the King or Commonwealth, whether it be by imagination,
word, or deed; as to compass or imagine the death of the King, Queen, or Prince;
or to deflower the Kings Wife, or His eldest Daughter unmarried, or His eldest
Sons Wife, or levy War against the King in His Realm, adhere to His enemies,
counterfeit His Great Seal, Privy Seal, or Money; or wittingly to bring false
Money into this Realm counterfeited like the Money of England, and utter the
same: To kill the Kings Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of either Bench,
Justices in Air, of Assise, or of Oyer and Terminer, being in their place,
doing their Office. (An. 25 Edw. 3. cap. 2.) Forging the Kings Seal-Manuel or
Privy Signet, Privy Seal, or Foreign Coin current here (Anno 2 Mar. cap. 6.) or
diminishing or impairing current Money (5 Eliz. cap. 11. 14 Eliz. cap. 3. and
18 Eliz. cap. 1. Or to say, the King is an Heretic or Papist, or that He
intends to introduce Popery, etc. Anno 13 Car. 2. cap. 1. And many others,
which you may read there, and in other places particularly expressed. In case
of this Treason a Man shall be hanged, drawn, and quartered, and forfeit his
Lands and Goods to the King, it is also called Treason Paramount. Anno 25 Edw.
3. cap. 2.

Petit Treason, Is when a Servant kills his Master, a Wife her Husband, or when
a Secular or Religious Man kills his Prelate or Superior to whom he ows Faith
and Obedience, and in how many other Cases Petit Treason may be committed. See
Cromp. Just. of Peace. This kind of Treason gives forfeiture of Escheats to
every Lord within his own Fee. See Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 3. number. 1.
and 2. There is also mention of Accumulative Treason, and Constructive Treason,
in the Stat. 14 Car. 2. cap. 29.

Treasure-trove, (Fr. Tresor-trouve, i. Treasure-found) Signifies veterem
depositionem pecuniae, cujus non extat memoria, ut jam dominum non habeat --
And, though the Civil Law give it to the finder, according to the Law of
Nature, yet, our Law gives it to the King by His Prerogative, or to some other,
who claims by the Kings grant, or by praescription, as appears by Bracton, lib.
3. Tract. 2. ca. 3. nu. 4. The punishment for concealing Treasure found is
imprisonment and fine. But, if the owner may any ways be known, then it does
not belong to the Kings Prerogative. Briton, (ca. 17.) says, it is every
Subjects part, as soon as he has found any Treasure in the earth, to make it
known to the Coroners of the County, etc. See Kitchen, fo. 40. Anno 1 and 2 Ph.
and Mary, ca. 15. This was anciently called Fyndaringa, of finding the
Treasure. LL. Hen. 1. ca. 11. See 3 Inst. fo. 132.

Treasurer, (Thesaurarius) Is an Officer, to whom the Treasure of another is
committed to be kept, and truly disposed of; The chief of these with us is the
Treasurer of England, who is a Lord by his Office, and one of the greatest men
of the Land; under whose Government is all the Princes Wealth contained in the
Exchequer, as also the Check of all Officers any way employed in collecting
Imposts, Tributes, or other Revenues belonging to the Crown, etc. Smith de
Repub. Angl. lib. 2. ca. 14. See Anno 20 Ed. 3. ca. 6. and other Statutes
relating to this Great Officer. There is also Treasurer of the Kings Household,
who is also of the Privy Council, and, in the absence of the Steward of the
Kings household, has power, with the Controller and Steward of the Marshalsea,
without Commission to hear and determine Treasons, Murder, etc. committed within
the Kings Palace. Stam. Pl. Cor. lib. 3. ca. 5. There is also in the Statutes
mention of Treasurer of the Exchequer, Treasurer of the Navy, Treasurer of the
Kings Chamber, Treasurer of the Kings Wardrobe, Treasurer of the Wars, etc.
And, most Corporations throughout the Kingdom, have an Officer of this Name,
who receives their Rents, and disburseth their common expenses.

Treat (From the French Traire, i. Emulger^) Signifies as much as taken out, or
withdrawn: As a Juror was challenged because he could not dispend 40 l. and
therefore was treat by the Statute (Old. Not. Br. fo. 159.) that is, removed or
discharged.

Trebuchet, (Terbichetum) A Tumbrel, or Cokestole, 3 Part. Inst. fo. 219. See
Tribuch.

Treet (Triticum, i. Wheat.) In the Statute of 51 Hen. 3. Bread of Treet seems
to be that bread which was made of fine Wheat. See Cocket.

Trental (Trentale) An Office for the Dead, continued thirty days, or
consisting of thirty Masses; from the Italian Trenta, i. Triginta, mentioned
Anno 1 Ed. 6. ca. 14. -- Et volo and ordino quod Executores mei ordinant scu
ordinare faciunt unum Trentall pro salute animae meae. Will proved, Anno 1456.

Trespass (Transgressio) Signifies any transgression of the Law, under Treason,
Felony or Misprision of either, Stam. pl. Cor. fo. 38. where he says, that for
a Lord of the Parliament, to depart from the Parliament without the Kings
license, is neither Treason, nor Felony, but Trespass. But, it is most commonly
used for that wrong or damage, which is done by one private man to another, or
to the King in his Forest; In which signification it is of two sorts,
Trespass-general, otherwise termed vi and armis; and, Trespass-special,
otherwise called Trespass upon the Case, which seems to be without force
(howbeit sometimes they are confounded.) In an Action of Trespass the Plaintiff
always sues for Damages, or the value of the hurt done him by the Defendant.
See Brokes Abridg. Tit. Trespass.

There is also Trespass local, and Trespass transitory; Trespass local is that,
which is so annexed to a place certain, that if the Defendant join issue upon
the place, and traverse the place, only by saying, absque hoc, that he did the
Trespass in the place mentioned in the Declaration, and aver it, it is enough
to defeat the action. Trespass transitory is that which cannot be defeated by
the Defendants travense of the place, because the place is not material; but,
Actions of Trespass quare Clausum frogi^ ought to be local. Bracton, lib. 4.
ca. 34. number. 6. divides transgressionem in majorem and minor^m. See also New
Book of Entries, verbo Trespass.

Trespassants, (Fr.) Passengers: so Britton uses it, ca. 29.

Trial, (Triatio) Is used for the examination of all causes Civil or Criminal
before a Judge, according to the Laws of our Realm; of which there are diverse
kinds; as, Matters of Fact shall be tried by the Jurors; Matters of Law, by the
Justices; Matters of Record, by the Record it self. A Lord of Parliament, upon
an Indictment of Treason, or Felony, shall be tried without any Oath, by his
Peers, upon their Honors and Allegiance; but, in appeal, at the Suit of any
Subject, they shall be tried per bonos and legales homines. If ancient Demeasne
be pleaded of a Manor, and denied, this shall be tried by the Record of
Domesday. Bastardy, Excommengement, lawfulness of Marriage, and other
Ecclesiastical matters, shall be tried by the Bishops Certificate. Of the
ancient manner of Trials by Combat, and great Assize, see Combat and Assise.
See Stamf. pl. Cor. lib. 2. ca. 1, 2, 3. And Twelve Men. Triatio est
exactissima, litis contestatae, coram Judice, per duodecemvirale sacramentum,
exagitatio. Pat. 3. R. Joh. m. 3. in fidelitate Leulini. Statuitur de triatione
differentiarum dicti Leulini, etc.

Tribuch and Trebuchet, (Terbichetum) A Tumbrel, Cuckingstole, or Gogingstole.
-- Haec omnia concedimus deo and Ecclesiae Sancti Albani, cum Soca and Sacca,
on Stronde and Streme, on Wude and Feld, Toll and Teym, Tribuch, Hamsoken,
Murdre, Forestal, Danegeld, Infangenthef and Utfangenthef, Flemenefremthe,
Blodwite, Wreck, etc. Carta Joh. Regis, Dat. 11 Junii, Anno 1 Regni.

Trihing, or Trithing, (Sax. Trihinga) contains three or four Hundreds, or the
third part of a Shire or Province; Also a Court held within that Circuit, which
was the same we now call a Court Leet, which is above a Court Baron, and
inferior to the County Court. Breve de Atturnato de loquelis, etc. Regist. 266.
-- Provisum est quod quilibet liber homo libere possit facere Atturnatum suum
ad loquelas suas prosequendas and defendendas motas in Trithyngis, Comitatibus,
Wapentachiis and aliis Curiis sine breve nostro. Sur le Statute de Merton, ca.
10. Fiat autem visus de Franciplegio sic, viz. quod pax nostra teneatur, and
quod Trithinga sit integra, sicut esse consuevit, etc. Mag. Char. ca. 36. See
Fleta, lib. 2. ca. 61. and Origin. Jurid. fo. 26. See Lath. -- Et volo quod
dicti Monachi sint quieti and soluti ab omni scotto, Geldo, auxiliis
vicecomitum, Hydagio, and a secta in Schiris, wapuntachis, Hundredis,
Trithingis, and omnimodis aliis Curiis and saeculi oneribus universis. Carta
Eadredi Regis Anno 948. Abb. and Monachis Croiland.

Trinity-house, Is a kind of College at Debtford, belonging to a Company, or
Corporation of Seafaring Men, who have power by the Kings Charter to take
knowledge of those that destroy Sea-marks, and to redress their doings, as also
to correct the faults of Saylors, etc. and to take care of diverse other things
belonging to Navigation and the Seas. Anno, 8 Eliz. ca. 13.

Trink, Is a kind of Fishing-net, or an Engine to catch fish, Anno 2 Hen. 6. ca.
15. Cokes 12 Rep. fo. 89. Mich. 9. Jac.

Triours, Are such who are chosen by the Court to examine whether a Challenge
made to the Panel, or any of them be just, or no. Brook tit. Challenge, fo.
122. and Old. Not. Br. fo. 158.

Trista. -- In quo Rex cum caeteris superior constitisset, secundum legem
venandi, quam vulgus Tristam vocant, singulis proceribus cum suis canibus
singula loca delegat, ut obsessa undique bestia, ubicunque eligeret exitum,
inveniret exitium, etc. December Scriptores, fo. 367. Servitium vel Officium plane
sapit, fiducia mixtum; Origo, in fallor a nostratium Trust. Gloss. in x.
Script. See Tristris.

Tristris, Tristis and Trista, (from Traist, i. Trust) Is an immunity, whereby
a Man is freed from his attendance on the Lord of a Forest, when he is disposed
to ch^se within the Forest, and shall not be compel^d to hold a dog, follow the
chase, nor stand at a place appointed, which otherwise he might be, under pain
of amercement, Manw. par. 1. pa. 86. -- Et sint quieti, etc. de chevagio,
Honde-peny, Buckstal and Tristris, and de omnibus misericurdiis, etc. Privileg.
de Semplingham. 4 Inst. fo. 306.

Thrithing, (Trithingum) In the Statute of Merton, ca. 10. signifies a Court
consisting of three or four Hundreds, 2 Inst. fo. 99. See Trihing.

Tronage, (Tronagium) Is Custom, or Toll taken for weighing Wool; Fleta, (lib.
2. ca. 12. Sect. Item ulnas) says, that Trona is a Beam to Weigh with,
mentioned in West. 2. ca. 25.

Tronator, (from Trona, i. Statera) An Officer in the City of London, who
weighs the Wool that is brought thither. See his Oath in the Book of Oaths,
fo. 231.

Trover, (Fr. Trouver, i. Invenire) Is the name of an action, which a man has
against one, who, having found any of his Goods, refuses to deliver them upon
demand. See New Book of Entries, verbo Trover. Actions of detinue are of late
much turned into Actions upon the Case, sur Trover and Conversion. Preface to
Rolls Abridgment.

Troy-weight, (Pondus Troiae) See Weight.

Trug. -- Tres Trugge frumenti vel avenae faciunt 2 Bushels infra Prebendam de
Hunderton in Ecclesia Heref. MS. de temp. E. 3. And, at Lempster at this day
the Vicar has Trug Corn allowed him for Officiating at some Chapels of ease,
(as Stoke and Dorklay) within that Parish; Happily it may come from the Sax.
Trog, which signifies a great hollow Vessel, or Trough.

Tumbrel, (Tumbrellum, turbichetum,) Is an engine of punishment, which ought to
be in every liberty that has view of Frankpledge, for the correction and
cooling of Scoldes, and unquiet Women, Kitchen, fo. 13. See Cuckingstool. Item,
si aliquis, qui in libertatem nostram, per assensum and consensum Comburgensium
nostrorum, admissus fuerit, fecerit aliquod delictum, per quod ad penam
publicam seu vile Judicium, ut ad Collistrigium vel Tumbrellum, vel aliquod
aliud hujusmodi adjudicatus fuerit, pro perjuro reputabitur, and ipso facto
amittet libertatem suam. MS. Codex de LL. Statutis and Corfuetud. Burgi villae
Mountgom. fo. 11.

Tun, Is a measure of Oil or Wine containing twelve score and twelve Gallons,
or four Hogsheads, Anno 1 Rich. 3. ca. 12. 2 Hen. 6. ca. 11. and 12 Car. 2. ca.
4. a Tun of Timber is 40 solid feet; a Load 50.

Tun-greve, (Sax. Tungeraefa, i. Villae praepositus) A Reeve, or Bailiff; qui
in villis (and quae dicimus Maneriis) Domini personam sustinet, ejusque vice
omnia disponat and moderatur. Spelman.

Tunnage, al. Tonnage, (tunnagium and tonnagium) Is a Custom or Impost due for
Merchandise brought or carried in Tuns, and such like vessels, from or to other
Nations after a certain rate for every Tun, An. 12 Edw. 4. ca. 3. -- 6 Hen. 8.
ca. 14. -- 1 Ed. 6. ca. 13. -- 1 Jac. ca. 33. and 12 Car. 2. ca. 4. It is
sometimes used for a duty due to the Mariners for unloading their Ship, arrived
in any Havens, after the rate of so much a Tun. Tunnage and Poundage began in
the 45th of Edward the third. Cottoni posthuma, fo. 172. See 4 Inst. fo. 32.

Turbary, (turbaria, from turba, a turf) Is a right or interest to dig turves
on another man's ground, Kitchen, fo. 94. And, Common of Turbary is a liberty
which some Tenants have by prescription to dig turves on the Lords Waste.
Turbaria is sometimes also taken for the ground where turves are dug.

Turn, (turnum) Is the Sheriffs Court, kept twice every year, viz. within a
Month after Easter, and Michaclmas. Mag. Charta, ca. 35. and 3 Edw. 3. ca. 15.
From this Court are exempt only Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls,
Barons, all Religious men and women, and all such as have Hundreds of their own
to be kept. Anno 25 Hen. 3. ca. 10. Britton, (ca. 29.) calls it Tour, (i.
ambitus, circuitus.) It is a Court of Record in all things that pertain to it,
it is the Kings Leet through all the County, and the Sheriff is Judge, and this
Court is incident to his Office. See Cromp. Jur. fo. 230. and 4 Inst. fo. 260.

Turney or Tournement (Fr. Tourney, i. Decursorium) Signifies a Martial
exercise of Knights or Gentlemen fighting on horseback one with another in
disport, and is thus defined, Torneamenta dicuntur nundinae vel feriae, in
quibus milites ex condicto convenire, and ad ostentationem virium suarum and
audaciae, temere congredi solent. This word is used in the Statute 24 Hen. 8.
ca. 13. but, the thing it self is now disused.

Turno vicecomitum, Is a Writ that lies for those that are called to the
Sheriffs Turn out of their own Hundred, Reg. of Writs, fo. 174.

Twaite, Signifies a wood grubbed up, and turned to Arable. Coke on Litt. fo.
4. b.

Two nights geste, (Hospes duarum noctium) If he did harm to any, his Host was
not answerable for it, but himself. Hoveden, part poster. fo. 345. b. See
Third-nights-awn-hine.

Twelve men, (duodecim homines legales,) otherwise called the Jury, or Enquest,
is a number of twelve persons, or upwards to twenty four, by whose Oath, as to
matters of Fact, all Trials pass both in Civil and Criminal Causes, through all
Courts of the Common Law in this Realm. In Civil Causes, when proof is made of
the matter in question, the point of the Fact (on which they are to give their
verdict) is delivered likewise to them, which we call the Issue, then they are
put in mind of their Oath, to do right, and are, by the Judges, summing up the
evidence, sent out of the Court, by themselves to consider upon the Evidence on
both sides, until they are agreed: which done, they return to the Court, and
deliver their verdict by the Mouth of their Foreman; according to which (if the
matter be not arrested, or staid by the discretion of the Judge or the Court,)
the Judgment passes.

In Causes Criminal there are two sorts of Enquests, one called the Grand
Enquest, the other the Enquest of life and death; The first is so called,
either because it consists of sixteen at the least, or else because all causes
Criminal or Penal first pass through them; whereas the other Enquest is
especially appointed for one or few matters touching life and death. Those of
the Grand Enquest are called by Bracton, 12 Milites; because they were wont to
be Knights, if so many could be had. And their Function is to receive all
Presentiments of any Offense, and accordingly to give their general opinion of
them, by writing either these words billa vera upon the Bill of Presentment,
which is an Indictment of the Party presented, or else Ignoramus, which is a
doubting of the Fact presented. Of this read more in Indictment, Assise, Jury.
See the Statute 35 Hen. 8. ca. 6. and 37 ejusdem, ca. 22. -- 2 Ed. 6. ca. 32.
and 5 Eliz. ca. 25.

Timber of skins, Is 40 skins. Book of Rates, fo. 18.

Tympeny. Abbas and Monachi Rading. -- Sint quieti de tributis and lastagiis
and stallagiis de Thething-peny and Tympeny, de summonitionibus de Assisis and
super assisis, etc. In Memorand. Scacc. de Anno 20 Ed. 3. int. Record. de Trin.
Rot. 3. I find it elsewhere written Tinpeny. Mon. Angl. 1 Par. fo. 419. a.
Quaere.

U.
VAcation, (Vacatio) Is all the time respectively, betwixt the end of every
Term and beginning of the next; when such times began and ended in our
Ancestors days. See Hovedens Annals, Par post. fo. 343. a. where you shall
find that this intermission was called Pax dei and Ecclesiae. Also the time
from the death of a Bishop or other Spiritual person, till the Bishopric, or
other Dignity be supplied with another, is called Vacation. Westminster. 1. ca. 21.
and 14 Edw. 3. ca. 4. and 5. See Plenarty.

Uaccarie, alias Uaccharie, (Vaccaria, al. Vaccharia, and Vacheria) Is a House
or place to keep Cowes in. Fleta, lib. 2. ca. 41. Domus sive locus quo vaccae
aluntur, vel quo negotium quod ad eos attinet perficitur. Spelm. A Dairyhouse.
Without warrant no Subject may have a Vaccary within the Forest, Crom. Jur.
fo. 194. But, in the Stat. 37 Hen. 8. ca. 16. Vacchary seems to be a special
name of a certain compass of ground within the Forest of Ashdown.

Uaga. See Waga.

Uagabond, (Vagabundus) One that wanders about, and has no certain dwelling, an
idle Fellow. Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, mentioned in diverse
Statutes. -- De Vagabundis and aliis hominibus mendicantibus qui se nominant,
Travelyng-men, etc. Charta, 22 Hen. 6. m. 34. n. 36. Item utimur, quod nullus
Vagabundus vagetur seu deambulet de nocte in villa seu suburbio ejusdem post
pulsationem Campanae nostrae communis, vocatae Coverfu, Et si aliquis ibidem
capiatur post pulsationem dictae Campanae ducatur ad Gaolam Domini Regis, and
ibi morabitur usque in crastinum. ut noticia personae suae habeatur, and
emendas faciet ad voluntatem Balivorum and Comburgensium, and per Balivos
Capitales liberetur, si hoc petat. MS. Codex de Legibus and Statutis
Burgi-villae Mountgomer. a tempore, Hen. 2.

Ualect, Ualet, or Uadelect, (Valettus vel valecta. Qui juxta dominum vadit seu
ministrat. Fr* Valet.) A Servitor, or Gentleman of the Privy-Chamber, according
to Cambden. In the accounts of the Inner Temple it is used for a Benchers
Clerk, or Servant; The Butlers of the House corruptly call them Varlets. In
Reg. of Writs, 25. b. Valettus. If the Sheriff be a Vadelect of the Crown, etc.
Coke on Lit. fo. 156. Sciant -- Quod ego Henricus Comes Lancastriae and
Leicestr. Senescallus Angliae Dendimus -- Dilecto Valetto nostro Johanni le
Blount novem acras terrae cum pertin. in Holland in Foresta nostra de Duffeld,
etc. Dat. apud Hegham Ferrers 3 die Junii 5 Ed. 3. Penes Wall. Kirkham Blount
Bar.

Valet was anciently a name specially denoting young Gentlemen, though of great
descent or quality, but now given to those of the rank of Yeomen. Seldens
titles of Honor, fo. 831.

Ualue, (Valentia, valor) Is a known word; but, West gives us a nice difference
betwixt value and price. -- The value, says he, of those things, in which
offenses are committed, is usually comprised in Inditements, which seems
necessary in Theft, to make a difference from petit Larceny, and in Trespass to
aggravate the fault, and increase the Fine: But, no price of things ferae
naturae may be expressed, as of Deer, Hares, etc. if they be not in Parks and
Warrens, which is a liberty. Anno 8 Ed. 4. fo. 5. nor of Charters of Land. And,
where the number of the things taken are to be expressed in the Indictment, as
of young Doves in a Dovehouse, there must be said pretii, or ad valentiam; but,
of diverse dead things, ad valentiam, and not pretii. Of Coin not current, it
shall be pretii, but of Coin Current it* shall neither be said pretii, nor ad
valentiam, for the price and value thereof is certain, etc. Par. 2. Symbol.
tit. Inditements. Sect. 70. V. W.

Ualor of Marriage, (Valor maritagii) Was a Writ that lay for the Lord, having
profer'd Covenable Marriage to the Infant, and he refusing it, to recover the
value of the Marriage. Old. Not. Br. fo. 90. but taken away by the Statute 12
Car. 2. ca. 24.

Uantarius, Praecursor. As Vantarius Regis, the Kings fore-foot-man. Richardus
Rockesle, miles tenebat terras Seatoniae per Scriantiam esse Vantarium Regis in
Gascoign, donec perusus fuit pari solutarum precii 4 d. i. dum trivisset par
calceorum pretii 4 d. Rot. de Finibus. Term. Mich. 2 Ed. 2.

Uariance, (From the Fr. Varier, i. Alterare*) Signifies an alteration or
change of condition, after a thing done. As, the Commonalty of a Town make a
composition with an Abbot, and after obtain Bailiffs by grant from the King. In
this case, if the Abbot commence any Suit for breach of the composition, he
must vary from the word Commonalty set down in the Composition, and use
Bailiffs and Commonalty. Brook, tit. variance, fo. 292. It is also used for an
alteration of something formerly laid in a Plea. See Variance in the New Book
of Entries.

Uarlets, By a Repealed Statute of 20 Rich. 2. cap. 2. were used for Yomen, or
Yomen-servants. See Valects, and the Statute 3 Car. 1. ca. 4. Will. Hunt Varlet
del Chamber nostre Seigneur le Roy. Claus. 12 Rich. 2. M. 43. in dorso.

Uaslet, (Vaslettus) -- Concordia inter Regem and Radulphum de Normanvil, viz.
quod Rad. tenebit in servitio Regis Geroldum and Radulphum milites, filios
suos, quamdiu guerra sua duraverit, per sic, quod Rex ei remittat CC. Marcas
quas debebant Regi Johanni de Fine pro redemptione dicti Geroldi, and per sic
deberetur; Thomas filius dicti Radulphi Vaslettus in custodia Regis, qui
similiter morabatur in servitio Regis cum praedictis Geroldo and Radulpho
fratribus suis. Pat. 1 Hen. 3. in dorso M. 13. It seems here to signify a
Ward. See Valect.

Uassal, (Vassallus,) From the Germ. Gessel. i. Comes qui mercede servit)
Signifies him that holds Land in Fee of his Lord, we call him more usually a
Tenant in Fee, whereof some owe fidelity and service, and are called vasalli
jurati. But, the word being little used in our Law Books, make me waive that
enlargement which Cowel makes upon it.

Uasto, Is a Writ that lies for the Heir against the Tenant for life or years,
for making waste, or for him in the reversion or remainder. Fitz. Not. Br. fo.
55 See the Statute 6 Ed. 1. ca. 5.

Uavasor, alias Ualvasor, Is one who in dignity is next a Baron. Cambd. Brit.
pa. 109. -- Bracton, lib. 1. ea. 8. says thus of them -- Sunt and alii
potentes sub Rege, qui dicuntur Barons, hoc est, robur belli; sunt and alii
qui dicuntur vavasores, viri magnae dignitatis: vavasor enim, nihil melius dici
poterit, quam vas sortitum ad valetudinem. -- Rex, etc. Ballivis Petri de
Pratellis de Insula Gerse and Gernse, etc. volumus -- quod Episcopi, Abbates,
Abbatissae, Clerici, Milites, vavassores, and alii qui redditus and tenementa
habent in Insula Gersey, etc. quintam partem reddituum suorum unius anni, etc.
praebeant ad sustentandum milites and servientes qui praedictas Insulas
defendunt. Pat. 5 Joh. M. 7. See more of these in the learned Spelmans Gloss.

Uavasorie (Vavasoria) The Lands that a Vavasor held -- Quod dicitur de Baronia
non est observandum in Vavasoria, vel aliis minoribus feodis quam Baronia, quia
caput non habent sicut Baronia. Bract. lib. 2. cap. 39.

Ueal-Money, or Ueal noble Money, The Tenants of one of the Tithings within the
Manor of Bradford in Com. Wilts, pay a yearly Rent by this name to their Lord,
the Marquess of Winchester, which is in lieu of Veal paid formerly in kind.

Uejours (Visores, from the Fr. Veoir, i. Cernere, intueri) Are those that are
sent by the Court to take view of any place in question, for the better
decision of the right. Old Not. Br. fol. 112. So Bracton uses it, Lib. 5.
tract. 3. cap. 8. It signifies also those that are sent to view such as Essoign
themselves De malo lecti, whether they are in truth so sick, as they cannot
appear, or whether they counterfeit. Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 2. cap. 10. and
14. Lastly, It is used for those that are sent or appointed to view an offense,
as a Man murdered, or a Virgin ravished. See View.

Uenditioni exponas, Is a Writ Judicial, directed to the Undersheriff
commanding him to sell goods, which he has formerly, by commandment, taken
into his hands for the satisfying a Judgment given in the Kings Court. Reg.
Judie. fol. 33. And Anno 14 Car. 2. cap. 21.

Uenire facias, Is a Writ Judicial, going out of the Record, and lies where two
parties plead, and come to Issue; for then the party Plaintiff or Defendant,
shall have this Writ directed to the Sheriff, to cause Twelve Men of the same
County to say the truth upon the Issue taken: And if the Enquest come not at
the day of this Writ returned, then shall go a Habeas Corpora, and after a
Distress, until they come. Old Not. Br. fol. 157. See how diversely this Writ is
used in the Table of the Register Judicial. There is also a Writ of this name,
that is original, as appears in the Reg. of Writs, fol. 200. Which Lambert in
his Processes annexed to his Eiren. says, is the common Process upon any
Presentment, not being Felony, nor specially appointed for the fault presented
by Statute, whereof he sets down an example in the same place. See also the New
Book of Entries, verbo, Enquest, fol. 253. And the Stat. 35 Hen. 8. cap. 5.

Uenire facias tot matronas. See Ventre inspiciendo, and Lamb. Eiren. lib. 4.
cap. 14. page 532.

Uentre inspiciendo, Is a Writ for the search of a Woman, that says she is with
child, and thereby withholds Land from him that is next Heir at Law. Register
of Writs, fol. 227. a.

Uenue or Uenew (Vicinetum al. Visnetum) Is taken for a neighboring or near
place, Locus quem vicini, habitant. For example, Twelve of the Assise ought to
be of the same Venew, where the Demand is made. Old Not. Br. fol. 115. Anno 4
Hen. 4. cap. 26. And 25 Hen. 8. cap. 6. -- And also shall return in every such
Panel upon the Venire facias, six sufficient Hundreders, at the least, if there
be so many within the Hundred, where the Venue lies. See Visne.

Uerd. See Vert.

Uerderor (Viridarius, Fr. Verdeur, i. Custos nemoris) Is a Judicial Officer of
the Kings Forest, chosen by the Kings Writ in the full County of the same
shire, within the Forest where he dwells, and is sworn to maintain and keep the
Assizes of the Forest, and to view, receive, and enrol the Attachments and
Presentiments of all manner of Trespasses of Vert and Venison in the Forest.
Manwood, par. 1. page 332. His office is properly to look to the Vert, and see
it be well maintained. Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 165. His Oath, Fee, and Authority,
see in Manwood supra, and fol. 51.

Uerdict (Verdictum, quasi dictum veritatis) Is the Answer of a Jury or Enquest
made upon any Cause, Civil, or Criminal, committed by the Court to their trial;
which is twofold, General or Special. Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 3. cap. 9. A General
Verdict, is that, which is given or brought into the Court in like general
terms to the General Issue; as in an Action of Disseisin, the Defendant pleads,
No wrong, no Disseisin: Then the Issue is General, whether the Fact be a wrong
or not, which being committed to the Jury, they, upon consideration of their
evidence, come in and say, either for the Plaintiff, that it is a wrong and
Disseisin, or for the Defendant, that it is no wrong, no Disseisin.

A Special Verdict, is, when they say at large, that such a thing, and such
they find to be done by the Defendant or Tenant, so declaring the course of
the Fact, as in their opinion it is proved, and as to the Law upon the Fact,
they pray the Judgment of the Court. And this Special Verdict, if it contain
any ample Declaration of the Cause; from the beginning to the end, is also
called a Verdict at large; whereof read diverse examples in Stamf. ubi supra.
New Book of Entries, verbo, Verdict. And Coke on Littl. fol. 228. a. Item
utimnr, quod Balivi and Coronatores Burgi nostri usi fuerint and adhuc utuntur
recipere Veredictum Duodecim Juratorum ex quacunque causa infra Burgum nostrum
praedictum seu ejus libertatem emergenti sive contingenti, Senesealli
praesentia nullo modo expectata. MS. Codex de LL. and Statutis Burgi-villae
Mountgomer. fol. 15.

Uerge (Virgata) Is used for the compass of the Kings Court, which bounds the
Jurisdiction of the Lord Steward of the Kings Household, and of the Coroner of
the Kings House, and that seems to have been twelve miles compass, Anno 13
Rich. 2. stat. 1. cap. 3. Britton, fol. 68. and 69. Cokes Rep. lib. 4. fol. 47.
See the Stat. 33 Hen. 8. cap. 12. Fleta (lib. 2. cap. 4. sect. 1) says, This
compass about the Court is called Virgata, a Virga, quam Marishallus portat ut
signum suae potestatis.

Verge is also used for a Stick or Rod, whereby one is admitted Tenant, and,
holding it in his hand, swears Fealty, to the Lord of a Manor, who is
therefore called Tenant by the Verge. Old Not. Br. fol. 17.

Uerge of Land (Anno 28 Edw. 1 Statute of Wards) Virgata terrae. See Yard-land.

Uergers (Virgatores) Are such as carry White Wands before the Justices of
either Bench, etc. Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 38. otherwise called Porters of the
Verge.

Uery Lord, and very Tenant (Verus Dominus, and verus Tenens) Are those that
are immediate Lord and Tenant one to another. Brook, tit. Hariot, fol. 23. In
Old Not. Br. fol. 42. You have these words -- And know ye that in taking of
Leases, six things are necessary, viz. Very Lord, and very Tenant. Service
behind; the day of the taking; Seisin of the Services and within his Fee. And,
that a Man is not very Tenant, until he have atturned to the Lord by some
service. See Anno 19 Hen. 7. cap. 15. And see Tenant.

Uert (Fr. Verd, i. Viridis) Otherwise called Greenhue, signifies in the Forest
Laws, every thing that grows and bears green Leaf within the Forest, that may
cover a Deer. Manwood, 2 Part. fol. 6. and 33. Vert is divided into Over Vert,
and Nether Vert. Over Vert is that which our Law Books call Hault Bois, and
Nether Vert, South-bois. And of this you may read Manwood, 2 par. cap. 6. per
totum. Vert is also sometimes taken for that power which a Man has by the
Kings Grant to cut Green Wood in the Forest. See 4 Inst. fol. 317.

Uervise, Otherwise called Plonkets. Anno 1 Rich. 3. cap. 8. A kind of Cloth.

Uesses. Anno 1 Rich. 3. cap. 8. And Anno 14 and 15 Hen. 8. cap. 11. otherwise
called Set Clothes, most commonly made in Suffolk.

Uest (Vestire) Plenam possessionem terrae vel praedii tradere; saisinam dare,
infeodare. Says Spelman.

Uestry-men (Anno 15 Car. 2. cap. 5.) Are a select number of the chief
Parishioners of every Parish within the City of London, and Suburbs, and
elsewhere, who yearly choose Officers for the Parish, and take care of its
concernments, so called, because they usually meet in the Vestry of the Church.

Uesture (Vesturd* Signifies a Garment, but we turn it Metaphorically to
betoken a Possession, or an admittance to a Possession, or Seisin: So is it
taken in Westminster. 2. cap. 25. And in this signification it is borrowed from the
Feudists, with whom Investitara, imports a Delivery of Possession by a Spear or
Staff, and Vestura, Possession it self. Hottoman, verbo, Investitura. Vestura
terrae, i. Segetes quibus terra Vestitur. MS.

Uesture of an Acre of Land (Anno 14 Edw. 1. stat. 1. Is the profit of it. So
in Extenta Manerii 4 Edw. 1. It is inquirable, How much the Vesture of an Acre
is worth, and how much the Land is worth, when the Wood is felled.

Uetitum namium, Namium signifies a Taking or Distress, and Vetitum, forbidden;
as when the Bailiff of a Lord Distrains Beasts or Goods, and the Lord forbids
his Bailiff to deliver them, when the Sheriff comes to Replevy them, and to
that end, drives them to places unknown; or when, without any words, they are
so eloigned, as they cannot be replevied. Diverse Lords of Hundreds, and Court
Barons have power to hold Plea De Vetito Namio, in old Books called De Vet. 2
Inst. fol. 140. Sir Henry Spelman says it is Antiqua Juris nostri locutio, and
brevis Regis nomen. See Naam.

Uicario deliberando occasion cujusdam Recognitionis, etc. Is a Writ that lies
for a Spiritual Person, imprisoned upon forfeiture of a Recognisance, without
the Kings Writ. Reg. of Writs, fol. 147.

Uicis and venellis Mundandis, Is a Writ that lies against a Major or Bailiffs
of a Town, etc. for the clean keeping their Streets. Reg. of Writs, fol. 267. b.

Uicar (Vicarius) The Priest of every Parish is called Rector, unless the
Predial Tithes be impropriated, and then he is called Vicar, Quasi vice fungens
Rectoris. Sciant -- quod ego Johannes Web perpetuus Vicarius Ecclesiae
Parochialis de Bromyord Dedi -- Domino David Hay perpetuo Vicario Ecclesiae
Parochialis de Anenebury duas acras terrae, etc. Dat. 8 Hen. 5. They styled
themselves Perpetui Vicarii, because every Vicaridge has a constant
Succession, as a Corporation, and never dies. The Canonists mention four
species of Vicars: Quidam sunt perpetui, ad Parochiales Ecclesias constituti;
quidam non perpetui, sed ad aliquos actus constituti, ut temporales; and isti
dicuntur, mercenarii: Quidam sunt speciales, non ad curam, sed ad certum locum,
articulum vel actum constituti: Quidam nec perpetui, nec ad curam, nec ad
certum actum, sed generaliter dantur ad omnia. See Vocab. utriusque Juris,
verbo Vicarius.

Uice-Chamberlain, called Under-Chamberlain (Anno 13 Rich. 2. stat. 2. cap. 1.)
Is a great Officer in Court, next under the Lord Chamberlain, and in his
absence has the command and controlment of all Officers whatsoever,
appertaining to that part of his Majesty's Household, which is called the
Chamber, or above stairs.

Uicegerent (Anno 31 Hen. 8. cap. 10.) A Deputy or Lieutenant.

Uicinage (Fr. Voisinage) Neighborhood, nearness. Mag. Char. cap. 14. See Venue.

Uicinetum. See Visne.

Uicount alias Uiscount (Vicecomes) Signifies as much as Sheriff: Between which
two words, I find no other difference, but that the one comes from our
Conquerors the Normans, the other from our Ancestors the Saxons, of which, see
more in Sheriff.

Vicount also signifies a degree of nobility next to an Earl, which Camden
(Britan. page 170.) says, Is an old name of Office, but a new one of dignity,
never heard of among us till Henry the Sixths days, who, in his eighteenth
year, in Parliament created John Lord Beaumont, Viscount Beaumont, but far more
ancient in other Countries. Cassan. de Gloria mundi, par. 5. consider. 55. See
Sheriff. And Seldens Titles of Honor, fo. 761.

Uicountiels, (Vicecomitilia) Are certain Ferms, for which the Sheriff pays a
rent to the King, and makes what profit he can of them. v. Stat. 33. and 34
Hen. 8. ca. 16. -- 2 and 3 Ed. 6. ca. 4. and 4 Hen. 5. ca. 2. Writs Vicountiel
are such Writs as are triable in the County, or Sheriffs Court. Old Not. Br.
fo. 109. of which kind you may see diverse Writs of Nuisance set down by Fitzh.
in his Not. Br. fo. 184. b. See Anno 6 Rich. 2. ca. 3.

Uicountiel Rents, Mentioned 22 Car. 2. ca. 6. see Vicountiels.

Uidimus, (Anno 15 Hen. 6. ca. 3.) See Innotescimus.

Uiew, (Fr. Veue, i. Visus, conspectus) Signifies the act of Viewers: For, when
any Action real is brought, and the Tenant knows not well what land it is that
the Demandant asks, then he may pray the view, which is, that he may see the
land which is claimed, of this Britton writes, ca. 45. This course of
proceeding we received from the Normans, as appears by the grand Custumary, ca.
66. and 80. This view is used, as in other cases, so in an Assise of
rentservice, rent charge, or rent seck. Fitz. Not. Brev. fo. 178. and in a Writ
de Curia claudenda. Idem, fo. 128. In a Writ of Nuisance, idem. fo. 183. In a
Writ Quo jure. Idem, fo. 128. In the Writ de rationabilibus divisis. Idem, fv.
129. And, in the Writ de secta ad molendinum. Idem, fo. 123. see the New Book
of Entries, verbo, view, and, how this view is made, in Fleta, lib. 4. ca. 6.
See Veiours, and Westminster. 2. ca. 48.

Uiew of Frankpledge, (Visus Franci plegii) Is the Office which the Sheriff in
his County Court, or the Bailiff in his Hundred performs, in looking to the
Kings peace, and seeing that every man be in some pledge. This is called by
Bracton, Res quasi sacra, quia solam personam Regis respicit, and introducta
pro pace and communi utilitate, lib. 2. ca. 16. number. 8. See Frankpledge, Leet
and Decennier. See New Book of Entries on this word.

Ui laica removendo, Is a Writ that lies for the removing a forcible possession
of a Benefice, kept by Laymen; and is sometimes granted upon the Certificate
of the Bishop into the Chancery, that there is such a force in his Diocese;
sometimes only upon a surmise thereof made by the Ineumbent himself, and has a
several form for either case. Fitz. Not. Brev. fo. 54. Reg. of Writs, fo. 59
and 60.

Uigil, (Vigilia) Anno 2 and 3 Ed. 6. ca. 19. is used for the eve or day next
before any solemn Feast; because then Christians of old were wont to watch,
fast and pray in their Churches.

Uill, (Villa) Is taken for a Manor, and sometimes for a Parish, or part of
it. Villa, apud Saxones nostros antiquos Romano sensu accipi videtur, pro
praedio unius alicujus in rure, cum idoneis aedibus ad reponendos cjusdem
fructus honestato. Non autem primitus pro multarum mansionum connexione, quod
in oppidis potius expetendum esset, and successivis temporibus villis postea
introductum est. Spelman. Vill and Parish shall be intended all one, 2 Part
Crokes Rep. Wreys Case, fo. 263. yet there may be two Vills in one Parish,
idem, fo. 120. Storks Case.

Uillain, (Villanus) Fr. Vilain, i. Illiberalis, vilis, impurus) Signifies a
Bondsman; of which there were two sorts in England, one termed a Villain in
gross, who was immediately bound to the person of his Lord and his heirs; the
other a Villain regardant to a Manor, whom the Civilians term Glebae
adscriptitium, being bound to their Lord, as Members belonging to, and annexed
to a Manor, whereof the Lord was owner. Sir Thomas Smith Repub. Angl. lib. 3.
ca. 8. Old. Not. Br. fo. 8. and Bracton, lib. 1. ca. 6. number. 4. He was properly
a pure Villain, of whom the Lord took redemption to marry his Daughter, and to
make him free, and whom the Lord might put out of his Lands and Tenements,
Goods and Chattels at his will, and beat and chastise, but not maim him. There
are not properly any Villains now, though the Law concerning them stands
un-repealed; We have rarely heard of any Case of Villenage, since Crouches Case
in Dyer. See Preface to Rolls Abridgment. Servorum enim and Nativorum apud nos
sublata est conditio; and quas ideo possidebant terras vel praedia, hodie
libere tenent sub antiquae servitutis consuetudinibus. Spel.

Omnibus -- Frater Mathaeus Abbas de Halesoweign and Conventus ejusdem loci
salutem. Noveritis nos unanima voluntate and concensu fecisse Johannem del
Grene de Rug eakur liberum, cum tota sequela sua procreata and procreanda, and
cum omnibus catallis suis habitis and habendis. Ita vero quod praefatus
Johannes, cum tota sequela sua procreata and procreanda and cum omnibus
catallis suis habitis and habendis, ab omni jugo servitutis liberi maneant
imperpetuum. In cujus ^ei testimonium huic literae libertatis sigillum nostrum
apposuimus. Dat. 31 Ed. 3. Ex ipso Autographo penes Johannem Winsord Mil.

Uillanis Regis subtructis reducendis, Was a Writ that lay for the Soringing
back of the Kings Bondmen, that had been carried away by others out of his
Manors, whereto they belonged. Reg. of Writs, fo. 87. b.

Uillanous Judgment, (Villanum Judicium) Is that which casts the reproach of
villainy and shame upon him against whom it is given, as a Conspirator, etc.
Stamf. Pl. Cor. lib. 3. ca. 12. fo. 175. which Lam. in his Eiren. (lib. 1. ca.
13. pa. 63.) calls villainous punishment, and says, it may well be called
villainous, because the Judgment in such a case, shall be like the ancient
Judgment in Attaint (as it is said Anno 4 Hen. 5. Fitz. Judgment, 220) and (in
27 lib. Assis. pl. 59.) is set down to be, that they shall not be of any credit
afterward, nor lawful for them in person to approach the Kings Court, and that
their Lands and Goods be seized into the Kings hands, their Trees rooted up,
and their Bodies imprisoned, etc. And, at this day, the punishment appointed
for Perjury, (having somewhat more in it then corporal, or pecuniary pain,
strotching to the discrediting the testimony of the Offender for ever) may be
partaker of this name. This and such like is elsewhere termed vile and odibile
Judicium. See Pillory.

Uillein fleeces, (Anno 31 Edw. 3 ca. 8.) Are bad fleeces of Wool, that are
shorn from scabb'd Sheep.

Uillenage, (Villenagium) Signifies a servile kind of tenure of Lands or
Tenements, whereby the Tenant was bound to do all such services as the Lord
commanded, or were fit for a villain to perform; ubi sciri non poterit vespere,
quale servitium fieri debet mane. Bracton, lib. 2. ca. 8. number. 3. The division
of Villenage, was villain of Blood, and of Tenure. Tenure in Villenage could
make no Freeman villain, if it were not continued time out of mind; nor free
land make villain free. Villenage is also divided by Bracton (ubi supra) into
Purum villenagium a quo praestatur servitium incertum and indeterminatum, as
above is said; and Villenagium Soccagium, which was to carry the Lords Dung
into his Fields, to plow his ground at certain days, Sow and Reap his Corn,
etc. and even to empty his Jakes, as the Inhabitants of Bickton were bound to
do those of Clun Castle in Shropshire, which was afterward turned into a Rent,
now called Bicton silver, and the villainous service excused.

Placita de Banco a die Pasche in 15 dies, 34 Hen. 3. Rot. 20 Berks.
WIll. Maynard, qui tenuit terras in Heurst, cognoscit se esse Villanum Abbatis
de Abbendon, and tenere de eo in Villenagio and per villanas consuetudines,
viz. per servitium 18 d. per annum and dandi Maritagium and Marchetum pro filia
and sorore sua, ad voluntatem ipsius Abbatis, and faciendo omnes villanas
consuetudines. Copyholders, or Tenants by Copy is but a new name; for anciently
they were called Tenants in Villenage, or of base Tenure. Fitz. Not. Br. fo.
28. C.

Uinnet, (Anno 14 Car. 2. ca. 33.) A kind of flower or border, with which
Printers use to garnish printed leaves.

Uirgata terrae, Al. Virga terrae. A Yardland. MS. Codex. -- December acrae terrae
faciunt secundum antiquam consuetudinem, unam ferdellam, and quatuor ferdellae
faciunt virgatam. See Yardland.

Uiridario eligendo, Is a Writ that lies for the choice of a Verderor in the
Forest. Reg. of Writs, fo. 177.

Uirilia, A man's privy-members; the cutting off of which was Felony by the
Common Law, (according to Bracton, lib. 3. fo. 144.) whether the party
consented or not. Henricus Hall and A. uxor ejus capti and detenti in prisona
de Evilchester, eo quod rectati fuerint quod ipsi absciderunt virilia Johannis
Monacbi, quem idem Henricus deprehendit cum praedicta A. uxore ejus. Rot.
Claus. 13. Hen. 3. m. 9.

Uirga ferrea, -- Sciant -- quod ego Hamundus Urri dedi -- Nich. filio Edde pro
viii 5. sterlingis quos mihi dedit prae manibus, unam placetam terrae meae in
vico versus Dustelee, quae jacet inter terram meam and terram Philipp^ fili^
Heylin, cujus latitudo in front continet in se xvi virgas ferreas praeter unum
quarterium, and totidem aretro, etc. Ex libro Cart. Prior. Leominstr. This was
so many yards, according to the Kings Standard in the Exchequer, which
anciently was of Iron, now Brass.

Uisitation, (Visitatio) Is that Office or Action which is performed by the
Bishop in every Diocese once in every three years, or by the Archdeacon once a
year, by visiting the Churches, and their Rectors, etc. -- Ut populus illorum
curae commissus salubriter a pastoribus and ordine gubernetur. Reform. Leg.
Eccles. fo. 124. Ne quid detrimenti capiat Ecclesia, says another Author.

Uisitation of Manners, (Visitatio morum) Was wont to be the name of the
Regarders Office in ancient time. Manwood, Par. 1. pa. 195. See Regarder.

Uisne, (Vicinetum) Signifies a Neighbourplace, or a place near at hand. Anno
16 Rich. 2. ca. 6. dicitur vicinetum in Jure nostro locus quem vicini habitant,
qui olim intelligebantur de eadem villa sive adjacentibus, atque alias de eodem
Hundredo vel proximit; modo vero de eodem pago, sive Comitatu, (...) hoc est
compagenses. Spelm. See Venew.

Uisu Franciplegii, Is a Writ, to exempt him from coming to the View of
Frankpledge, who is not resident within the Hundred; For men are bound to this
View, by reason of their habitation, and not of Lands held where they dwell
not. Reg. of Writs, fo. 175.

Uitteller alias Uictualer (Victualarius al. Vitellarius) Is he that sells
Victuals; for whom there is a Writ in Fitz. Not. Br. fol. 172. If they exercise
their Trade, bearing a Magistracy in any Town Corporate.

Uiva pecunia, Anciently used for live Cattle. See Pecunia.

Uiva voce. See Deposition.

Uivary (Vivarium) Signifies a place on Land, or Water, where living things are
kept. In Law it most commonly signifies a Park, Warren, Fish Pond, or Piscary.
Cokes second part Inst. fol. 100. Haec est conventio inter Priorem and
Conventum Canonicorum de Rudham and Rogerum de Glanvilla, de Molendino and
stagno de Thorp, sc. quod Canonici reddent annuatim praefato Rogero 7 sol.
quemadmodum pater ejus Robertus de Glanvilla solebat habere tempore Michaelis
Prioris; and si Rogerus de Glanvilla fuerit in Ructon vel uxor ejus, ipse
poterit piscari in Vivario absque Wasto cum Batello Canonicorum, etc. Anno
1171. 8 Maii. M. S. Penes Gul. Dugdale Arm.

Ulnage. See Alnage.

Uncore prists, Is a Plea for the Defendant, being sued for a debt due at a day
past, to save the forfeiture of his Bond; saying, he tendered the debt at the
time and place, and that there was none to receive it, and that he is yet also
ready to pay the same. 7 Edw. 6. 83 Dyer. See Unques prist.

Uncuth (Sax.) Unknown. It is used in the ancient Saxon Laws, for him that
comes to an Inn guest-wise, and lies there but one night; in which case his
Host was not bound to answer for any offense he committed, whereof he was
guiltless himself. See Lamb. Archai. fol. 133. number. 7. -- Item secundum
antiquam consuctudinem dici poterit de familia alicujus, qui hospes fuerit cum
alio per tres noctes; quia prima nocte poterit dici Uncuth Secunda vero Gust,
tertia nocte Hoghenehine. Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 10. number. 2. See
Thirdnightawnhine.

Unde nihil habet, Is a Writ. See Dote unde nihil habet.

Under-chamberlain of the Exchequer, Is an Officer there, that cleaves the
Tallies, written by the Clerk of the Tallies, and reads the same, that the
Clerk of the Pell, and the Comptrollers thereof may see their Entries be true;
he also makes searches for all Records in the Treasury, and has the custody of
Domesday Book. There are two Officers there of this name.

Under Sheriff. (Subvicecomes.) See Sheriff.

Under sitter, Is an Inmate. See Inmate.

Undertakers, Were such as were employed by the Kings Purveyors as their
Deputies. Anno 2 and 3 Phil. and Ma. cap. 6. And such as undertake any great
work, as draining of Fens, etc. Anno 43 Eliz. cap. 11.

Under Treasurer of England. (Vicethesaurarius Angliae) Anno 39 Eliz. cap. 7.
This Officer is confounded in other Statutes with Treasurer of the Exchequer,
as in 35 Eliz. In the vacancy of the Lord Treasurers Office, he does all things
in the Receipt that the Lord Treasurer does. Anciently he did Chest up the
Kings Treasure at the end of every Term, and note the content of Money in each
Chest, and see it carried to the Kings Treasury in the Tower, for the ease of
the Lord Treasurer, etc.

Uniformity (Uniformitas) One form of Public Prayers and Administration of
Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England; prescribed
by the Statutes 1 Eliz. cap. 2. And 14 Car. 2. cap. 4.

Union (unio) Is a combining or consolidating of two Churches in one, which is
done by the consent of the Bishop, the Patron and Incumbent: But there are two
other sorts of it; as when one Church is made subject to the other, and when
one Man is made Rector of both, and when a Conventual is made Cathedral, as you
may read in the Gloss of the Chapter, Licet de locato and conducto, in
Lyndwoods Provincials, Sect. Et quia -- In the first signification, by the
Statute 37 Hen. 8. cap. 21. It was made lawful to make an Union or
Consolidation of two Churches in one, whereof the value of the one is not above
six pounds in the Kings Books of the First Fruits, and not above one mile
distant from the other. And by another Statute 17 Car. 2. cap. 3. It shall be
lawful for the Bishop of the Diocese, Major, Bailiff, etc. of any City or
Corporate Town, and the Patron or Patrons, to unite two Churches or Chapels in
any such City, Town, or the Liberties thereof; provided such Union shall not be
good, if the Churches so united exceed the sum of One hundred pound per annum,
unless the Parishioners desire otherwise, etc.

Unity of Possession, Signifies a Joyntpossession of two Rights by several
Titles; As, if I take a Lease of Land from one upon a certain Rent, afterward
I buy the Fee-simple; this is an Unity of Possession, whereby the Lease is
extinguished, by reason that I, who had before the occupation only for my
Rent, am become Lord of the same, and am to pay my Rent to none but my self.

University (Universitas) Is most usually taken for those two Bodies, which are
the Nurseries of Learning and Liberal Sciences in this Realm, Oxford and
Cambridge, endowed with great favors and privileges, as appears not only by
Anno 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. cap. 15. -- 13 Eliz. cap. 21. and 18 Ejusdem, cap. 6.
But much more by their several Charters, granted by diverse pious and munificent
Kings of this Land. Anno 14 Car. 2. cap. 4.

Unlage (Sax. Un-laga) A wicked or unjust Law. In which sense the word occurs
in LL. Hen. 1. cap. 34. 84.

Unlawful Assembly (Illicita Congregatio) Is the meeting of three or more
persons together, with force to commit some unlawful Act, and abiding together,
though not endeavoring the execution of it, as to assault or beat any person,
to enter into his House or Land, etc. West, par. 2. Symbol. tit. Indictments,
sect. 65. Lambert in his Eiren. cap. 19. By the Statute of 16 Car. 2. cap. 4.
And 22 Ejusdem, cap. 1. If five persons or more shall be Assembled together
above those of the Family, at any Conventicle or Meeting, under color of any
Exercise of Religion, it is unlawful and punishable by Fines, and otherwise, as
in the said Statute is expressed.

Unques prist (i. Always ready) Is a Plea whereby a Man professes himself
always ready to do, or perform that, which the Demandant requires. For example,
A Woman sues the Tenant for her Dower, and he, coming in at the first day,
offers to aver, that he was always ready, and still is to perform it. In this
case, except the Demandant will aver the contrary, he shall recover no damages.
When this Plea will serve to avoid charges, and when not, see Kitchen, fol 243.
See Uncore prist.

Uoidance (Vacatio) Is a want of an Incumbent upon a Benefice, which is
twofold; either in Law, as when a Man has more Benefices incompatible; or in
Deed, as when the Incumbent is dead, or actually deprived. Brook, tit. Quare
impedit. number. 51.

Uolumus, Is the first word of a Clause in the Kings Writs of Protection and
Letters Patent. Anno 1 Rich. 2. cap. 8. And 13 Ejusdem, cap. 16. Of Protections
some are Cum clausula Volumus; and of these there are four kinds, viz. 1. Quia
profeoturus. 2. Quia moraturus. 3. Quia indebitatus nobis existit. 4. When any
one, sent into the Kings service beyond Sea in War, is imprisoned. Coke on
Littl. sect. 199.

Uoucher (Vocans) Is a word of Art, and is in the understanding of Law, when
the Tenant calls ano^^er into the Court that is bound to him to War anty, and
that is either to defend the righ^ against the Demandant, or to yield him other
Lands, etc in value; and extends to Lands or Tenements of Freehold, or
Inheritance, and not to any Chattel Real, Personal, or mixed, etc. He that
Voucheth is called the Voucher (Vocans) and he that is vouched is called
Vouchee, (Warrantus.) The Process whereby the Vouchee is called, is a Summone
as ad Warrantizandum, etc. A Recovery with a single Voucher is, when there is
but one Voucher; and with a double Voucher, is when the Vouchee voucheth over,
and so a treble Voucher. There is also a Foreign Voucher, when the Tenant being
impleaded within a particular Jurisdiction (as in London, or the like) voucheth
one to Warranty, and prays, That he may be summoned in some other County out of
the Jurisdiction of that Court; which might more aptly be called a Voucher of a
Foreigner, De forinsecis vocatis ad Warrantisandum. Coke on Littl. fol. 101. b.
See Recovery.

Voucher, Is also used in the Statute (19 Car. 2. cap. 1.) for a Lieger Book or
Book of Account, wherein are entered the Acquittances or Warrants for the
Accomptants discharge.

Upland (Uplanda) High Ground, or as some call it Terra firma, contrary to
Moorish, Marsh, or Low Ground. -- Duramque terram novem Miliariis per aquam, de
Uplanda, id est de superiori terra, schaphis deferri, and paludibus commisceri
jussit. Ingulp^. Hist. Croyland.

Usage. See Prescription.

Use (Usus) A Deed consists of two principal parts, namely, the Premises, and
the Consequents. The Premises is the former part of it, being all that which
precedeth the Habendum, or Limitation of the Estate, which are the persons
contracting, and the thing contracted. The Consequent is the Habendum, in which
are two Limitations; the one, of the Estate or Property which the Party Passive
shall receive by the Deed; the other of the Use, which is, to express in the
said Habendum to, or for what use and benefit he have the same Estate. And of
the Limitation such Uses, you may read many Presidents in (...) lib. 2. par. 1.
sect. 308. These Uses were in (...)ted upon the Statute of Westminster. 3. Quia
emptor^ terrarum, before which Statute, no such Uses we(...) known. And because
in time many deceits were (...)ed, by settling the possession in one Man, and
the Use in another, Anno 27 Hen. 8. cap. 1. it was Enacted, That the Use and
Possession of Lands should always stand united. See Coke, lib. 3. Chudleys Case.

User de Action, Is the pursuing or bringing an Action, in what place and
County it ought to be. See Brook, tit. Lieu and County, fol. 64.

Usher (Fr. Huissier, i. A Doorkeeper of a Court) Is an Officer in the
Exchequer, of which there are four that attend the Chief Officers and Barons at
the Court at Westminster, and Juries, Sheriffs, and all other Accomptants at
the pleasure of the Court. There are also Ushers in the Kings Court, as of the
Privy Chamber, etc. See Blackrod.

Us^act. In Privilegio de Semplingham. -- Sint quieti tam ipsi quam homines
eorum, etc. de omnibus misericordiis and amerciamentis and forisfacturis, etc.
Et de murdro and latrocinio and conceyles and Us^act, and Hamsoka, Grithbrich,
Blotwit, etc. Perhaps miswritten for Utlage or Utlagat. Sed quare. In Kelways
Report I find Hutlatch.

Usucaption (Usucaptio) The enjoying a thing by continuance of time, or
receiving the profits; long possession or prescription.

Usufructuary (Usufructuarius) One that has the use, and reaps the profit of
any thing.

Usury (Usura) Is Money or Money's worth, given above the principal sum for the
Loan or it; otherwise called Interest or Use. Usura st commodum certum quod
propter usum rei mutuatae accipitur. Cokes 5 Rep. Paytons Case. By the Stat. 12
Car. 2. cap. 13. no Man must take above Six pound for the forbearance of One
hundred pound for a year, under the penalties therein contained. See Cokes 3
Instit. fol. 151. By the Stat. 3 and 11 Hen. 7. it is called Dry Exchange.

Utas (Octava) Is the eighth day following any Term or Feast, as the Utas of S.
Michael, the Utas of S. Hillary, etc. whereof you may read Anno 51 Hen. 3.
Statute concerning General days in the Bench. And any day within the Feast, and
the eighth day is said to be within the Utas. The use of it is in the return of
Writs, as appears by the Statute. At the Utas of the Holy Trinity. Preamble to
the Stat. 43 Edw 3.

Utensil (Fr. Utensile) Any thing necessary for our use and occupation:
Housholdstuff.

Utfangthef (Sax. Ut-fang-theof, i. Fur extra captus, scil. Extra dominium vel
jurisdictionem) Is an Ancient Royalty or Privilege granted to the Lord o^ a
Mannot by the King, which gives him power to punish a Theif, dwelling, and
committing the (...) of his Liberty, if he be taken within (...) Fee.
Utfangthef dicitur extrancus lat(...) oeniens aliunde de terra aliena, and qui
(...) suit in terra ipsius, qui tales habet libertat(...) Bracton, lib. 2.
tract. 2. cap. 35. Anno (...) 8. cap. 26.

U(...) (Uthlagus) An Outlaw. -- Fuit qu(...)m Uthlagus famosissimus, parts
istas frequentans propter iter commeantium inter Nottingham and Derby per
Forestam. Mon. Angl. 2. par. fol. 618. a. See Outlaw.

Utlagato capiendo quando utlagatur in uno Comitatu and postea fugit in alium,
Is a Writ, the nature whereof appears in the words of its name. See Reg. of
Writs, fol. 133.

Utland (Sax. i. terra extera) Dicebatur terra servilis seu tenementalis, quod
de procinctu terrarum Dominicalium, quae Inland nuncupatae sunt, in exteriorem
agrum rejiciebantur. Vide Inland.

Utlary or Utlawry (Utlagaria vel Utlagatio) Is a punishment for him, who,
being called into Law, and lawfully sought, does (after an Original Writ, with
a Nihil habet, Three Writs of Capias, Alias, and Pluries, Returned by the
Sheriff with a Non est inventus, and an Exigent with a Proclamation thereupon
Awarded) contemptuously refuse to appear. He must also be called at Five
County Court days, a Month between each one; and if he appear not within that
time, Pro exlege tenebitur, cum principi non obediat nec legi, and ex tunc
Utlagabitur, that is, he shall be pronounced to be out of the Kings Protection,
and deprived of the benefit of the Law: The effect of which is diverse, For if
he be outlawed at the suit of another in a civil Cause, he shall forfeit all
his Goods and Chattels to the King; if upon Felony, then all his Lands and
Tenements which he has in Fee, or for Life, and his Goods and Chattels. Et
tunc gerit caput Lupinum, ita quod sine judiciali inquisitione rite pereat, and
secum suum judicium portet, and merito sine lege pereat, qui secundum legem
vivere recusavit, etc. Says Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 11. A Minor or
Woman cannot be outlawed; but where a Man is termed outlawed, a Woman is said
to be waived. How an Outlaw is inlawed again, and restored to the Kings Peace
and Protection. See Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 14. And Fleta, lib. 1. cap.
27. and 28. See Outlaw.

Utlepe. Significat escapium, hoc est, Evasionem latronum* Fleta, lib. 1. cap.
47. And 18 Hen. 6. Pat. 2. m. 22.

Utrum. See Assise.

Utter Barrasters (Jurisconsulti) Are such, who for their long study and great
industry, bestowed upon the knowledge of the Common Law, are called out of
their contemplation to practice, and in the view of the World to take upon them
the Protection and Defense of Clients. In other Countries they are called
Licenciati in Jure. The time, before any one ought to be called to the Bar, by
the Ancient Orders, was heretofore eight years, now reduced to seven. And the
exercise done by him (if he were not called Ex gratia) was Twelve Grand Moots,
performed in the Inns of Chancery in the time of the Grand Readings, and Twenty
four Petty Moots at the Inns of Chancery in the Term times, before the Readers
of the Respective Inns of Chancery. A Barraster newly called, is to attend the
six next long Vacations, the Exercise of the House, viz. In Lent and Summer,
and is thereupon for those three years called a Vacation Barraster. And they
are called Utter Barrasters, i. Pleaders without the Bar, to distinguish them
from Benchers, or those who have been Readers, who are sometimes admitted to
plead within the Bar, as the King, Queen, or Princes Council are.

W.
WAftors (Waftores) Edward the Fourth constituted a Triumvirate of Officers
with Naval Power, whom the Patent (22 Edw. 4. Membr. 2.) styles Custodes,
Conductores, and Waftores; and these were chiefly to guard our Fishermen on the
Coast of Norfolk and Suffolk. We still retain the word to Waft over, i. To
Convey or Conduct over Sea.

Waga alias Uaga, A Weigh, which is a Measure of Cheese, Wool, etc. contraining
Two hundred fifty six pound of Averdupois, according to Cowel; for by the
Statute of 9 Hen. 6. cap. 8. a Weigh of Cheese ought to contain Thirty two
Cloves, and the Clove eight pound, though some say but seven. -- Unam Wagam
salis de salinis suis de Terincton* Mon. Angl. 1 par. fol. 515. See Weigh.

Wage (Vadiare, Fr. Gager) Signifies the giving security for the performance of
any thing; as to Wage Deliverance, which see in Gage; to Wage Law, see in Law.
None wageth Law against the King. Brook, tit. Chose in Action, number. 9. See Coke
on Littl. fol. 294. b. Tit. Ley-gager.

Wager of Law. See Law.

Waif or Weyf (Waivium) Or goods waived, are those which a Theif has stolen,
and being pursued or overcharged with the burden, flies and leaves the goods
behind him: Then the Kings Officer, or the Bailiff of the Lord of the Manor
(within whose jurisdiction they were left) who (by prescription or grant from
the King, has the Franchise of Waif) may seize the Goods to his Lords use,
except the owner come with fresh suit after the Felon, and sue an Appeal within
a year and a day, or give in evidence against him at his arraignment, and he be
attainted. In which Cases, the owner shall have restitution of his Goods,
though Waif is properly spoken of Goods stolen, yet it may be also of Goods not
stolen; as if a Man be pursued with Hue and Cry, as a Felon, and he flies and
leaves his own Goods, these shall be forfeit, as Goods stolen; and are properly
called Fugitives Goods. See Coke, lib. 5 Foxleys Case.

Waifs, Things lost and Estrays must, by the Lord of the Franchise where they
are found, be caused to be cried and published in Markets and Churches near
about, else the year and day does not run to the prejudice of him that lost the
M. Briton. cap. 17. -- Plac. coram Joh. de Berewel and Sociis suis Justic.
Itin. apud Salop. in Octab. Sancti Michaelis 20 Ed. 1. Rot. 29. in Dorso.
Richardus fill. Alani Comes Arundel summonitus fuit ad respondend. Domino Regi
de placito quo Warranto clamat habere placita Coronae and habere Wayf in
Manerio suo de Upton subtus Haweman, etc. in Com. Salop. Et Comes dicit quod
ipse clamat habere Infangenethef and Wayf, and eadem placita and libertates
habuerunt, ipse and omnes antecessores sui, and eisdem usi sunt a tempore quo
non extat memoria and eo Warranto clamat, etc. Et Hugo de Lowther qui sequitur
pro Domino Rege dicit quod Wayf est quoddam grossum de Corona, ita Coronae
Domini Regis annexum, quod nullus eo gaudere possit, nisi inde habeat speciale
Warrantum a Domino Rege vel antecessoribus suis concessum. Weyf, i. Si aliquis
adduxerit aliqua animalia, ut oves, boves, equos and hujusmodi, vel aliquas
alias res, and inde suspectus and arrestatus fuerit a Balivis Prioris donec
probaverit per fideles homines, quod illae res furatae non fuerant, and ille
dimissus non redierit: Dictae res seu animalia servabuntur per unum annum and
unum diem, and si ille non redierit and res suas esse probaverit, erunt
Prioris, etc. Si aliquis alius venerit, and res suas legitime esse probaverit,
datis expensis, illas habebit. Ex Registro Prior. de Cokesford.

Wainnable, That may be Ploughed or Manured, Tillable. -- Dedimus -- in loco
qui vocatur Shiplade la Moreis, and la terre Wainnable, and la Bruere, etc.
Carta Rogeri de Scales. Sine dat.

Wainage (Wainagium) From the Sax. aeen, i. Plaustrum, Vehiculum.) Mag. Char.
cap. 14. -- And any others Uillain, then ours shall be likewise amerced, saving
his Wainage, if he fall into our mercy. Sir Edward Coke (2 Part Instit. fol.
28.) says it signifies the Contentment or Countenance of the Villain. But
quaere whether it may not rather signify, the furniture or appurtenances of
the Cart or Wain, wherewith he was to do Villainservice. See Gainage and
Wannage.

Waitefee. Tho. Spelman, Filius Johannis, obiit 12 Marcii, 1 Eliz. and dicitur
in Inquisitione tenuisse Manerium de Narborough cum tertia part Advocationis
Ecclesia, etc. De Domina Regina, ut de Manerio suo de Wingrave per servitium
Militare, and per redditum 14 s. pro Waytefee and Castlegarde, and valet clare
per annum 34 l. 17 s. 10 d. quadrantem. Patet in Schedula liberationis Joh.
Spelman fratris sui, 7 Aug. 5 Eliz. Perhaps a Fee to excuse his Waiting or
giving Attendance at the Castle.

Waiviaria mulieris, Is as much as Vtlagatio viri. Reg. of Writs, fol. 132.
Many of the Kings Liege People outlawed, and many waived by erroneous Process.
Anno 7 Hen. 4. cap. 13. See Vtlary.

Wakeman (Sax.) The Chief Magistrate of the Town of Rippon in Yorkshire, so
called; quasi, Watchman. Came. Britan.

Wald (Walda) See Weald.

Walkers, Are those who are otherwise called Foresters. Cromp. Jurisd. fol.
145. There are Foresters assigned by the King, who are Walkers within a certain
space of Ground assigned to their care.

Wall or Sea-wall (Walla vel Wallia.) See Watergage.

Wallesheria or Walecheria. -- Quod quatuor villatae propinquiores loco ubi
casus homicidii vel infortunium contigerit, veniant ad proximum Comitatum, una
cum inventore and Wallesheria, i. Parentela hominis interfecti, and ibidem
praesentent factum feloniae and casum infortunii, etc. Reperio (says Spelman)
in nota quadam A. Wallesheria, i. Parentela interfecti, scilicet unus ex part
patris and alius ex part matris. And concludes with -- Significat Wallica pars
ut videtur.

Wang (Sax.) A Field; also the Cheek or Jaw, wherein the Teeth are set. Hence
with Chaucer we call the Cheek-Teeth or Grinders Wangs and Wang-teeth, which is
also notified in that old way of sealing writings.

And in witness that this is sooth,
I bite the Wax with my Wang tooth.
See Wong.
Wangenetheof -- Maneriolum de A. sit quietum de Gelth and Scoth, de Wreccho
and de Wangenetheof and Danegueld, etc. Pat. 22 H. 4. par. 1. m. 33. Quaere.

Wannage (Wannagium) -- Eodem anno (scil. 1198.) Rex Angl. accepit de unaquaque
carucata terrae sive Hyda toti^s Angliae 5 Sol. de auxilio, ad quos colligendos
misit idem Rex per singulos Comitatus Angliae unum Clericum and etiam unum
militem -- Qui fecerunt venire coram se Senescallos Baronum illius Comitatus,
qui juraverunt quot Carucarum Wannagia fuerint in singulis villis, etc. Ipsi
vero qui electi fuerant and constituti ad hoc negotium Regis faciendum,
statuerunt per estimationem legalium hominum, ad uniuscujusque carucae
Wannagium, centum acras terrae. Hoveden. Annal. par. poster. fol. 443. number. 30.
See Wainage. -- Quod ego H. and haeredes mei villas and aedisicia and Wannagia
ad libitum nostrum in terris praenominatis faciemus, and claudemus xl acras
terrae ad excolendum vel ad tensandum, ad libitum nostrum. Mon. Angl. 2 par.
fol. 612. a. Here Wannagia seems to signify Wainhouses, or necessary
outhouses for Husbandry.

Wapentake (Sax. waepen-getace, i. Arma tradere) Is all one with that we call a
Hundred, as appears by Bracton (lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 1. number. 1.) Convocentur
postmodum servientes and Balivi Hundredorum and per ordinem irrotulentur
Hundredarii sive Wapentachia, and nomina servientium, etc. Nominis autem origo,
non ab armorum tactu, ut Hovedeno traditum; sed hinc, quod quoties novus esset
Hundredi Dominus, ei in subjectionis signum arma redderent vassalli, ut Ranulfo
Cestriensi observatum. Lib. 1. cap. 5. Conslata voce a waepen, arma, Weapons;
Et gaetecan, Tradere, reddere, to betake. -- Quod Angli vocant Hundredum,
supradicti Comitatus vocant Wapentachium. LL. Edw. Conf. cap. 33. Sir Tho.
Smith de Repub. Angl. cap. 16. says to this effect, That anciently Musters were
taken of the Armor and Weapons of the several Inhabitants of every Wapentake,
and from those that could not (...)de sufficient Pledges for their good
abearing, their Weapons were taken away, and delivered to others. Lambert (in
his Explication of Saxon words, verbo, Centuria) says, This word is especially
used in the Counties beyond Trent. The Statutes Anno 3 Hen. 5. cap. 2. -- 9
Hen. 6. cap. 10. And 15 Hen. 6. cap. 7. make mention of Stainctif Wapentake,
and Frendles Wapentake in Craven in the County of York. See Came. Britan, fol.
159. And Cokes 2 Part Instit. fol. 99. Wapentak, hoc est quietancia de sectis
and Hundredis quod dicitur Wapentak. MS. in Bibl. Cotton. sub tit. Vitellius,
c. 9.

Waranty, (Warrantia) Is a promise or Covenant by Deed, made by the bargainer
for himself and his heirs, to warrant or secure the Bargainee and his heirs
against all men, for the enjoying any thing agreed on between them. And he that
makes this Waranty is called Warrantus by Bracton, lib. 2. ca. 19. and 37. It
passes from the Seller to the Buyer, from the Feoffer to the Feoffee, from him
that releaseth, to him that is released from an Action real, and such like, and
the form of it is thus Et ego vero praefatus A. and haeredes mei praedictas
quinque acras terrae cum pertinentiis suis praefuto B. haeredibus et assignatis
suis contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus in perpetuum per praesentes. See
Glanvile, lib. 3. per totum. Bracton, lib. 5. Tract. 4. Briton. ca. 105 and
Coke, lib. 4. Nokes Case, fo. 81. a.

Waranty, Is either Real or Personal* Real, when it is annexed to Lands or
Tenements granted for life, etc. and, this is either in deed, as by the word
VVarrantizo expressly; or in Law, as by the vord Dedi, or some other
amplification: Personal, which either respects the property of the thing sold,
or the quality of it. Real Waranty, in respect of the Estate, is either Lineal,
Collateral, or commencing by Disseisin; for which see Littleton in the last
Chapter of his Tenures, and Coke, lib. 3. Fermors Case, fo. 78. a. Under this
word baredes are comprised all such as the first Warranters Lands afterward
come unto, either by descent, or otherwise, ex caus^ lucrativa. Warantizare
nihil aliud est quam possident^m defendere. Fleta, lib. 5. (...). 15. Sect. 1
Bracton, lib. 2. ca. 16, nu. 10. By what words in a Feo^^ment a Feossor shall
be (...) to Waranty, see the Statute of Bigamy, Anno (...) Ed(...) ca. 6. See
Coke on Litt. fo. 365. a. and 383. b. Item utimur, quod si aliquis puerorum
nosirorum in aliquo casu Tenementa nostro tangenti, vocatur ad Warrantizandum,
non tenetur Warrantizare nisi sit quatuordecim annorum. MS. Codex de LL. (...)
and Statutis Burgi-villae Mount-gomer* a temp. Hen. 2.

There is also a Warant of Attorney, whereby a man appoints another to do
something in his Name, and waranteth his Action; which seems to differ from a
Letter of Attorney, which passes ordinarily under the hand and Seal of him
that makes it, before any credible Witnesses; whereas a Warant of Attorney, in
a personal and mixed Action, and many real Actions, is of course put in by the
Attorneys for the Plaintiffs or Demandants, Tenants or Defendants; but, a
Warant of Attorney, to suffer a Common recovery by the Tenant or Vouchee, is
acknowledged before such persons, as a Commission for the doing thereof
directs. West. Par. 2. Symb. tit. Recoveries, Sect. 1. F. See Attorney, and
Letter of Attorney.

Ward, (Sax. eard, i. Vigilia. item Custos) Has diverse applications, as a Ward
in London, Latined Warda, which is a portion of the City committed to the
special charge of one of the twenty-four Aldermen, etc. See Stows Survey.
Secondly, A Forest is divided into Wards, Manwood, par. 1. pa. 97. Thirdly, A
Prison is also called a Ward. Lastly, The heir of the Kings Tenant, holding by
Knights-service, or in Capite, or of any common person by Knights-service, was
called a Ward during his nonage, Anno 32 Hen. 8. ca. 46. But, this last, with
the Court of Wards, and all Wardships, etc. is taken away by the Stat. 12 Car.
2. ca. 24.

Wards and Liveries, (Wardi and liberatura) Was a Court first erected in King
Henry the Eighths time, and afterward augmented by Him, with the Office of
Liveries, and therefore called by Him, The Court of Wards and Liveries. now
taken away and discharged by Stat. 12. Car. 2. ca. 24.

Warrantia Chartae, Is a Writ, that lies properly for him, who is enfeoffed in
Lands or Tenements, with Clause of Waranty, and is impleaded in an Assise, or
Writ of Entry, wherein he cannot vouch, or call to Waranty; In which case his
remedy is, to take out this Writ against the Feoffor or his heir. Reg. of
Writs, fo. 157. Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 134. and Fleta, lib. 6. ca. 35.

Warrantia diei, Is a Writ lying in c^se, where a man, having a day assigned
personally to appear in Court to any Action wherein he is sued; is, in the mean
time, by Commandment, employed in the Kings Service, so that he cannot come at
the day assigned* the Writ is directed to the Justices to this end, that they
neither take nor record him in defalt for that day, Reg. of Writs, fo. 18.
Fitz. Not. Br fo. 17. and Glanvile, lib. 1. ca. 8.

Warrantia Custodiae, Is a Writ judicial, that lay for him, who was challenged
to be Ward to another, in respect of Land said to be holden in Knights-service,
which, when it was bought by the Wards Ancestors, was Warranted to be free from
such thraldom; and, it lay against the Warranter and his Heirs. Reg. jud. fo.
36. But, by the Statute 12 Car. 2. ca. 24. it is now become useless.

Wardage, (Wardagium) -- Sed sint quieti de quolibet Theolonio, Tallagio,
Passagio, Pedagio Lastagio, Hidagio, Wardagio, and omnibus Geldis, Fengeldis,
Horngeldis, Forgeldis, Penigeldis, Tendpenigs, Hunderpenigs; Miskemelig,
Brenalpeninge, Gritbbregs, etc. Carta Gilberti Tison summi Vexillatoris
Angliae. Sine Dat. It seems to be the same with Wardpeny, which see.

Wardstaf. -- Lambourn Manor in Essex is held by Service of the Wardstaf, viz.
to carry a Load of Straw in a Cart with six Horses, two Ropes, two men in
Harness to watch the said Wardstaf, when it is brought to the Town of Aibridge,
etc. Came. tit. Essex.

Wardfeoh, or Wardfegh, Sciant presents and futuri quod ego Henricus de la
Morton dedi -- Rogero de Foresta and Johannae uxori suae pro duodecim solidis
and sex denariis quae mihi dederunt prae manibus unam acram terrae meae de
tribus selionibus, etc. Reddendo inde annuatim ad Festum Sancti Michaelis mihi
and heredibus meis unum denarium pro omni servitio, herietto, relevio, warda,
regali servicio, Wardfegh and pro omnimoda secta Curiae meae and heredum meorum
and assignatorum nostrorum and pro omnibus consuetudinibus and exactionibus,
etc. Sinc dat. It signified the value of a Ward, or the money paid to the Lord
for his redemption from Wardship.

Warden, (Gardianus) Is all one with the Fr. Gardein, and signifies him that
has the keeping, or charge of any person, or thing by Office; as Wardens of the
Fellowships in London, Anno 14 Hen. 8. ca. 2. Warden-Courts, 31 Hen. 6. ca. 3.
Warden of the Marches, 4 Hen. 7. ca. 8. Wardens and Communalty of the lands
contributory to Rochester-Bridge, 18 Eliz. ca. 7. Wardens of Peace, 2 Ed. 3.
ca. 3. Stat. Northampton. Warden of the West-Marches, Came. Brit. pa. 606.
Warden of the Forest, Manwood, Par. 1. pa. 42. and 111. Warden of the Aulnage,
18 Hen. 6. ca. 16. Warden of the Kings Wardrobe, 51 Hen 3. Stat. 5. Wardens of
the Tables of the Kings Exchange, 9 Edw. 3. Stat. 2. ca. 7. and 9 Hen. 5. Stat.
2. ca. 4. Wardens of the Rolls of the Chancery, 1 Ed. 4. ca. 1. and 5. Warden,
or Clerk of the Hanaper of the Chancery, ibidem. Warden of the Kings Writs and
Records of his Common Bench, ibidem, Warden of the Kings Armor in the Tower, 1
Ed. 4. ca. 1. Warden of the House of Converts, 12 Car. 2. ca. 30. Warden of the
Stanneries, 14 Car. 2. ca. 3. See Guardian.

Wardmote, (Wardemotus) Is a Court kept in every Ward in London (Anno 32 Hen.
8. ca. 17.) ordinarily called among them the VVardmote Court. vide Cart. Hen.
2. de libertatibus London, where there are 26 Wards, which are as Hundreds,
and the Parishes as Towns 4 Inst. fo. 249.

Wardpeny, alias Warpen, and Warthpeny. Denarii vicecomiti vel aliis
Castellanis persoluti ob castrorum praesidium, vel excubias agendas. -- Concedo
etiam eidem Ecclesiae leugam circumquaque adjacentem liberam, and quietam ab
omni geldo and secto and Hidagio and danegeldo and opere pontium and
Castellorum and parcorum and omnibus auxiliis, placitis, and querelis, and
siris, and Hundredis; cum saca and soca, and Thol and Theme, and Infangtheof
and Warpeny, and Lestage, and Hamsocne, and forstal, and Blodwite, etc. Chart.
Gul. Conq. Ecclesiae S. Martini de Bello. -- Retinui vero mihi and haeredibus
meis Wartpeny and Peterspeny, de praedicta terra. Carta Bertram de Verdon.
penes W. Dugdale Ar.

Wardwite, Significat quietantiam misericordiae in casu quo non invenerit quis
hominem ad Wardam faciendam in castra vel alibi. Fleta, lib. 1. ca. 47.
Immunitas a praesidiis faciendis, vel ab eorum contributione. Spelm.

Warectum, and terra warecta, (Fr. Terre garee) Land that has been neglected,
and long untilled; also Fallow ground. Tempus warecti, in ancient Records,
signifies the time wherein Land lies Fallow, the Fallow year, or season for
Fallowing Land. -- In Warectis, in brueriis, in boscis, in mariscis, in
defensis, et in omnibus terris, etc. Mon. Angl. 2. Par. fo. 253. a. -- xxv
acras uno quoque anno ad seminandum, et totidem ad Warectandum. Idem. 1. Par.
fo. 525. b. See Yvernagium.

Waren, (VVarenna, from the Germ. Wahren, i. Custodire) Is a Franchise, or
place priviledg'd either by prescription or grant from the King, to keep Beasts
and Foul of VVaren, which are Hares and Conies; Partridges and Feasants. If
any person offend in such Free-waren, he is punishable for the same by the
Common Law, and, by Statute 21 Ed. 3. called the Statute de malefactoribus in
parcis et chaceis, etc. Videtur tamen Justiciariis hic et Concilio Dom. Regis,
quod Capreoli sunt bestiae de Warenna et non de Foresta, eo quod fugant alias
bestias de Warenna. Hill. An. 13 Ed. 3. Ebor. Rot. 136.

Warnoth, -- Inter Record. de Recept. Scacc. Trin. 33 Ed. 1. Linc. 46. coram
Rege, I find it to be an ancient Custom, whereby, if any Tenant, holding of the
Castle of Dover, faild in paying his Rent at the day, he should forfeit double,
and, for the second failer, treble, etc. And, in Mon. Angl. 2. Par. fo. 589. a.
-- Terris cultis and terris de Warnoth

War-scot, Was the contribution that was made toward Armor, or War, in the
Saxons time. Sint omnes tam primarii quam mediocres et minuti, immunes, liberi
et quieti ab omnibus provincialibus, summonitionibus et popularibus placitis
quae Hundred laghe Angli dicunt, et ab omnibus armorum oneribus, quod Warscot
Angli dicunt et forinsecis querelis. LL. Forest. Canuti Regis. number. 9.

UUarwit. See VVardwite.

Waste (Vastum, Sax. waest) Has diverse significations; first, it is a spoil
made either in Houses, Woods, Lands, etc. by the Tenant for life or years, to
the prejudice of the Heir, or of him in the Reversion or Remainder. Kitchen,
fol. 168, etc. Whereupon the Writ of Waste is brought for recovery of the thing
wasted, and trebble damages. See Vasto. Waste of the Forest is most properly,
where a Man cuts down his own Woods within the Forest, without License of the
King or Lord Chief Justice in Air. See Manwood, 2 Part, cap. 8. number. 4 and 5.

Secondly, Waste is taken for those Lands which are not in any one Man's
occupation, but lie common, which seem to be so called, because the Lord cannot
make such profit of them, as he does of his other Lands, by reason of that use
which others have of it, in passing to and fro. Upon this none may build, cut
down Trees, dig, etc. without the Lords License.

Thirdly, Year, day, and Waste, (Annus, Dies, and Vastum) Is a punishment or
forfeiture belonging to Petit-Treason or Felony, whereof you may read Stamf.
Pl. Cor. lib. 3. cap. 30. And see Year, Day, and Waste.

Waste-ground (Vastus fundus) Is so called, because it lies as Waste, with
little or no profit to the Lord of the Manor, and to distinguish it from the
Demesns in the Lords hands. 2 Part Inst. fol. 656. See Waste.

Wastors (Anno 5 Edw. 3. cap. 14.) Were a kind of Thieves so called. -- There
have been (says the Statute) diverse Man-slaughters, Felonies, and Robberies
done by People, called Roberdsmen, Wastors, and Draw-latches. 4 Hen. 4. cap. 27.

Wastel Bread (Anno 51 Hen 3. Statute of Bread) Forte a Uasten, Belgis
jejunare; unde illis Wastelavond, Shrovetide. Vox autem unde veniat, non
liquet, says the Gloss. in x. Scriptores. See Cocket.

Water-bailiffs, Seem to be Officers in Port-Towns, for the searching of Ships.
Anno 28 Hen. 6. cap. 5. Also an Officer so called belonging to the City of
London, who has the supervision and search of Fish brought thither, and the
gathering of the Toll, rising from the Thames. He also attends on the Lord
Major for the time being, and has the principal care of Marshalling the guests
at his Table, and does Arrest Men for debt, or other personal or criminal
Matters upon the River of Thames, by Warrant of his Superiors.

Watergage (Watergagium and Aquagagium) A Sea-wall or Bank to stop or restrain
the current, or overflow of the Water; also an Instrument to gage or measure
the profundity or quantity of any Waters.

Watergang (Watergangium, Sax. waetergang, i. Decursus aquae) A Trench, Trough,
or Course, to carry a Stream of Water: Such, I conceive, as are usually made in
Sea-walls, to loose and drain Water out of the Marshes. Some Authors confound
this with Watergage, but they seem to have different significations. Carta Hen.
3. De Ordinatione Marisci de Romency, etc. Ad reparandum Wallias and
Watergangias eiusdem Marisci contra Maris periculum. -- Omnibus Balivis de
Besintone, Robertus de Curci salutem, Mando vobis atque praecipio, quatenus
justicietis meos homines de Snargate, ut faciant Wallas and Watergangas and
clausuras Wallarum, sicut debent facere, and si facere noluerint, tum
justicietis illos ut faciant, etc. Mon. Angl. 2 par. fol. 920. b.

Watergavel, -- Henricus -- Rex, salutem. Sciatis nos dedisse -- dilecto and
fide li nostro Huberto de Burgo, Comiti Kantiae, and Margariae uxori suae
redditum xxxii s. and iv d. quem homines eorundem Huberti and Margariae de
Manerio suo de Elmour nobis reddere solebant singulis annis per manum Balivi
nostri de Menstreworth, nomine Watergavel, Habend. etc. Dat. 15 Hen. 3. This
was a Rent paid for fishing in, or other benefit received from, some River or
Water.

Watlingstreet (Anno 39 Eliz. cap. 2.) Is one of those four ways, which the
Romans are said to have made here, and called Consulares, Praetorias,
Militares, Publicas. This Street is otherwise called Werlamstreet, and leads
from Dover to London, Donstable, Touceter, Atterston, and the Severn, near the
Wrekyn in Shropshire, extending it self to Anglesey in Wales.

The second is called Ikenildstreet, stretching from Southampton over the River
Isis, at Newbridge; thence by Camden and Litchfield, then it passes the River
Derwent near Derby, so to Bolesover Castle, and ends at Tinmouth.

The third was called Fosse, because in some places it was never perfected, but
lies as a large Ditch; leading from Cornwall, through Devonshire by Tetbury,
near Stow in the Wolds; and besides Coventry to Leicester, Newark, and so to
Lincoln, etc.

The fourth was called Ermin or Erminagestreet, stretching from S. David's in
West-Wales unto Southampton. See LL. Edw. Conf. cap. 12. whereby these Quatuor
Chemini, or Four Public Ways had the privilege of Pax Regis.

Waxshot or Waxscot (Ceragium) Tributum quod in Ecclesiis pendebatur, ad
subministrationem cerae and luminarium. Wax, cera and Shot, symbolum. Hac autem
solutione multi se contendunt immunes esse a minoribus quibusdam decimis
persolvendis. Ejusdemque generis sunt, quae alias Cock, and Wax, alias
Maineport appellantur. Spelm. This Waxscot was anciently paid thrice a year
toward the charges of Candles in Churches.

Way. See Chimin.

Wde (for so they anciently wrote) Wood. See Strond.

Weald or Weld (Sax. weald, i. Sylva, desertum) Is the Woody part of a
Country, as the Weald of Kent. Came. Britan, page 247. Anno 26 Hen. 8. cap. 7.
In the Collection of Statutes, 14 Car. 2. cap. 6. It is mis-printed Wilds of
Surrey, Sussex or Kent, for Wealds.

Wear or Were (Wera and Wara, Sax. waer) A Stank or great Dam in a River, well
known, accommodated for the taking of Fish, or to convey the stream to a Mill.
-- Unam Waram and duas Cotlandas cum Dominio and prato. Mon. Angl. 2 par. fol.
128. And I have seen an old Deed with Boera stans in aqua, supposed to signify
a Wear. See Kiddel.

Weif. See Waif.

Weigh (Waga) Is a Weight of Cheese or Wool, containing Two hundred fifty six
pounds of Avoir du pois. See Waga. Cokes 12 Rep. fol. 17. mentions Eighty Weigh
of Bay Salt. See Waga.

Weights (Pondera) There are two sorts of them in use with us: The one called
Troy Weight, which has Twelve ounces to the Pound, by which, Pearl, Precious
Stones, Electuaries, and Medicinal things, Gold, Silver, and Bread, are
weighed: The other Avoir de pois containing Sixteen ounces to the pound, by
which all other things are weighed, that pass by weight. Geo. Agricola in his
Learned Tract De ponderibus and Mensuris, page 339. terms the Pound of Twelve
ounces Libram Medicam, and the other Libram Civilem, saying thus, Medica et
Civilis Libra, numero non gravitate unciarum differunt. By these words Avoir du
pois are sometimes signified such merchandise as are bought and sold by this
kind of Weights. The first Statute of York, 9 Edw. 3. in Proaem. 27 Edw. 3.
stat. 2. cap. 10. And 24 Hen. 8. cap. 13.

All our Weights and Measures have their first composition from the Penny
Sterling, which ought to weigh Thirty two Wheat Corns of a middle sort, Twenty
of which pence make an ounce, and Twelve such ounces a Pound; but Fifteen
ounces make the Merchants Pound, (Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 12.) which (though an
ounce less) should probably be all one in signification with Avoir du pois; and
the other Pound, called by Fleta, Trone Weight, plainly appears to be all one,
with that we now call Troy Weight. See Tronage. From henceforth there shall be
one Weight, one Measure, and one Yard, according to the Standard of the
Exchequer, throughout all the Realm, etc. Anno 17 Car. 1. cap. 19.

Weights of A wncel (Anno 14 Edw. 3. stat. 1. cap. 12.) See Auncel Weight.

Weythe. -- Et omnia animalia advenientia fugitiva, Gallice Weythe, in toto
Hundredo de Halton. Mon. Angl. 2 par. fol. 187. b. See Waif.

Wend (Wendus, i. Perambulatio, circuitus, from the Sax. wendan, to Wend,
Meare) Procinctus terrae amplior, plurima juga in se continens. Rentale Regalis
Manerii de Wy, page 31. -- Tres sunt Wendi, viz. Dounwend, Chiltones Wend, and
Bronsford Wend, and in quolibet Wendo sunt december juga, and sic in tribus Wendis
sunt 30 juga, quorum 26 juga and dimid. sunt in Wy, etc. Et infra. Quilibet
Wendus faciet 10 averagia semper de tribus septimanis in tres, etc.

Were alias Werre (Sax. ere and era, i. pretium) Signifies as much as
aestimatio capitis or pretium hominis, that is, so much as one paid in ancient
time for killing a Man; when such crimes were punished with pecuniary mulcts,
nor death. In LL. Edw. Conf. cap. 11. We read -- Were suum -- id est, Pretium
suae redemptionis, his ransom. -- Si quis ante Comitem in placito pugnaverit,
emendet secundum precium sui ipsius and forisfacturam, quod Angli dicunt were
and wite. Can. LL MS. page 150. In which words the Saxon (w) is often mistaken
into p, and written Pere and Pite. See Pere and Pite, and see Gavelet.

Weregelt-thef, Significat latronem qui redimi potest. Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 47.
also.

Wergild, Wergeld (Wergildus) Pretium seu valor hominis occisi, homicidii
precium; which was paid partly to the King, for the loss of His Subject, partly
to the Lord, whose Vassal he was, and partly to the next of kin. -- Quaedam
(crimina) emendari non possunt; quae sunt Husbrech, Bernet and Openthef, and
Eberemord, and Lafordfith, and infractio pacis Ecclesiae, vel per Manus Regis
per homicidium. LL. Hen. 1. cap. 13. In which Chapter, the crimes are
enumerated, which might be redeemed per Weram. -- De unoquoque fure per totam
Scutiam est Wergelt 30 Vaccae and una juvenca, sive fuerit liber homo sive
servus. Reg. Majest. lib. 4. cap. 19. The Weregild of an Archbishop and of an
Earl was 15000 Thrimsa's. Seldens Titles of Honor, fol. 604.

Weretoff. -- Et sint quieti de communi misericordia Comitatus, de Wardpenny
and Averpenny, de Hundredpenny, and Thirdingpenny, de Weretoff and de Forfeng.
Carta Hen. 1. from the Sax. ere-to-fon, i. To take a ransom or price for
killing a Man. See Were.

Wervagium. -- Cum omnibus aliis consuetudinibus, legibus and libertatibus suis
and Wervagio suo by land and by strande. Carta Hen. 3. Leveshamensi Coenob.
Quaere.

West Saxonlage alias West Sexenlage, Was the Law of the West Saxons. See
Merchenlage.

Westminster (Westmonasterium) Sax. Westmynster, i. Occidentale Monasterium)
Was the ancient Seat of our Kings, and is now the well known place where the
High Court of Parliament, and Courts of Judicature sit: It had great
Privileges granted by Pope Nicholas, among others -- Ut amplius in perpetuum
Regiae constitutionis locus sit atque repositorium Regalium Insignium. Ep. ejus
ad div. Edovard. Council. Tom. 3. B. fol. 1228. See City. And 4 Inst. fol. 255.

Wetecroft. -- Habebit mensuram unam, sc. Wetecroft, cum orto, ubi possit
manner, etc. Mon. Angl. 2. par. sol. 40. b.

Wharf (Wharfa) Is a broad plain place near a Creek or Hithe of the Water, to
lay Wares on, that are brought to, or from the Water. New Book of Entries, fol.
3. Anno 12 Car. 2. cap. 4.

Wharfage (Wharfagium) Is Money paid for Landing Wares at a Wharf, or for
Shipping or taking Goods into a Boat or Barge, from thence. It is mentioned
Anno 27 Hen. 8. cap. 26. And 22 Car. 2. cap. 11.

Wharfinger, Is he that owns or keeps a Wharf, or has the oversight or
management of it. Anno 7 Edw. 6. cap. 7. 12 Car. 2. cap. 4. And 22 Ejusdem,
cap. 11.

Wheelage (Rotaticum, Fr. Rouage) Tributum est quod rotarum nomine penditur;
hoc est, pro plaustris and carris transeuntibus. Spelm.

Whitehart-silver (Candidi cervi argentum) Is a Tribute or Mulct paid into the
Exchequer, out of certain Lands in or near the Forest of Whitehart; which has
continued from Henry the Third's time, who imposed it upon Thomas de la Linde,
for killing a most beautiful White Heart, which that King before had purposely
spared in Hunting. Came. Brit. page 150.

Whiterent. See Quitrent.

White Spurs, A sort of Esquires so called. See Esquires.

White-straits, A kind of course Cloth, made in Devonshire, of about a yard
and half quarter broad raw; and mentioned Anno 5 Hen. 8. cap. 2.

Whitson-farthings (see Pentecostals) mentioned in Letters Patent of Henry the
Eight, to the Dean and Chapter of Worcester.

Widow of the King (Vidua Regis) Was she, who after her Husbands death, being
the Kings Tenant in Capite, was driven to recover her Dower by the Writ De Dote
Assignanda, and could not marry again without the Kings consent. Stamf. Prarog
cap. 4. see the Statute of the Prarog. Annu 17 Edw. 2. Mag. Char. cap. 7. And
32 Hen. 8. cap. 46.

Widowhood (Viduitas) The state or condition of a Widow. Sciant presents and
futuri, quod ego Margeria quae fui uxor Ricardi Smith de Birchore (Com. Heref.)
in Viduitate and in legitima potestate mea, remisi, relaxavi, etc. Dat. apud
Birchore die Dominica in Fest. Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae, Anno 9
Hen. 4.

Will or Last Will (Testamentum, ultima voluntas) Is of two sorts, a Will in
Writing, called also a Testament, and a Will by word of mouth only, called a
Nuncupative Will, which being proved by witnesses, may be of as good force, as
that in writing; except only for Lands, which are not devisable, but by a
Testament put in writing in the Life of the Testator. See Touchstone of Wills,
page 2.

Ex codice MS. nuncupativo March penes Registrar. Curiae Praerog. Domini
Archiepis. Cantuar. Qu. 7.
IN nomine Patris and Filii and Spiritus Sancti, Amen. The sevententh day of
September, the yer of our Lord ^hu^ Crist a thousand four hundred and four, I
Lowys Clyrforth falls and traitor to my Lord God, and to all the blessed
company of Hevene, and unworthi to be clepyd a Christian man, make and ordeyne my
Testament, and my last Will in this manner.

At the beginning, I most unworthi and Goddys tratour, recommaund my wrechid
and synfule Soul holy to the grace, and to the great mercy of the blessfull
Trynytie; and my wrechid careyne to be beryed in the ferthest corner of the
Chircheyerd, in which parish my wrechid soul departs fro my body.

And I pray and charge my Survivors and my Executors as they woollen answer to
fore God, as all mine hoole trest in this matere is in hem, that on my stinking
careyne be neither leyd clothe of gold ne of slike, but a blake clothe, and a
Taper at mine bed, and another at my fete, ne stone ne other thing, whereby any
man may wit where my stynkyng careyne liggeth. And to that Church do mine
Executors all thingis which owen duly in such caas to be don, without any more
cost saaf to pore men.

And also I pray my Survyvors and mine Executors that any debt that any man
kan axe me by true title, that hit be paid. And if any man kan trewly sey that
I have do him any harm in body or in good, that ye make largely his gree
whiles the goodys wole strecche.

And I wole also, that none of mine Executors meddle or mynystre any thing of
my goodys withoutyn abyse and consent of my Supervisors or sum of hem.

Now first I bequethe to Sire Phylype la Vache Knyht my Masse-boke, and my
Portoos; and my book of Tribulacion to my daughter his wif.

Et quicquid residuum fuerit omnium and singulorum bonorum and catallorum
superius seu inferius non legatorum, do integre and lego Philippo la Vache,
Johanni Cheynee and Thomae Clanvow militibus libere sibi possidendum, etc.

Probatum, etc. 5 Dec. An. 1404.
Wigreve (a Wig vel Wic, quod Sylvam sonat) An overseer of a Wood, a Woodward.
Thus Spelman. But ig in Saxon signifies Via; so it may rather signify an
Overseer of the Highways.

Winches (Anno 21 Jac. cap. 32.) A kind of Engine to draw Barges up the Water
against the Stream.

Winkinga. -- Et dedi eis totas Winkingas in Boschis and Plants. Mon. Angl. 1
par. fol. 592. b. Quaere.

Winter-heyning (Anno 20 Car. 2. cap. 3.) Is from the Eleventh day of November,
to the 23 of April; which time, is by the said Act excepted from the liberty of
Commoning in the Forest of Dean.

Wisgilthef, (Vale royal, pa. 113.) Perhaps mistaken for Weregelthef, which see.

Wite, (Sax.) Punishment, pain, penalty, a fine or mulct. Hence our Wite, or
Witfree, one of the terms of Privilege granted to our Portsmen; signifying a
freedom or immunity from Fines or Amercements; not, (as it is vulgarly accepted
and construed among them) from being liable to be begged for fools for lack of
wit or understanding. Sax. Dict. See Wit and Gloss. in x. Scriptores.

Witerden, alias Witereden and Winterden, Was a kind of taxation among the
West Saxons, imposed by the public Counsel of the Kingdom. For wite and ^itan
signify majores regni, and paedan, concilium. Charta Ethelwulfi Regis
catholica, apud Malm. de gest. R. lib. 1. pa. 41. -- Mansio (sc. quaevis
Ecclesiae assignata, Sit tuta and libera ab omnibus secularibus seruitiis,) Nec
non regalibus tribuin, majoribus and minoribus, sive taxationibus, quae nos
dicimus Witereden, etc.

Withernam, (Vestitum namium, Sax. yth ^ contra, and Nam, captio, i. Reprisals)
Is the taking or driving a distress to a Hold, or out of the County, so that
the Sheriff cannot, upon the Replevin, make deliverance thereof to the party
distreined; In which case the Writ of VVithernam, or de vetito namio is
directed to the Sheriff, for the taking as many of his Beasts as did thus
unlawfully distrein, or as much goods of his, till he has made deliverance of
the first distress: Also, if the Beasts be in a Fortlet or Castle, the Sheriff
may take with him the power of the County, as appears by the Statute Westminster. 1.
ca. 20. and Briton, ca. 27. VVithernam, (in Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. ca. 37.
and in Westminster. 2. ca. 2.) seems to signify an unlawful distress, made by him
that has no right to distrein. Anno 13 Ed. 1. ca. 2. See the New Book of
Entries on this word.

Waad, (Glastum) Is an Herb like Plantain, growing in some parts of England,
the parts of Tolouse in France, and in Spain, much used for the dying a blew
color, Anno 7 Hen. 8. ca. 2. we call it woad, from the Italian Guado.

Would, (Sax.) Lat. Walda,) A Plain, a Down, an open Champian ground, Hilly, and
void of Wood; as Stow in the Wolds, and Cotswold in Gloucestershire. This is
sometimes misunderstandingly confounded with VVeald.

Wong, (Sax. ang,) A Field. Tres acrae terrae jacentes in lez wongs, i. In
campis opinor seminalibus, magis quam pascuis, says Spel. So in an ancient
Charter of Garradon-Abby in Leicestershire, Dat. 14 Ed. 3. There is mention of
the wicket-wong, which is a large piece of enclosed ground, lying before the
Abbygate, still reteiniug the name. See VVang.

Woodgeld, (VVoodgeldum) Seems to be the gathering, or cutting wood within the
Forest, or Money paid for the same, to the Foresters. And the immunity from
this by the Kings Grant, is by Crompton called Woodgeld, fo. 157. Coke (on
Litt. fo. 233. a.) says, it signifies to be free from payment of money for
taking of VVood in any Forest.

Woodmen, Are those in the Forest, who have charge especially to look to the
Kings woods. Crom. Jur. for 146.

Woodmote Court, Is the Court of Attachment of the Forest. Manw. Par 1. pa. 95.
See Attachment.

UUood-plea Court, Is a Court held twice a year in the Forest of Clun, in Com.
Salop, for determining all matters of wood and agistment there; and, was
anciently perhaps the same with VVoodmote Court.

UUoodward, (VVoodwardus) Is an Officer of the Forest, whose Function you may
understand by his Oath, set down in Crom. Jur. fo. 141.

YOu shall truly execute the Office of a VVoodward of B. woods, within the
Forest of VV. so long as you shall be Woodward there; you shall not conceal any
offense, either in Vert or Venison, that shall be committed or done within your
charge; but you shall truly present the same, without any favor, affection or
reward: And, if you see or know any Malefactors, or find any Deer killed or
hurt, you shall forthwith do the Verderor to understand thereof; and, you shall
present the same at the next Court of the Forest; be it Swainmote or Court of
Attachments; So help you God.

VVoodwards may not walk with Bow and Shafts, but with Forest Bills. Manwood,
par. 1. pa. 189. Arcum and calamos gestare in Foresta non licet, sed (ut
rescripti utar verbo) Hachettum tantummodo. Sic Term. Hill. Anno 13 Ed. 3.
Ebor. rot. 106.

Wool-drivers, (Anno 2 and 3 Ph. and Ma. ca. 13.) Are those that buy Wool,
abroad in the Country, of Sheepmasters, and carry it on horseback to the
Clothiers, or to Market Towns to sell again.

Woolstaple, (Anno 51 Hen. 3. Stat. 5.) That City or Town where wool was sold.
See Staple.

Wool-winders, Are such as wind up every Fleece of wool that is to be packed
and sold by weight, into a kind of bundle, after it is cleansed in such manner
as it ought to be by Statute; and, to avoid such deceit, as the owners were
wont to use, by thrusting in locks of refuse wool, and other dross, to gain
weight, they are Sworn to perform that office truly between the owner and the
buyer. See the Statute 8 H. 6. ca. 22. -- 23 Hen. 8. ca. 17. and 18 Eliz. ca.
25.

Wranglands, Seen to be misgrown Trees, that will never prove timber. Kitchen,
fo. 160 (...).

Wreck, (Wreccum maris. Sax. raec, i. Detortum, abdicatum,) Is, where a ship is
perished on the Sea, and no man escapes alive out of it, if any part of the
Ship, or any of the Goods that were in it are brought to Land by the Waves,
they belong to the King by His Prerogative, or to such other person to whom the
King has granted Wreck. But, if a man, a Dog or a Cat escape alive, so that the
owner come within a year and a day, and prove the Goods to be his, he shall
have them again by provision of the Statute of Westminster. 1. ca. 4. and 17 Ed. 2.
ca. 11. See Coke, Vol. 6. fo. 106. a. Bracton, lib. 2. ca. 5. number. 7.
Edouardus, Conf. Ringsted cum liberate adjacente and omni maris ejectu, quod
Wrec dicitur, Ecclesiae Ramesiensi largitus est. Lib. Ramesien. Sect. 95. By
which, and other Antiquities, it appears, that VVrec did not only comprehend
Goods that came from a perishing Ship, but whatever else the Sea did cast upon
the Land, were it precious Stones, Fishes, or the like. For, in the Statuto
Praerog. Regis, ca. 11. we read -- Rex habebit Wreckum maris per totum regnum,
Balenas and Sturgiones captas in mari, vel alibi infra regnum, exceptis
quibusdam privilegiatis locis per Regem. -- See Rot. Cart. 20. Hen. 3. m. 3.
and Rot. Cart. 4 Hen. 3. m. 6. and Pat. 40. H. 3. in Dorso, m. 1. This in the
Grand Customary of Normandy, ca. 17. Is called Uarech, and Latined Veriscum;
and in some of our ancient Charters it is written Seupwerp quasi Sea-up-werp,
i. Ejectus maris; from Up-werpen, ejicere. In the Statute 27 Hen. 8. ca. 26. it
is called VVreke de mer. See 2 Inst. fo. 167.

Writ, (Breve) Is the Kings precept, whereby any thing is commanded to be done
touching a Suit or Action, as the Defendant or Tenant to be summoned, a
Distress to be taken, a Disscisin to be redressed, etc. And these Writs are
variously divided in diverse respects; Some in respect of their order, or manner
of granting, are termed original, and some judicial. Original Writs are those,
which are sent out of the high Court of Cnancery, for summoning the Defendant
in a personal, or Tenant in a real Action, before the Suit begins, or to begin
the Suit thereby. Those are Judicial, which are sent out by order of the Court,
where the Cause depends, upon emergent occasion after the Suit begun. Old Not.
Br. fo. 51, and 147. And, judicial are thus known from Original, because their
Test bears the name of the Chief Justice of that Court, whence it comes,
whereas the Original says, Test meipso, in the name, or relating to the King,
and, according to the nature of the Action they are personal or real; real are
either touching the possession called Writs of Entry; or the property, called
Writs of Right. Some Writs are at the Suit of the Party, some of Office. Some
ordinary, some of privilege. A Writ of Privilege is that which a privileg d
person brings to the Court for his exemption, by reason of some privilege. See
Procedendo, and New Book of Entries, verbo, Privilege. See Brief.

Writ of Rebellion. See Commission of Rebellion. Writ of Assistance, issues out
of the Exchequer, to authorize any person to take a Constable, or other public
Officer to seize Goods or Merchandise prohibited and uncostomed, etc. Stat. 14
Car. 2. ca. 11.

Writer of the Tallies, (Scriptor Talliarum) Is an Officer in the Exchequer,
being Clerk to the Auditor of the Receipt, who writes upon the Tallies the
whole Letters of the Tellers Bills.

Wudhepec. See Pudhepeck.

Wulvesheved, Contractius Wulveshead, (Sax. lfe, lupus and heofod, caput, i.
Caputlupinum,) Was the condition of those, who were outlawed for Criminal
matters in the Saxons time, or not yielding themselves to Justice. For, if they
could have been taken alive, they must have been brought to the King; and, i.
they for fear of being apprehended did defend themselves, they might be slain,
and their heads brought to the King; For, their head was no more to be
accounted of, than a VVoolfs head. LL. hdw. set forth by Lamb. fo. 127. b. number.
7. and Bracton, lib. 3. Tract. 2. ca. 11. See Utlary. V^oolfeshead and
VVulferford, are all one. Coke on Litt. fo. 28 b.

Wyke, (VVyka) A Farm, or little Village. -- Et tutam Wykam cum hominibus, etc.
Mon. Angl. 2 Par. fo. 154.

Wit, or Wite, (VVyta vcl VVita. Sax. ite, i. Paena, mulcta) Saxones duo
mulctarum genera statuere; Weram and Wptam. Wera mortis reos and gravissime
peccantes liberabat. Wyta mediis and levioribus delictis statuta fuit, non
certa sed pro qualitate commissi; alias gravior, alias levior; salvo tamen
semper contenemento delinquentis (ut lex loquitur in Mag. Char. ca. 14.) hoc
est, aestimatione ejus, Anglice, his Countenance. -- Ex his placitis quaedam
emendantur centum solidis, quaedam Wera, quaedam Wyta, quaedam emendari non
possunt. Leg. Hen. 1. ca. 13. -- Emendet juxta ordinis digu^tatem, sive per
redemptionem, i. Were; per forisfacturam, i. Wite; per Legis transgressionem,
i. Lasblite. MS. de LL. Canu^i in Bibl. Cotton. sub tit. Vitellius, C. 9.

X.
XEnia, Dicuntur munuscula quae (...) Provincialibus Rectoribus Provinciarum
offerebantur. Vox in Privilegiorum Chartis non insueta; ubi quietos esse a
Xeniis, inmunes notat ab hujusmodi muneribus aliisque Donis Regi vel Reginae
praestandis, quando ipsi per praedia Privilegiatorum transierint; ut in Chart.
Domus Semplingham. Principibus enim olim fuit in more, a subditis vel invitis
munera extorquere. Itaque ab hoc jugo liberos fecit Ecclesiasticos Aethelbaldus
Rex Merciorum Anno 749. ut ab exemplari Chartae suae cum apud Ingulphum Saxtum
Will. Malmsb. Lib. de Gestis Reg. Angl. p. 29. l. 4. His verbis habetur. --
Concedo ut omni Monasteria and Ecclesiae Regni mei a publicis vectigalibus,
operibus and oneribus absolvantur -- Nec munuscula praebeant Regi vel
Principibus, nisi voluntaria. Spelm. -- Nulla autem persona parva vel magna ab
bominibus and terrae Radingensis Monasterii exigat, non equitationem sive
expeditiunem non summagia, non vectigalia, non navigia, non opera, non tributa,
non Xenia, etc. In Memorand. Scacc. de Anno 20 Edw. 3. Trin. Rot. 3.

Y.
YA and Nay -- Quod homines sui (Riponienses) sint credendi per suum Ya and per
suum Nay in omnibus querelis and Curiis, licet tangen. Freedmortel, etc. Carta
Athelstani Regis.

Yard (Virga) Is a well known measure of three foot in length, which (according
to Sir Richard Baker) Henry the First ordained by the length of his own Arm.
See Virga Terrea.

Yard Land (Virgata Terrae, a Sax. gyrd, i. Virga) Is a quantity of Land,
various according to the place. As at Wimbleton in Surrey it is but 15 Acres,
in other Counties 20, in some 24; in some 30, and in others 40 Acres. Virgata
terrae continet 24 acras, and 4 virgatae constituunt unam Hidam, and quinque
Hidae constituunt feodum militare. MS. Abbatiae Malmsb. -- This Yardland,
Bracton (lib. 2. cap. 10. and 27.) calls Virg(...)m Terrae; but expresses no
certainty what it contains. It is called a Verge of Land. Anno 28 Edw. 1.
Statute of Wares. See Seldens Titles of Honor, fol. 622.

Year and day (Annus and dies) Is a time, that determines a right in many
cases, and is in some an usucaption, and in others a prescription; as in case
of an Estray if the owner (Proclamation being made) challenge it not within
that time, it is forfeit: So is the year and day given, in case of Appeal, of
Descent, after entry or claim, of Non claim upon a Fine, or Writ of Right, of
the death of a Man, sore bruised or wounded; of Protections, Essoigns, in
respect of the Kings Service; of a Wreck, and diverse other cases. Coke, Vol. 6.
fol. 107. b. and 3 Inst. fol. 53.

Year, Day, and Waste, (Annus, dies, and vastum) Is a part of the Kings
Prerogative, whereby he challenges the profits of their Lands and Tenements,
for a year and a day that are attainted of Petit-Treason, or Felony, whosoever
is Lord of the Manor, whereto the Lands or Tenements do belong; and not only
so, but in the end may waste the Tenement, destroy the Houses, Root up the
Woods, Gardens, Pasture, and Plough up Meadows, except the Lord o the Fee agree
with him for redemption of such Waste; afterward restoring it to the Lord of
the Fee, whereof you may read at large Stamf. Praerog. cap. 16. fol. 44.

Yelding or Yielding, and Paying (Reddendo and solvendo) Is a corruption from
the Sax. geldan and gyldan, Sulvere, praestare. And in Domesday Gildare, is
frequently used for solvere, reddere; the Saxon g being often mistaken into Y.

Yeme, Is an ancient corruption of Hieme, Winter, as I have seen in an old Deed
-- Reddend. -- Ad Festum S. Martini in Yeme, etc. And in another of 4 Edw. 3.
Thus, -- Reddend quando dict. quatuor acrae terrae s^miaantur somine Yemali,
duodecim Bussel. boni and legalis frumenti ad Festum Purificationis, etc.

Yeven or Yeoven, (as we use at the end of Indentures, and other Instruments,
Yeoven the day and year first above written) Is a corruption from the Saxon
Geofian, i. Dare, and is the same with Given. So Dictum de Kenelworth concludes
with -- Yeoven and proclaimed in the Castle of Kenelworth the day before the
Calends of Nov. Anno 1256.

Yeman or Yoman (from the Sax. geman, i. Communis) These Camden in his Britan,
page 105. places next in order to Gentleman, calling them ingenuos, whose
opinion the Statute affirms, Anno 6 Ric. 2. cap. 4. And 20 Ejusdem. cap. 2. Sir
Tho. Smith in his Repub. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 23. calls him a Yoman, whom our
Laws call Legalem hominem, which (says he) is in English a Freeman born, that
may dispend of his own Free-land, in yearly Revenue to the sum of Forty
shillings Sterling. Verstegan (in his restitution of Decayed Intelligence, cap.
10.) writes, That Gemen among the ancient Teutonicks and Gemein among the
Modern, signifies as much as Common, and that the first Letter G. is in this
word, as in many others, turned into Y. and so written Yemen, which therefore
signifies Commoner. Yoman signifies also an officer in the Kings House, in the
middle place between the Sergeant and the Groom; as Yoman of the Chaundry,
Yoman of the Scallery. Anno 33 Hen. 8. cap. 12. Yoman of the Crown. Anno 3 Edw
4. cap. 5. The word Yongmen is used for Yomen in the Statute of 33 Hon. 8. cap.
10. And I have seen it written Jeman in old Deeds. See Jeman.

Yingeman. LL. Hen. 1. cap. 16. Danagildum quod aliquando Yingeman dabatur, i.
12 d. de unaquaque hida per annum, si ad terminum non reddatur, Wita emendetur.
The Learned Spelman thinks this may possibly be mistaken for Inglishman or
Englishman, though he finds it written Yingeman, both in Sir Rob. Cottons
Codex, and his own.

Yvernagium (from the Fr. Hyvernee, i. The Winter-season) Was anciently used
for the Winter-Seedness or Season for Sowing Corn. -- Dictus vero Willielmus
and haevedes sui arabunt unum Seilonem ad Yvernagium, and unum Seilonem ad
Semen quadragesimale, and unum Seilonem ad Warettum, etc. Carta Ricardi de
Harrecurt penes Tho. Wollascot Arm. Sine dat.

Z.
ZUche (Zucheus) Stips siccus and aridus, A withered or dry stock of Wood. Rex,
etc. Quia accepimus per Inquisitionem, quod non est ad d^mpnum seu praejudicium
nostrum, aut aliorum, si concedimus dilecto valecto nostro Ric. de Stelley
omnes Zucheos aridos, qui Anglice vocantur Stobenes infra Hayam nostram de
Beskewood, quae est infra Forestam nostram de Shirewode, etc. Pla. Forestae in
Com. Not. de Anno 8 Hen. 3. -- Auxilium faciend. Burgensibus Salop. de vet^ris
Zuchis and de mortuo bosco, etc. Claus. 4 Hen. 3. (...). 10.

FINIS.
CORRIGENDA.
In A Bet, read, from the Sax. a, i, ad. Chancemedley, r. party might. Clerk of
the Ax, dele totum, and read Clerk of the Acts, is an Officer of good account
in the Navy Office, who receives and enters the Commissions and Warrants of the
Lord Admiral, and Registers the Acts and Orders of the Commissioners of the
Navy. Anno 16 Car. 2. cap. 5. Consolidation, r. usum fructum. Contrabanded, r.
or exported. Cordage, r. general appellation. Cuckingstool, r. scalfingstole.
Defend, r. Fence-moneth. Dismes, r. has his share. Divorce, r. a divertendo.
Eberemurder, r. Eberemorth. Fardingdeal, r. Sax. faeorth. Farthing of Land, r.
feorthling. Flitchtwite, r. contention or Forathe, r modo -- fidelem
Franc-almoin, r. terrestrial. Friburgh, r. Fidejussor. Frumstol, r. Homestal.
LL. Furca, r. seu Calefurcia. Gabel, r. gafol al. gafel. Guardian, r. gardung.
Gavelkind, r. nominant. Haec terrae. Gultwit, r. for Gyltwite. Haga, r. de
quinque solidis. Hamsoken, r. Hamsoc^e and Fridebrice. Hokeday, r. senescallus
Curiae de. Honor, r. ^lun, Raleigh. Horngeld, r. Sax. horn. Imparlance, r. the
like Clause. Infangthef, r. S. Ben. Rames. Insidiatores viarum, r. are words.
Institution, r. no Franc-tenement. Jury, r. public or private. Knave, r. Sax.
cnapa, in every place, etc. Knight, r. by Divines. Landa, r. a Lawnd or.
Landcheap, r. Sax. Landceap from ceapan. Livery of Seisin, r. there was --
delivered- Magna Charta, r. Sir Edw. Manumission, r. Sigillo Comitatus nostri.
Mise, r. Lords Marchers. Naam, r. quod inscribitur. Nuisance, r. Vicountiel.
Precariae, r. iv Precarias in. Saka, r. See Sac. Sea-rover, r. See Pirate.
Sergeant, r. Countor, is. Serjeanty, r. Donec perusus. Sharping Corn, r. Harrow
Tines. Shirif-tooth, r. and terris in. Soc, r. Secta de. Socage, r. Tenure of
Lands. Solidata terrae, r. Vic^comitibus. Specialitas, r* ab eodem. Suffragan,
r. (suffraganeus) Team, r. Children, Goods. Terrage, r. Pavagio, Passagio.
Theft, r. Personal goods. Theftbote, r. emenda furti. Trista, r. ni fallor.
Wainage, r. contenement or Warranty, r. tenementa nostra. Xenia, r. ut omnia.



