Bloody Nevvs FROM SHREWSBURY, BEING A True and Perfect Relation of a Horrible
Villain, by Name Thomas Re^nolds, who ^ately lived at Aldow, near Ludlow, in
the County of Sal^p.

He before he was Eighteen years of Age, Murdered Alice St^phens, and her
Daughter Martha, Cutting their Throats, as they were asleep, and having done,
set their house on fire, which consumed several of the adjacent Houses.

He likewise set on fire one Goodman Merick's House, while he, his Wife, and
one Child difficultly escaped through the Flames.

Also he twice attempted to Murder one Mis. C^rfeilds, but was disappointed;
for all which, and many other smaller facts, as Robbery, Burglary, etc. He was
Condemned and Hanged in Chains at Shrewsbury the 14th. day of March, 1672/3

With Allowance.

London, Printed for R. Burton, and P. Brooksby, next Doors to the Ball in
West-Smith-field. 1673.

Bloody News From Shrevvsbury.
AT Aldow, in the Parish of Steak-Sag, near unto Ludlow, in the County of
Salop, there lived a fellow about eighteen years of age, and though he were
mean enough in his Parentage, Habit, and Education, yet no way despicable,
except in his lewd life, and shameful death. His name was Thomas Reynols,
eminent for Pilfering, even from his Childhood, which he had ever an audacious
and peremptory way of denying. And as he increased in years, so he did not only
in inclinations to do ill, but also in subtilty and strength, to prosecute the
projects, which his wicked heart daily suggested to him, and to which his
subtle head continually showed him the way. Being grown to the Age of Sixteen,
he became a notable hardy and sturdy Villain, excellently subtle in
contriving, and admirably audacious in prosecuting any mischiefs whatsoever.
Some of the most eminent you find in this Relation, from which it will not be
very difficult to guess at the rest.

Upon the Sixteenth day of February 1673 he was observed to rise very early in
the morning, before, or as ^oon as ever the day began to appear; and being
asked what business he had to do so timely, he either answered churlishly, or
doubtfully, but however, went away with a resolution of doing a Villainy, that
my hand shakes to Write of, and will I believe, make many a man's heart ache to
read.

There lived at that time, in the same Parish, one John Stephens, and he was a
very honest laborious man in his Calling; it seems he was a day labourer, and
usually went abroad every morning early to some or other of his Masters
thereabout to work, which he did this morning, as formerly he had done, leaving
Alice his Wife, and his only Daughter Martha at home, to such employments as
became people of their degree and Sex: this was perceived and observed by our
hatcher of Wickedness, the wretched Thomas Reynols, who being informed by
others, or fancying of himself that there might be something in Stephen's
house, worth the putting in practice of this his murderous design, animated by
the Devil, or (what was almost as bad) by his own diabolical and mischievous
heart, he enters the house, about seven of the Clock in the Morning, and
bringing with him a large ^nife made very sharp, for that purpose, goes to
their bedside, and while they (poor wretches) were asleep, not thinking of
doing harm, or dreaming, of reciving any, this bloody Miscreant taking first
the Mother, and afterward the Daughter by the throat, he cuts them clean
through the Windpipe, whence issued forth such a fierce torrent of blood, as
flew all about the face and clothes of the Murderer, as if it had designed to
discover, or (according to its power) to revenge the injury done to those
bodies, to whom it had for many years been so friendly a Guest: but though at
present its endeavors are too weak to effect its desired revenge, till Gods
time is come; yet in the mean while it cries loud for it, so loud that one time
or other, the cries shall be assuredly heard; as you shall see hereafter.

After this bloody Fact, the Author of it thinking himself unsafe, and
imagining, that should the dead bodies be found in that ghastly manner he might
in time be discovered, he hardens himself in his Wickededness; and to secure
all, goes with a Firebrand ^nseen, and sets fire to the house, till it was all
in Flames, which not only consumed three or four of the adjacent houses, but
also the body of the murdered Guests it did contain.



Thus did that place which was a Shelter and Sanctuary to the living, prove a
Grave, or rather an Urne to the dead, and they who before had preserved its
Roof, then fed its Flames.

And now our bloody wretch thinking his Villainy to have been consumed in those
Flames it caused, goes to a Well to wash away the substance of the Blood, but
not the guilt of it. And having given himself imaginary absolutions, he
adventures boldly to behold his own Fires, as ever Nero, whom he out-did even
in Cruelty.

Encouraged by this (as he called it) happy success, he thought himself in a
very fair way to get an estate (as we say) out of the Fire, and therefore
resolves to put in practice the Husbandry I have observed in some Countries,
believing he might better his Estate by burning. To this purpose he resolves
upon a design in all Circumstances exactly tallying the former, but only in the
success of it.

There lived not far from this place one Goodman Merick, whose manner of life
and other circumstances I (for brevities sake) omit, as not pertinent to our
present Relation, supposing it sufficient to acquaint you that this Thomas
Renolds with inventions equally bloody, and designs altogether as cunning,
while the said Merick, together with his Wife and one Child were all in bed,
sets fire to the house, which imediately, being Thatch, becomes a body of
Flames, and the first Summons that the inhabitants received was an astonishing
noise of Flame, which yet hardly appeared through the thick Clouds of smoke;
Merick newly awakned, is strangely surprised, as well with the unexpec^^^ness,
as d^^ger of the accident.

But be is no Salamander, he cannot stay there, nor had he leisure to consult
how to go, but on a sudden takes up his Wife and Child, and carries them
through the flames in the Sheet they lay upon: which had he not done with
strange dexterity and strength, they had doubtless found there, both a
Deathbed, and a Winding Sheet, and had become like the former, as it were,
Sacrifices to his Cruelty.

To what intent he acted this heinous Fact, whether out of Malice, or design of
Gain, is not known: But certainly what ever his designs were, the means he made
use of to accomplish them, were the most unheard of, and Tragical, that any
story mentions.

After this he breaks open another Neighbors House, while the people were
abroad, and not finding in it a Booty answerable to his expectations, he falls
to work with a Barrel of Metheglin they had in the House, of which he tasted so
plentifully, that he became very Drunk: Yet was he so cunning as to retreat
into an adjoining Barn, belonging to one Mr. Baughs; where he was Apprehended,
and immediately committed by a Justice of Peace to Shrewsbury Goal: Where he
received his Trial the 11th. of this Instant March, And by his own Conf^ssion
he was found Guilty of all the forementioned Facts.

Together with the cruelty he had plotted against the Wife of one Mr. Corfeilds
of Ferny-hall, whom he had twice attempted to Murder, but her Husband being at
home, he was disappointed.

But those he had the misfortune to effect, were sufficient to entitle him to
the Gibbet; and accordingly Sentence was passed on him the 13th* of the same
March, to be Hanged in Chains, which was Executed on the morrow accordingly.

FINIS.

