A SERMON Against PERSECUTION.

PREACHED March 26. 1682. Being the 4 th. Sunday in Lent (on Gal. 4. 29. Part
of the Epistle for that Day) and the time when the Brief for the Persecuted
Protestants in France was Read in the Parish Church of Shapwicke.

AND Now Published to the Consideration of Violent and Headstrong Men, as well
as to put a stop to false Reports.

By Sa. Bold, Vicar of Shapwicke in Dorcetshire.

LONDON, Printed 1682, and Published by Richard Janeway.

To the Reader.
Reader,
IT has bin my constant Course for some Months, to Preach every Sunday either
on the whole Epistle for the Day, or some part of it. And finding I was
commanded in the Brief for the Persecuted Protestants in France, (which was
brought me in the Week before the 4th. Sunday in Lent) to publish it the next
Sunday; I found there was no need to alter my wonted course, in order to my
pitching on a Subject which might suit with that Occasion. The famous Dr.
Patrick in his Epistle Dedicatory before his Sermon Preached before the Lord
Major, etc. the 21st. Sunday after Trinity 1680. ascribes his being directed to
the Subject he then Preached on, not so much to his own Prudence, as a Kind of
Divine Providence; because having observed this same Course that Year, he did
not on that Occasion go out of his way to meet with a sitting Argument. Whether
People will put the same Construction on this Discourse or not, I neither know
nor care. But I think I may truly say, I have discoursed on this Text, with a
Freedom which becomes a Christian, and particularly a true Son of the Church of
England.

It may he some who pretend to the Church, will take Exception at this Sermon,
for there are some so shallow, and of so short Discourse, they cannot
understand how a man can except against their violent Proceedings against some
Dissenters, and yet he himself a thorough Conformist. Indeed it is not of any
moment what such may either say or think, but yet to give them some
Satisfaction, if they ever happen to be favored with any sober and lucid
Intervals, I will amongst the many Instances I might mention for this end,
offer these few to their Consideration.

1. I could never yet understand that Conformity did oblige any man to lay
aside all Bowels of Compassion. Nay I am sure, to Convince and Satisfy Men with
Reason, and by Humility, Gentleness, and Meekness is most Christian, and tends
most to the Honor of particular Persons, and whole Churches. How much of
Fierceness and Violence there is in any Party, especially if countenanced by
the Principles of that Persuasion, so much there is of some Infernal and
Devilish Mixture in it.

2. Those who do generally Decry and Prosecute Dissenters with greatest Passion
and Virulence, are greatest Strangers unto them. They usually know no more of
them, than they learn from some false and scandalous Observator or other.

3. They are commonly Ignorant of the State of the Controversy betwixt us, and
the Dissenters. The true Reason, why Judicious and thinking Conformists do use
those particular Ceremonies which are enjoined, is because they are satisfied
they come under the general Rule given by the Apostle, VIZ. that all things be
done decently and in order. And the Reason why they observe no other Rites and
Ceremonies, (whilst it must be acknowledged there are others every whit as
orderly and decently in themselves as these) is because, these alone are
enjoined by an Authority, they are persuaded, has Power to interpose in these
things. And now if others do not break the general Rule given by the Apostle,
but apprehend that a Freedom from Impositions in these things, is one part of
the Liberty they are commanded to stand fast in, why should we quarrel with,
and prosecute them? especially whilst they acknowledge that it pertains to
Authority to take notice of them who are Indecent, and Disorderly in their
Worship. Is it not enough that we may act according to our own more minute
Persuasion, and have the Countenance and Incour agement of those in Power, but
we must ruin and oppress them who will not truckle to our Fancies?

4. I have had the Opportunity to be acquainted both with Conformists, and
Nonconformists. And as I acknowledge I have great cause to bless God for the
worthy Labors, and exemplary Lives of very many in the Church of England, so I
ought to give others their due. And this I must say, that those of the
Dissenters whom I have bin acquainted with, have bin men of great Learning,
exemplary Piety, strict Devotion, and extraordinary Loyalty. Men who have bin
diligent Attenders on God in his public Ordinances, eminently Religious in
their Families, who have had a great regard to Conscience in all the parts of
their Conversation with Men. They have neither bin Haunters of Taverns, nor
obscene and loose in their Discourse, nor have they bin guilty of sitting Days
and Nights at Cards and Dice. Indeed they have bin Persons that could not be
justly blamed for any thing, but that they had straighter Notions concerning
humane Impositions in the Service of God, than we Conformists have.

And a very learned Gentleman had upon Consideration given a very just and good
Reason of this. Mr. Hunt's Appendix to his Argument for Bps. Right in judging
in Capital Causes in Parliam.
He expresses himself in these Words. I think this their Scrupulosity may be
of God, and that some men are by him framed to it, that he has provided it as
a Bar and Obstacle in the Natures and Complexions of some devout Men, against
any Innovations whatsoever, that dangerous ones may not steal upon the Church,
for the better maintaining the Simplicity and Purity of Christian Religion and
Worship.

If after all this, any remain unsatisfied, p. 84.
they may seek Satisfaction where they please (...).

Sa. Bold.

A SERMON Against PERSECUTION, etc.
Galatians 4. Verse 29. But as then He that was born after the Flesh persecuted
Him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now.
THere were some even in the Apostles days, who labored what they could to
hinder the progress of the Gospel, by Preaching up the necessity of the Jewish
Law. These having insinuated themselves into the Churches of Galatia, had
infected many of those Christians, with their poisonous and false Doctrines:
For though they did not openly declare themselves enemies to the Gospel, yet
they did supplant it as to its power and efficacy, by alleging its
insufficiency alone, and the necessity of their being circumcised, and
embracing those old rules God had anciently enforced under the former
dispensation. They knew if they could leaven and corrupt them with these
Principles, they did at first so speciously display, it would not be long
before they should entirely undermine that foundation the Apostles had laid
amongst them. For however innocent their pretenses might seem at first, it is
clearest Paul perceived the consequence would be dangerous. Christ will not
profit you at all, Gal. 5. 2.

For this cause it is he does labor with them so earnestly, and uses such
variety of Arguments to secure them from giving place any further, to those
false and pernicious Teachers, and to convince them of their error and fault,
in giving way unto them at all.

Amongst other Arguments he urges the different state men are in when under
the Gospel, from that they were in when under the Law: And that the Law was
primarily designed only to prepare and fit men for the Gospel, but not to
continue in the same Place and Power after, as before; no more than he that
being arrived to ripe and full years, is bound to continue under their
Tutorage, who had the care of him in his Minority, Gal. 4. 1.

He afterward proceeds to argue with them from the Nature of that Law they are
so desirous to be under, v. 21. And then explains himself by a Similitude of
Abraham's two Sons; showing there is as great a difference between those who
are under a Gospel State, and them that are under the Law, as between that Son
which was his natural Child, and that which was conferred on him by the special
Promise and powerful Interposition of God's particular Blessing.

And thus he takes occasion to reflect on the great Alteration that was wrought
amongst them, since they did histen to, and entertain these false and deceiving
Apostles. And does, as it were, tell them, it was no wonder they should thus
vary, and that they should now approve ways of Severity toward Christ's
apostles and Followers, seeing they did receive and adhere to them, that were
directly contrary to Christ's Ministers and Servants. Compare Gal. 4. 14, 15.
whith this 29. v. It is no more than what has fallen out in all Ages of the
World. The Servants of Satan and Enemies of true Godlyness, have always bin
for persecuting the faithful and obedient Children of God. And it seems by this
Epistle, to be the especial and peculiar Character of them that are
irreligiously and immoderately hot and zealous about Ceremonies, to be the
greatest Persecutors of those who are most Pious and Conscientious. Look
through all the Scriptures, nay look through all the Ages of the Church, you
shall generally find that those who were most for the Persecution of others on
the account of some indifferences relating to Religion, were very wicked
superstitious men: Men that were inordinately Zealous for, and fond of some
outward Ceremonies. Now if a fondness for any Ceremonies would maintain and
justify Men's Persecution of others, who cannot approve their Fopperies, one
would think these Teachers who were crept in amonst the Galathians should be
excused, because they pressed only those things that had formerly bin of Divine
appointment. Dr. Stillings. pref. to Irenic.
For, He that came to take away the insupportable Yoke of Jewish Ceremonies,
certainly did never intend to gall the Necks of his Disciples with another
instead of it. But here we see how dangerous it is to give our selves too great
a Liberty in admiring any bare external and accidental Appendage to Religion.
Satan does suddenly strike in on such Occasions, and does so powerfully affect
men's Minds with some strange Apprehensions, of the Beauty, Excellency,
Usefulness, and Necessity of these things, they are quite taken off from
minding the inward Part and Soul of Religion. And by this means they come to
lay out all their Zeal about these trifling and worthless Parts, they even
starve their own Souls, by a constant feasting on these mere Husks, and do what
they can to destroy others Souls, at least their Bodies, by persecuting them,
if they will not conceive and believe as well of these things, as they do. It
is a very shrewd Sign, and token that a Man is a wicked unregenerate Man if he
be of a fierce and persecuting Temper; if he be prone to endeavor to Ruin and
Trouble, or further the Vexation and Disturbance of serious pious People, only
because they cannot be as Ceremonious as he is.

He that was born after the Flesh, etc. The Words do immediately relate to the
Sons of Abraham, Ismael is He that was born after the Flesh, viz. in a mere
natural ordinary way. Now, as he did Persecute, and Mock, and Deride, and
Insult over Isaac, who was born after the Spirit, viz. who was the Son of the
Promise, and in order to whose Birth, there was the Exerting a Divine Power in
the accomplishing of that Promise which was made to Abraham, when both he and
Sarah were past Hopes, and naturally incapable of having Children, so it is
now, viz. Even so, those in these Days, who are of the Seed of Abraham, that
pretend they have him for their Father, and are outwardly Jews, or that pretend
themselves so out of servile Compliance, do persecute them that are born after
the Spirit; that is, those who are the Children of the Promise, the Seed of
Abraham, truly so called in a religious Sense, who succeed him in his Faith.

The Jews did very much boast of, and lay an extraordinary stress on their
being the Seed of Abraham; they placed most of their Religion on this, and
thought it a sufficient Plea for themselves on all Occasions, and an effectual
Security from those Judgments that were sometimes threatened against them; and
therefore we find the Holy Men in Scripture often laboring to Convince them
what a sandy Foundation they did build upon, Mat. 3. 9. John 8. 39. Romans 4. 12,
13, 14. It is indeed a great Mercy to be Born of Pious and Religious Parents;
Those Parents that have a great Familiarity and Interest with God, have usually
a great Treasury and Portion of Blessings laid up with God for their Posterity.
Exodus 20. 6. But People may lay too great a stress on this outward Privilege.
And if Children do not labor to walk in the Steps of Religious and Gracious
Parents, but depend wholly on their Predecessors Holiness, they will be
fearfully mistaken at last.

He that was Born after the Flesh, etc. He that is a loose, wicked,
Unregenerate, Carnal Person, is for Persecuting and Undoing him that is Born
after the Spirit, him that is Serious, Holy, Strict, and Conscientious; thus it
has bin, and thus it is. I will sum up all into this Proposition.

Wicked, Doct.
Unregenerate Men, always have bin, and still are for Persecuting Holy,
Religious, Spiritual Men. Look through all the Books both of Old and New
Testament, nay look through all History, and you will still find, where ever
you meet with Persecution, that it was carried on by the Devil's Agents, by
Wicked, Lewd Men, against Holy and Righteous Men. Observe the Characters every
where of Informers and Persecutors, and see if they have not bin branded with
some notorious and hateful Wickedness.

Indeed Men can scarce arrive to such a height of Wickedness, as this is, till
they have by the habitual Exercise of other Crimes, feared their Consciences,
and are become so insensible, that all the commendable Notions and Sentiments
that do usually accompany Mankind, are lost and eradicated out of their Breasts.

Consider these few Instances of Persecutors as they now occur, and then see
whether all others be not of the same Complexion. What an obdurate Caitiff and
Villain was Cain that slew his own Brother, because more Holy, and consequently
better accepted with God than he was? What a vile Character is Ismael all along
represented under to us? Were not they Drunkards that were against David, and
made Songs of him? What were the false Prophets that set themselves against
Micaiah? were they not such as did Prophecy Lies? Who were those that were for
the Burning of the three Children? And for the casting of Daniel into the Lions
Den? Were they not all Flattering and Abominable Idolaters? What was Judas that
Betrayed Christ, that Informed the High Priests and Scribes against his Master
the Son of God? Was he not a Covetous Mercenary Son of Perdition? What were
those that swore, and gave Evidence against Christ? Were they not a couple of
perjured Miscreants? And if you search and inquire, you will find all Informers
against, and Persecutors of the Just and Holy to be of the same Stamp. Are not
the Informers and Persecutors of our Days like unto those that were before
them? Is it not evident to all that they are notorious for Perjury, Falsness,
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Profane and common Swearing? Are there any more
regardless of the Lord's Day, more Irreligious and Obscene in their Discourse,
more Vile. Contemptible and base in the Eye and Opinion of every Honest, Pious,
Good, or Sober Person? Are there any so unjust, so False, so exorbitantly
Vicious, Lewd, and Debauched as they?

Now Christ and Religion do not allow of Persecutions, of Troubling and Vexing,
of Ruining and Undoing of any Men for little Indifferences much less for Truth
and Holiness. They are for Advancing and Propagating Holiness and Peace, and
Love, and Condescension. Is. 42. 2, 3. Christ came not to destroy but to save
Men's Lives; and sharply rebukes his Disciples when they would have called for
Fire from Heaven to destroy the Samaritans: It is a sure Token Men are Enemies
to Christ and Religion, when they are of a persecuting Spirit. It has always
bin the great Character and Glory of the Christian Religion, that where ever it
came, it did promote and further Quietness and Peace, and Love, and Brotherly
Kindness; and did Banish Wrath and Fury, and Malice, and every hateful and
hurtful Disposition and Inclination. It was always thus, till Popery got some
Power in the World, and then more barbarous Villainies, and outrageous Cruelties
were perpetrated under this Name, than were known to the World before. And if
it be carefully observed, you shall find that in all ages, those who have bin
most for cruel Methods against them that differ from them, have had most of the
Spirit of Popery in them; and it is deplorably apparent that now in our Days,
they who appear most vigorous and active in Prosecuting those Protestants who
differ from others in some accidental Matters, have a great affection for
Popery, and are hastening toward Rome as fast as they can.

That the following part of my Discourse may be as plain and easy to you as
possible, I will reduce what I design to say on this Subject, to these
following Heads. 1. I will tell you what Persecution is. 2. Name more
particularly the Characters of them that are Persecutors. 3. Show you whence it
is that wicked Men are so violently set against the Godly. 4. I will make some
brief application of the whole.

I am first of all to tell you what Persecution is. 1st.
And it is an endeavoring to Trouble, Molest, Disturb, Kill, or any way Hurt
and Injure another Person on some Religious account. Every Prosecution of a
Person, is not properly Persecution, but only when it is grounded on some
Religious Affair. A Man may be guilty of Sin in prosecuting another upon civil
accounts, but this Sin comes under another Denomination, as Oppression,
Injustice, unpeacable Brangling, etc. Now Persecution is much what the same in
Religion, that Oppression is in Civils. When Men will not suffer others to
enjoy that Liberty, and those Rights in Religion, which either Nature or
Revelation do allow them; but will be severe against them, if in every
accidental Matter, they will not be just of their Mind. When Men do hale others
to Tribunals, and procure them either to be Punished in their Bodies, or in
their Estates; or to be deprived of their Lives, or civil Liberties, because
they either perform some Duty God has expressly Commanded, in a way they do not
approve, or because they will not consent to, Embrace, and Comply with those
Determinations they have just reason to Believe are Sinful. Whilst Men are not
openly Wicked, but tho not free from common Infirmities, which do unavoidably
accompany humane Nature in this frail Estate, yet free from Gross and
Scandalous Sins, whilst they deny not any Doctrine of Christianity, nor divulge
any Tenet to the Prejudice of Christianity, nor do any way endeavor to disturb
the Peace of the Government under which they live; they have a right to a
peacable and quiet Residence, and ought to be free from any Molestation, tho
they cannot in every accidental thing attain to the same Latitude with others.
Whoever goes about to Disturb and Injure, or Contract on such as these, Fines,
or other Punishments, because they cannot receive and comply with those super
numerary Conceits some do too much please themselves with, and press with too
much warmth on others, are too liable to this heavy Charge of Persecution. And
if we only consider what it is they are so concerned for, we may see too much
reason, to conclude they have no great Portion of Commendable properties.
Wherefore I will now proceed to the

Second Point, 2ly.
which is to account to you some of their Characters more particularly, or to
show you what kind of People Persecutors generally are. They are commonly
observed to be the worst, the most Brutish, and Degenerate part of Mankind.
Consult others, Read Histories, or Consider what you may Learn from your own
Observation; you will find them to come generally under some very Scandalous,
and Offensive Characters. They are usually taken to be the very Pest of
Society. It is almost as dangerous to live amongst them, as amongst the Wild
and Savage Beasts of the Desert. They are a sort of Tigers and Lions, the most
Ravenous Beasts of Prey with humane Visages. Were the Pythagorian Notion of the
Transmigration of Souls received, the whole World would then conclude them
nothing but humane Carcases acted with Wolvish Breath. More particularly they
have some or all of these Characters and Qualities attending them.

Paul's blind Zeal made him a Persecutor: He did it Ignorantly. And our Savior
tells us of some that would kill and murder Men, John 16. 2.
and flatter themselves with a Persuasion that they were therein doing God and
Religion good Service.

doing Evil: Their Delight is to Hurt and Offend them, with whom God is
Pleased. They are cankered and ill natured, and never pleased but when they
have an opportunity to entrap, and make the Innocent fall. They cannot bear
Contradiction. Zedekiah was so impatient of Contradiction, he no sooner hears
Micaiah bring a different Messsage from his, and discover how a lying Spirit
was in the Mouths of the other Prophets, 1. King. 22. 24.
but he falls upon Micaiah, and Buffets him.

3. They are Men of desperate and broken Fortunes, or else Mammon. They do
commonly take up Informing, and Swearing, and Persecuting as a Trade to live
by. They scarce know how to subsist but by Preying on the Wealth, and Estates
and Goods, of those honest, sober, religious People they do Inform and Swear
against. Men that are so lazy they cannot Work, so luxurious they have not
where withal to maintain their Lusts, and of so ill and blasted a Fame and
Reputation, none dares trust them. These are indeed a fit sort of People to
Persecute the Righteous: They cannot Live unless some or other fall by their
means. There are two sorts of most abominable and wicked Ways, Men have found
out to maintain themselves, and feed their Lusts by: The one is Robbing on the
Highway, and the other is Informing against, and Persecuting the Righteous.
Now those that apply to the latter Way, are the most Infamous of the two; for
as they are wicked enough, to commit as great Villainies as the other dares, so
they have not Courage to adventure on such dangerous Courses, and to expose
themselves to so much Hazard for a Livelihood as the other do. They think it
easier to Swear, than Hector and afright Men out of what they have. The wise
Man seems to give a very lively Description of these People in Prove. 4. 16, 17.
They sleep not except they have done Mischief, and their sleep is taken away,
unless they cause some to fall, for they eat the Bread of Wickedness, and drink
the Wine of Violence.

If there be any Persecutors whose Fortunes are not altogether so despicable
and small, they are such as make a Mammon their God; The Hopes of getting
Wealth does very powerfully irritate them to what they do: Was it not thirty
pieces of Silver that made Judas betray his Master? What is the Reason Sinners
do excite one another to wait for Blood, and to lurk privily for the Innocent
without Cause? Prove. 1. 11. 13.
Is it not because they hope they shall find all precious Substance, and shall
fill their Houses with Spoil?

Epicurus's Conceit, making their Belly their God, and minding nothing but the
things of this World. Your ordinary forsworn, and perjured Wretches, are the
People that do most commonly seek a Livelihood by being suborned to Swear
against them that fear the Lord. They that never scruple to tear the Name of
God in Pieces, and to affront their Maker on every turn, by taking his Name in
Vain, who emboss every Word they speak, with some dreadful Oath or other, who
dare impudently swear a hundred Oaths in an Hour, without any Provocation,
these are the fittest Men to Inform and Swear against, and endeavor their
Ruin, who have a Religious and truly Conscientious regard to the Name of God,
and every thing on which he has stamped his Image. No wonder such as these,
should solemnly devore and prostitute their Souls to Hell, by swearing even
falsely against others, when they have the Temptation and Encouragement of
getting Wealth and Riches, since they are so accustomed to affront their Maker,
they think they never speak gentilely, unless they set their most high God at
utmost Defiance, and do in Words at length challenge him to Damn them. He that
sets himself apart to Sathan's Service by indulging to all the Lusts of the
Flesh, that can boast of his Drunkenness, and Uncleanness, of his frequent
Excesses, and every Days Debauch, that can unconcernedly, or rather with
Triumph speak of his Hopes and Desires of being Damned for ever, that Defiles
the Air he speaks in, and offends all he comes amongst with his prodigious
Oaths, and Execrations: This Man is ready prepared if an Occasion do offer it
self, or can by any means be obtained, to Swear a Conscientious, Religious Man
out of his Right, and himself into it. That Man that will ordinarily endanger
his Soul, and Swear for nothing, will much more do so, be it right or wrong,
when he has the Temptation of Wealth, and it may be the Applause and
Commendation of great Men for his Encouragement.

Having given this account of the two first Particulars. 3ly.
I shall now inquire whence it is that wicked Men are such bitter and
inveterate Enemies against the Godly? Constant Experience is an undeniable
Proof of the Truth of it, for no Age has passed, but the worst Men have bin
contriving and endeavoring to do the Righteous some Displeasure. We need not
consult Histories, to Confirm what I am now treating of, for we may every where
take Notice of the Deplorable Truth and Certainty of it amongst our selves. But
from amongst the many Instances which might be mentioned as having some
influence in and concurring to this, I will only name these few.

1. There is a desperate and deadly Enmity against Godlyness, by Nature the
Children of Wrath, not only as we are subject and liable to the Wrath and
Displeasure of God, but as we are of a wrathful, furious, and unreconcilable
Temper. We are naturally Enemies not only to God, but to one another also. And
it is to be ascribed principally, rather wholly, to the wise Conduct and
Providence of God, that all Men are not constantly up in Arms, and always
endeavoring the utter Extirpation one of another. But this Enmity is
especially set against all Goodness. When Man lost Holiness, Heb. 6. 5. 6.
he became a most violent Adversary to it. As you observe when a Man has
tasted of the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come, if he
apostatize, he becomes the most Virulent and Implacable Enemy to it. So it is
with Man naturally since the Fall. The Devils that were such pure and holy
Angels, are now the greatest haters of Holiness.

Wicked Men are of a Cursed, Envious, Malicious Temper, they are of a
Persecuting Nature, and have a great deal of Savageness in their Temper; they
are against Holiness, as being contrary to their Nature, and thus become so
violent against good Men. Look at any Creature, you will find it has an
aversion to those things, which are of a contrary Nature, and if there be any
thing of Wildness, and Cruelty, and Savageness intermixed, then it is
extraordinary violent against those which are of the contrary Nature. But those
things which have not such a Savageness Intermixed, they only testify their
aversion by a peacible withdrawing themselves, not at all endeavoring the
Destruction or Hurt of the other. This is very apparent in the Wolf and the
Lamb: They delight not in the Society one of another, but the Lamb, though of
so contrary a Nature to the Wolf, does not seek the Life or hurt of the Wolf;
but the Wolf is not satisfied but with the total Destruction of the Lamb. Nor
is this only because the Wolf does usually prey and feed on such Creatures, for
then when the Hunger were satisfied, that rapacious and fierce Temper would
cease. That Creature which is of a fierce and ravenous Nature, will destroy and
kill not only out of Necessity, but also for Sport and Recreation. Thus wicked
Men they are of a contrary Nature to the Godly, and have much wildness and
ravenousness intermixed. They cannot sleep unless they make some to fall; and
therefore they are resembled to and set forth by those Creatures which are
wholly set upon destroying the Harmless and Innocent. They lie lurking privily
in their Den, that they may catch the Righteous.

If you ask what the Reason is that the Righteous and Holy do not Persecute the
Wicked, as well as the Wicked do them, the Nature of each being equally
contrary to each other? I answer, the Roughness and Severity of good Men's
Natures is taken away by that sanctifying and altering Grace which is bestowed
on them, and for which they are so much hated by the other. The new Nature
conferred on them, has the harmlesness of the Dove accompanying it. A
sanctified Nature so far as under the Power and Influence of Sanctification,
has no Hatred, nor Envy, nor Malice, nor any other Quality that is hurtful. It
dares not hate or hurt an Enemy.

And the true reason why ungodly Men do no more hurt to the Righteous, is
because God restrains them; he puts his Hook into their Nose, and his Bridle
into their Lips, and checks them.

Contrariety causes their Aversion to the Godly, but it is that fierceness
which is intermixed, which causes the Violence of the Persecution; as you see
Tigers, Wolves, Lions, and Bears, do pursue, and kill, and devour Sheep, Lambs,
and other Innocent and Profitable Creatures, and as Hawks and Kites do fly
after and Prey on Turtle Doves and Pigeons, so do Wicked outrageous Ungodly Men
Persecute and Trouble the Just and Holy.

2. Their Natural Enmity is very much increased and excited

It may not be amiss to take notice now of a Sin, that prevails exceedingly at
this time amongst our selves; which is, that we have disputed our selves into
so much Wrath, such an Aversness and Enmity to one another, that Dissenters,
and those who pretend to the Church, can scarce endure the Names of one
another, unless some disgraceful and reproachful Term be annexed. Too many of
them are become such fierce Adversaries one against another, that they have not
only abandoned themselves from the eminent Exercise of that Charity and mutual
Forbearance, common Christianity does very much enforce, but they do with too
much Appetite listen and inquire after, and instead of mourning for, do rejoice
and almost triumph in the Faults which particular Persons on either side are
chargible with; and which is yet a greater Fault, they are too frequent in
applying the Guilt beyond its due extent.

By this means do those who are Corrupt, Carnal, and Sensual on each side,
labor to increase our Animosities, and make our Divisions wider and more
unhealable.

But it is most of all deplorable, that the Malignity and Poison of this
course, seems to diffuse and spread it self amongst them who have given
undeniable and prodigious Evidences of extraordinary Learning, and sometimes of
very great and deservedly imitable Moderation and Equanimity: Which discovers
that when People do apply themselves to advance any Party with undue Warmth,
they forget to observe that Decorum, they have formerly commended to the World,
and are too easily induced to use the meanest Arts in depressing the Cause they
oppose.

It is certainly very unbecoming and unworthy of Men of great Learning,
Holiness, and Gravity to endeavor to defame all that are of the contrary
Persuasion, by suggesting to the World evil Surmises and Opinions concerning
all in general, by reporting infamous Stories which concern only some few in
particular: for besides the Injury they themselves do by this Means to those
that are Innocent; they both Countenance the unjust Methods the worst of Men do
use in decrying those they are against, and they furnish them with Materials to
carry on their Design.

This has bin an ancient Method, People have used to revenge themselves on the
Innocent. Jer. 20. 10.
Report say they, and we will Report. Do but either start any one Story that is
real, with relation to some Particulars, or fraim and coin a Story that will
appear Plausible, and let it once take Air, and we will soon help to transmit
it further, and by this means we shall take our Revenge on them.

But what a dreadful Blow would be given to Chrisianity in the Opinion of its
professed Enemies, should all Parties labor to rake together the foul and
enormous Offenses of particular Persons amongst those they do Oppose, and then
publish them to the World, as what the whole Party does either approve, or may
justly be charged with?

There is no doubt but this Church (tho it is Government and Constitution be so
pure, justifiable, and Consonant to Apostolical Practice) would suffer very
much, should but the almost Ordinary mis-carriages of a great number who
pretend to the Clergy be exposed to public view; with an account of the
Encouragement they meet with, or at least how free they are from Threats and
Molestations, whilst others who lead better Lives, and are more constant and
diligent Preachers, and do express on all Occasions more of that Charity and
Forbearance toward all men, which Christianity does so much commend and
enforce, are frowned upon, and left open to the Rage and Fury of besotted
Frantic and Debauched Bigots. There is no defense against unjust Prejudice.

3. They apprehend, that the strict and Holy Lives of Religious Herodias suffer
John Baptist to keep his Head any longer? It was because she could not live
quietly in her uncleanness with her Husbands brother, whilst he was still
Preaching to Herod, that it was not lawful for him to have her. Mat. 14. 3.
Indeed there is not any thing does more effectually discover the horrid
Loathsomness of wicked men's Lusts and Practices, than the Chaste, Holy, and
strict Conversations of Pious men. And therefore they are so much against them,
even because their Doctrines and Lives do so much reprove their wicked Works of
darkness.

4. Holy men are carrying on a different work from that which John 15. 19.
If ye were of the World the World would love his own, but because ye are not
of the World, but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World
hates you.

5. This proceeds many times from a very strong and Powerful impulse of Satan.
As wicked men are his Slaves and doing absolutely suppress the Righteous, he
should Reign and Triumph in the World without any Opposition. Ephesians. 2. 2.
The Devil Rules in the hearts of the Children of Disobedience. And it is worth
our Observation, that immediately before Judas went to the High Priest, etc. to
inform against and betray his Master, it is said the devil entered into him:
Luke 22 3, 4.
So that one main instance, whence it is that wicked People do persecute the
Righteous, is because the Devil is in them. The Devil does as truly possess,
Act, and govern them that persecute the Righteous, as he did those that were
called Demoniacks, when our Savior was upon Earth. And tho he do not cause
them now to Tear and Rent, and Torture themselves, as they did then, yet he has
a more dreadful Influence on their Souls, and indangers them much more as to
their spiritual and final Estate.

I am now in the last place to apply what has been discoursed concerning
Persecution; 4ly.
and will do it in a few Words.



This is no more than what you must expect, and what every good man ought daily
to prepare for. He that is resolved for Heaven must go through many
Tribulations; you are warned of such Treatment beforehand. Our Savior has
dealt so plainly with all his followers in this particular, that it is one
great part of a Christians work to live always in Expectation of those things
that so he may not be surprised when they come. We have our every days Cross to
wait for, and must be willing to take it up, and bear it away with
Cheerfulness, when ever it comes. We have not the clearest and most
unquestionable Evidences of the Truth, at least the Power of Christianity in
and over us, till we can Cheerfully part with and resign up all, yea with
Triumph bear away Reproaches, and Fears, and false Accusations, till we can lay
down our very Lives rejoycingly for Christ, his Gospel, and Religion, if
occasion be.

And if God sees fit to bring you to the Trial; it is that you may have the
stronger assurance of your unfeigned Love to him, and unconquerable interest in
him. And that you may display the Efficacy and Beauty of Religion unto the
World in the most undeniable and Constraining instances. The Persecutions of
the first Christians gained Christianity a great Repute, and made such an
entrance for it into the World, as could never be stopped up or hindered, till
Sloth, Carnality, and Superstitious conceits had corrupted the Minds and Lives
of it is Professors, and this happened after they were burdened and over
loaded, with Honors, Ease, Preferments, and a multitude of unnecessary, and
Superfluous outward Accommodations.

The Saints and people of God have met with the same Treatment in all Ages.
This has been their Lot and Portion, when they have lived amongst wicked loose
People. And we generally find that they took great Satisfaction in it. Our
blessed Savior was used thus himself. How was he reviled, scorned, reproach't,
falsely accused, Spit upon, Buffetted, Whipped, and at last disgracefully
Crucified, by a degenerate inhumane People? You see the greatest and most
absolute Innocence is not safe, from the Malicious rage, and violence of
ungodly men. The Apostles presently after, were served in the same manner. And
when they were Scourged, to render them a public scorn and reproach they went
away rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to be thus used for Christ. It is
one part of the Vocation you are called to, to suffer for Christ: Phil. 1. 29.
The more that wicked men do Load you with Contumelious Language, and oppressive
Fines and Mulcts, or do inflict on you Corporal Punishments and Torments, the
more they do to raise you to the Likeness of the blessed Jesus.

And indeed it is not the least matter of rejoicing, that they who Persecute
you, are only such as are born after the Flesh. Your Enemies, are they that are
Enemies to God and Christ; worldly, sensual, Devilish men, who glory in their
Shame, who make their Belly their God, who are Enemies to the Cross of Christ,
and whose end is Destruction. It is a much greater disgrace, to be respected
and spoken well of, by such as these, than to have them always spitting out
their Venom, and darting forth their forked Tongues and Stinge against you:
They will speak well of none but such as are infested with their Disease. They
that are the spawn of Satun, will undoubtedly have ill will to the Children of
God.

But what a rejoicing is it, that by this very means, you are so particularly
assured of a most glorious Recompense: Besides the inexpressible Consolation,
God will secretly Communicate at present, he has provided, and in a special
manner promised Incomprehensible Felicities hereafter. Mar. 5. 10, 11, 12. 1
Pet. 4. 14.

But then you must be sure that what you suffer for, be the cause of Christ.
Let it be true and real Religion, Conscience indeed, and not any groundless
Fancy, unreasonable Humor, or unaccountable Resolution and stubborness you
suffer for. Especially beware that none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a
Thief, or as an Evildoer, 1 Pet. 4. 15.
or as a busy Body in other men's Matters. These are the faults and Characters
of Persecutors themselves, and for these things men ought to suffer. See that
your Consciences be clear and well informed. Take care to understand the thing
you contend for. Weigh your Opinions and your Practices in the Balance of the
Sanctnary. Be sure your cause be Good, and then if you are Persecuted and do
suffer, come under what Denomination you will, and let your Persecutors be who
they will, of how great Power and Authority so ever, I dare and will pray that
Peace may be upon you, and upon the whole Israel of God. It is the cause that
makes the Martyr, tho it is not always the cause that makes the Persecutor.

2ly. Let this caution you, that you be not guilty of this Sin. It will be
found at last, a very dreadful thing to be a Persecutor; for by this means you
become fighters against God. And dare ye resolutely Provoke the Lord to
jealousy, 1 Cor. 10. 22.
are ye stronger than he? Did ever any set themselves against God and prosper?
The Lord Jesus does take what is done to his Followers and Disciples, as done
to himself. And he will terribly avenge himself of the Adversaries and
Destroyers of his People. You cannot hurt the People of God, Zech. 2. 8.
but you offend and pierce God himself in the Apple of his Eye. Luke 18. 7. 2.
And will not God (think you) avenge his own Elect which cry day and night into
him? I tell you be with avenge them speedily.

It were better for you, you had never been born or that some fatal, and
miserable stroke had ended your Lives, as soon as you saw the Light, than that
you should live to be Persecutors. Mat. 18. 6. have not Persecutors always come
to some fearful end?

If you would not pull down divine Vengeance on your own Heads, if you would
not make your selves and your Posterity infamous to all Generations, by
inheriting the most dreadful Curses on your Bodies, your Estates, and all your
Interests and Concerns, if you would not be the general abhorrence of mankind,
if you would not Rot away Peice-meal whilst you are alive, if you would not be
your own unpitied Executioners, if you would not be filled with Horror and
Consternation by reason of a Wounding, Terrifying and accusing Conscience, if
you would not Purchase to your selves the hottest Climate and Region in the
infernal Pit, but can be content with an ordinary Damnation, if you have no
desire to be the worst, the most miserable, the most Contemptible, of all that
shall inherit everlasting burnings, take heed of this Sin. The Devil never
feasts so deliciously, as when served with Persecutors and Informers.

How variously and strangely has God testified his Displeasure and Wrath
against Persecutors? Whole Volumes might be filled with bare Relations. Those
Judgments have been inflicted on them, to make them a scorn an abhorrence, and
a warning to Posterity, which were never known, or heard of in the World, till
they were punished and made infamous by them.

And if you be Persecutors God has the same, and greater Plagues and Judgments
in store for you.

I know there are few who apply themselves to this Course, but they flatter
themselves, and endeavor to satisfy others, with some or other false and
pretended Excuses. But alas what will these avail you, whilst they are so Thin
and Hollow not only the All-seeing-God, but the ordinary sort of People can see
thorough them? Unless the cause be too black and horrid to obtain the Patronage
of Hell, or the Actors be sordid and scandalous enough to make the Devil
ashamed of them, he will furnish with some pretense to palliate and gloss the
Fact.

But it is not enough that you have something to Plead and say in your own
defense amongst men, unless it be what will be warranted and approved by the
judge of all, for if you could so varnish the severity you use to others, as to
obtain the favorable opinion of the generality of men concerning it, what will
this avail you, if when you appear before the great Tribunal, you be found
amongst Persecutors? All false Colors, and meretricious Paint will then
disappear.

Now to secure you from this danger, it will be needful to have a constant
regard to these two Rules.

1. Have nothing to do with hurting, or contracting damages on any serious,
upright, Conscientious Christian. Be not accessory for a World to the Ruin, or
needless prejudice of any one, who stands fast in the faith of Christ. Those
who agree with us in all the Substantials of Religion, and add no dangerous or
Destructive Tenet to these, who are Holy, Sober, Chaste, Temperate, Righteous,
Compassionate and merciful, and who no way endeavor to disturb the public
peace, but are Vigorous Protestants, and resolute opposers of the common
Enemies of our Religion, and Civil Rights, they ought (especially considering
our present Circumstances) to be so far from being Persecuted and oppressed, as
to have all the Encouragement and Countenance that pious Christians, and Loyal
Subjects can claim and deserve. Do not hurt, persecute, or revile any, whom you
have reason to believe the Lord Jesus will own, approve and honor. Will Christ
ever thank men at the great day for keeping such out form Communion with his
Church, Dr. Stilling. Irenic. praef.
whom he will vouchsafe not only Crowns of Glory to, but it may be Aureolae
too, if there be any such thing there?

It had been well for Pilate, Mat. 27. 19.
if he had hearkened to that seasonable message, have thou nothing to do with
that just man.

2. Take heed of, and avoid the very appearances of this Sin. Keep at as great
a distance from it, as possible. Do not Cherish in your minds, any thing that
may engage, or incline to it. Cast away all unjust Prejudices, Mortify Wrath
and Anger: and shut your Ears against them that would incense you against
those, you differ from, by reporting false and malicious stories of them.

Supposing it could not properly be called Persecution to prosecute, and be
severe with People about those things, which you are satisfied in your own
minds, God has not concerned himself about, either by Commanding or forbidding
them, yet your Ruining or making others suffer extremely for these things,
whilst they have other apprehensions either of the Nature or use of them, will
unavoidably look too like Persecution (I think) for a serious Compassionate
Christian to tolerate himself in. This seems not to have any of that Meekness,
Condescension, and Forbearance our Religion does so expressly and so vehemently
enforce.

Nay your addicting your selves to such Courses will endanger the indearing of
a rough, sour, and unpeaceable temper to you. And it may be it will at last
hurry you, into such Exorbitances, as you did not at first either Design, or
think of; nay which will amount to inexcusable and downright Persecution.

This will certainly make way for your entertaining very unjust Prejudices
against others. It will lay you liable to greater Transports in your Passions.
It will expose you to more and stronger Temptations, than you are at first
aware of, it will lay you open to the wiles of Satan, that cunning Adversary,
and great destroyer of the Godly.

Nay it is probable enough, that when those Christian Sentiments and Resolves,
you do at present retain, are a little worn off, and by disuse become feeble,
the very desire and ambition of acquaintance with men of Power and Repute, who
are Enemies to Protestants as such, may engage you in those Practices, which
both your deceitful Hearts and the better hopes of others, made you believe you
should for ever detest.

Satan very seldom Attempts to draw any man to direct Persecution at first; He
only leads them at first to the out-skirts, and Fleshes them by degrees. But
when he has once brought men to take Pleasure in seeing others suffer, tho not
for real Religion, the sweetness of Blood, or the Satisfaction of getting
Wealth, or the Honor of being caressed by great men, will endanger to qualify
them to undertake with unconcernedness and Triumph the most barbarous and
inhumane Persections imaginable.

Men know not where they shall stop, if once they give way to Satan, or their
own corrupt Inclinations in matters of this Nature. People do sometimes Act
those things under the Alteration of their outward Estate and Condition, and
become so extremely Savage and cruel as they could not before imagine, which
they could not endure to think of without the highest Concernment and
Indignation. 2 Kings 8. 12, 13.

But notwithstanding all this, you may express your, Love to, and Zeal for the
Church, its Service, and its Ceremonies, sufficiently other ways. I dissuade
not from any Methods, which do any way tend to the Honor of our Church, or to
the making of real Proselytes: But only from those which endanger its
Reputation, and are not at all Suitable to the Matter and Occasion of our
Differences. I would persuade you to be as Faithful as possible to the Church
and its Interests, but not to express your Zeal in so confused and Preposterous
away, as will be destructive to humane Society, or endanger your washing your
Hands in the Blood of Innocents: Use all the Scripture, and rational Arguments
you can, to Winn upon, and Overcome, and Convince them that Dissent, but beware
of Extremity and Violence.

How Ridiculous and Absurd is it, to hear Men Talk very Gravely at sometimes,
that the Church has no Weapons but Tears and Prayers, and yet presently to see
the same Men using Rods, and Swords, and Axes in the Churches Behalf? When the
Church is in danger of being Clouded, Eclypsed, and Overcome, and Suppressed by
Popery, then it is unlawful to endeavor to help ourselves, we must only lie
Prostrate, and try if we can wash away our Sorrow with our Tears, or at most,
content our selves with Lord help us. But when we consider them we have got an
Ascendency over, it becomes Glorious (and indeed is more than Christian) to
Swagger and Triumph, and tread upon Men of the same Regligion with our selves,
only because they differ from us in some unhappy Circumstances.

When the Church does stand upon its proper Basis, and shines in its Native
Beauty and Luster, Js. 65. 25.
there will be no hurting in God's Holy Mountain.

That Method which has most of Lenity, Forbearance, Love, and Meekness, does
best comport with the Nature and Design of Christianity, and most answers that
Temper, our Savior and his Apostles commended to the World, both by their
Practices and Precepts. Luke 9. 55. 2 Timothy 2. 24.

3ly. Let me say a few Words to you that are Persecutors, you that are
Vilifying and Reproaching, Fining, and Distraining on, Murdering and tearing in
Pieces the Members of Jesus Christ, if you have any Shadow of Humanity yet
remaining, be persuaded to refletect on what you do, consider what your
Condition is, If you are not become Cruel like the Ostriches in the Wildernese:
If your Consciences be not feared with a hot Iron: Lam. 4. 3.
If you do not believe that your Impieties are a sure and impregnable Safeguard
and Defense against all the Thuander-Bolts of God's Vengeance, 1 Timothy 4. 2.
if you think they do not make you as Impenetrable by the Arrows of the
Almighty, as the Scales of the Leviathan, render him by the Arrows which are
commonly cast at him, then deliberate a while, and think seriously, whether one
time or other, you shall not be ashamed of, and sorry for what you now
perpetrate? If you Believe there is any Truth, or any Honesty, or any things
that are Pure, or Just, or Lowly, or of good Report, or if there be any Virtue,
then consider how contrary to, and inconsistent with all these, Persecution is.

Persecution is a Sin that destroys common Humanity: It makes you much more fit
to be banished from all Reasonable Society, to abide in the Wilderness and
Desert, with the Ravenous Devouring Monsters you resemble, than to be permitted
to Prey on those, who are as Humble as the Child, as Meek and Innocent as the
Dove.

You that are Informers and Persecutors, be you who you will, of what Name,
Size, Quality soever, you are of the worst Extraction of all other Creatures.
John 8. 44.
Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the Lusts of your Father, ye will do; He
was a Murderer from the Beginning, and abode not in the Truth, because there is
no Truth in Him. And if you Believe not this, you may read the Reason of your
Unbelief in the next Verse. verse. 45.
Because I tell you the Truth, ye Believe me not.

You are at present the Reproach of Humane Race. Judgments and Curses of the
greatest Size do await you here, and are ready to be poured out upon you, to
make you Instances of astonishing Vengeance, an Abhorrence to all the World,
and an Insupportable Bur than unto your selves. Nor is this your whole Portion,
for more than ordinary Wrath, those Torments, and Horrors, which have peculiar,
and most envenomed Mixtures in them, are prepared and kept in Store, to make
your Eternity. more amazing and dreadful, than that which will for ever be the
Punishment of other Sinners

If Depart from me ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels, be the mildest Sentence which shall be Pronounced on them, who have
only withheld their Charity, and not administered to the Necessities of
Christ's Members; what a terrible Damnation must you expect, who have both
hardened your selves against all their Tears, and Complaints, their Groans and
Entreaties, and added Affliction to their Affliction? What will be your Doom
when Christ shall come to be Glorified in his Saints, and shall charge you in
particular with pulling the Food out of the Mouths, and Clothes from the Backs
of his dearest Children, yea with eating their very Flesh, and drinking their
Blood? With taking from them their Means for Subsistence, rifling their Houses,
devouring their Goods, wasting their Estates, and haling them to Goals and
Prisons?

You that Persecute the Righteous, that you may maintain your Lusts, and
gratify your Luxurious Appetites and Desires, with their Wealth and Estates,
there is a dreadful Hand of Vengeance ready to appear against you. For all your
Huffing and Hectoring, your Swearing and Damning, your Carouzing and Quaffing,
your Healthing and Whoring, for all your seeming Jollity and Mirth, your
Countenances will change, Paleness shall seize your Faces, Astonishment and
Fear your Minds: You are at present but acting afresh Belshazzar's Folly and
Wickedness: Dan. 5.
You are drinking the Blood of Innocents instead of Wine, you are Feasting your
selves with the Substance of the Righteous. The Vessels you use, are Purchased
with the Lives and Estates of the Just and Upright. For these things God will
not Refrain, verse. 5.
but will certainly be Avenged of such Wickedness. When the Divine Hand does
write your Doom (as certainly it will) then will your Countenance be changeed,
verse. 9.
and your Thoughts troubled, the Joints of your Loins will be loosed, and your
Knees will smite one against another. Your making your selves Drunk with Wine,
and your being compassed about with great Men and Nobles, with your Wives and
Concubines, will not preserve you from these Effects.

What will you say for your own Vindication, when the Lord Jesus shall appear
in all his Glory, and particularly charge you, with Hurting, Defaming,
Impoverishing, Starving, Fining, and Murdering this and that Friend, Servant
or Child of his? For all your confident Domineering at present, tho you look
and talk now, as if you would Frown, and Threaten, and Swear them, and all that
are Advocates for them into Goals, nay in to their Graves, and were it possible
lower than that; a Time is hastening when Shame and Confusion will cover your
Faces, and an Ignominious Silence shall betray your Guilt. A Day is now
approaching when you will think it a kind of Happiness, if you might slink
privately into the Places of Eternal Torment, and so escape the Solemn
Reprimand and Condemnation you must have for this Sin in particular, before all
the World.

I know there are several things you insist on, to justify your selves in what
you do. But alas, they are such poor, and thin, and slight Excuses, they will
be so far from yielding you any Relief in the Judgment-day, that had you any
Shame, or Grace, and Modesty, you would blush to name them at present. And that
you may not any longer cheat your selves with a vain Pretense, that you have
enough to justify you in what you do; I will briefly name what you principally
trust to, and then show you how foolish and impertinent such Excuses be.

There are three things generally Insisted on by Informers, and Persecutors for
their own Vindication: They are these. 1. They say they do no more than what
the Law does Countenance them in. 2. The Persons they Prosecute are Dangerous,
Seditious, Rebellious People. 3. What they do, is out of Love to, and Zeal for
the Church.

These things are commonly alleged, and People do depend on them as Sufficient
and Unanswerable. But how unjust these Pretenses be, when pleaded by Foreign
Persecutors of the Protestants, I hope all are satisfied who do heartily
approve the Reformation. Now the Prosecution of Dissenting Protestants amongst
our selves, is generally defended by the same Arguments. And tho I acknowledge
there is a great Difference in the things, on the account of which the
Protestants are Prosecuted here, and in other palces, yet all those Abatements
being allowed for, the generality of our Fierce and Furious Prosecutors cannot
be excused from Guilt by these Instances. This will appear more clearly if we
consider the Particulars pleaded distinctly, and by themselves.

First, 1st.
You say you do no more than the Law allows. To this I answer in these
following Particulars.

Vid. Dr. Burnet's Pref. to his Hist. of the Rights of Princ. etc.
And often times when the Law is on a Man's side, as to the matter of what he
does, it is against him in the Method he observes. This is undeniably Evident
in the Prosecution of the Protestants in France.

2. Those who have had as good Opportunities as any others,

Vid. Res. of House of Comm. Jan. 10. 80. which seems very consonant with our
Sovereign. Judgm. when at Braeda.
by them who understand the Nature, the Tendency, and the Obligation of these
Laws, as well, or better than any of the Violent and Outrageous Prosecutors of
them. And tho this cannot Repeal or make Null the Laws, yet the public Opinion
of so great, Honorable, and August an Assembly, should have so much Influence,
as to check the inordinate Zeal some are too apt to lay out in their
unnecessary Informations and Presentiments.

4. If you must needs express your Zeal for established Laws, there are others
which you may understand more easily, and viz. Those Laws which are made
against Swearing, Drunkenness, Profaning the Lord's Day etc. Have not those
Laws which are enforced by God as well as Men, as great a Power and Authority
over you, as those which are only Humane Sanctions? Your talking of the Law is
of no weight, whilst you your selves do resolutely Transgress every Day, those
Laws which are of greater and more general life.

2 ly. But you say in the second Place, that those you Prosecute are Dangerous,
Seditious, and Rebellious People.

If you can prove this Charge against them, in Gods Name go on and never spare
them. Answ.
But is it not very Unjust to say they are Rebellious, and not prove any thing
of this Nature against them? Why do you not inform against them under this
Notion, and then prove it substantially against them? But to talk thus, and
when all comes to be inquired into, it is nothing but for serving God, when it
may be, you were serving the Devil, and your Lusts in a Tavern or Brothel
House, is the most villianous Wickedness imaginable.

Is not this to write after the most extravagant Instance we have in the French
Persecutors? Present State of Protest. in France, p. 21.
Nay is it not to outdo what is reported of the Intendant of Rochefort who
Suppressed a Protestant Minister, when the Deponent could say no more, but that
tho there was nothing to be found fault with in his Words, yet he perceived his
Thoughts were not Innocent?

Besides many of those you Prosecute, have given great Demonstrations of their
Loyalty, having suffered more in the late Times of Usurpation, for the King,
than many, if not all of you have, and contributing much more to the bringing
of him back to his Crown, and other just Rights. Those who never did more for
the King, than make themselves Drunk with drinking his Health, are not fit to
compare in Point of Loyalty with them that lost their Estates, and hazarded
their Lives for him. And many of the most considerable Dissenters, Dr. Burnets
Fast Sermon. on 30 of Jan. 1681 p. 16.
did even then, when it was not so safe to do it, as it is now, openly declare
against it (i. e. the Murder of the late King) both in their Sermons and
Writings. This is what in Justice cannot be denied them, and many of them were
no less Active and Industrious, and were indeed highly Instrumental in the
bringing home of his Majesty that now Reigns.

3 ly. 3ly.
You pretend that all you do is out of Love to, and Zeal for the Church. To
which I offer these following Considerations, which may discover how false this
Pretense is.

1. You are not qualified to do the Church any Service. The your Lives, than by
any one thing whatsoever. All the Dissenters in the Nation cannot prejudice the
Church half so much, as you drunken, swearing, profane Informers and
Persecuters do.

Indeed the Church would be much better without you, than with you. And could
she proceed against you in some of those ways, you would have her use against
others, she would do herself great Right, and very much commend that Purity,
and Holiness and Strictness, which would greatly adorn her, and which is by
your means very much Obscured.

Can any thing reflect more upon a Church, than to have those Men countenanced
in Prosecuting others, who do themselves discover no real Love to God or
Religion, and of whom no good can be said by others, nay who have nothing to
say in their own Vindication, but that when they are in the height of their
Debauches, when they are Drunk and Profane enough to be the Reproach and
Abhorrence of all Society, they do then pretend to admire and applaud the
Church, and to decry, and rail at, and swear against Dissenters?

You do the Church an unspeakable Injury, you prejudice her almost beyond
Repair, by pretending either Love for, or Alliance unto her. For by this means
you do what you are able to Represent her to Strangers, as the only Receptacle
of, and Sanctuary for the most infamous Criminals and Villains. It is no Credit
to any Woman, be she never so Chaste, Sober, and Honest, that the greatest
Debauches, and lewdest Miscreants are encouraged for her Service, and claim her
Patronage.

And that which renders you still more unfit for this Service. you intrude your
selves into, is, that you would make the Church consist only of such as your
selves, and dare impudently decry all the Sober, Moderate, and Pious
Conformists, with the same Virulence you set your selves against them you call
Nonconformists. So that were it in your Power, you would turn the Church into a
mere Stew, or Alehouse, or School of Sin and Debauchery.

There are, Dr. Fowler's Assize Sermon. 1681. p. 29.
God knows, too too many Debauchees in the Nation, who would be thought great
Champions for the King and the Church, but do infinite Prejudice to both, by
the mad and frantic Expressions of their Zeal, who do mighty honor to
Fanaticism, by charging all with it, that run not with them to the same Excess
of Riot.

As to all those who pretend to be of our Communion, and yet live scandalous
Lives, Dr. Sharp's Sermon. before the House of Commons April. 11. 1679.
and think that their owning themselves for the Sons of the Church, will make
Atonement for their Immoralities, it is to be feared they have done us more
hurt, then ever they will do us good. And unless they would reform, it may
perhaps be wished that we were rid of them. Let them declare themselves
Fanatics, Papists, any thing rather than Members of the Church of England. It
would perhaps be more desirable to Live in a mean, low, afflicted Condition
without such Company, than to govern the World with it.

2. This is an old Hypocritical pretense with which the Enemies Hear the word
of the Lord ye that tremble at his Word, your brethren that hated you, Is. 66.
5.
that cast you out for my Names sake, said, let the Lord be Glorified, but he
shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed. They pretended what they
did against them that trembled at the word of the Lord, was for the Church, and
that God might be Glorified, but yet God would bring them to shame for their
Hypocrisy.

I am afraid there are many who talk high for the Church, who would be glad to
see her welter in her own Blood, or consumed to Ashes with those flames they
hope to kindle by their own furious, or intemperate Zeal. People who are wicked
enough notwithstanding their loud Cries for the Church, to set her on Fire
themselves, and then like Nero, Triumph, and Dance, and Sing, when they behold
her devouring Flames, and utter Devastation.

As some in the late times did very wickedly face Rebellion with the name of
Religion, so it is to be feared some in these days do Cloak Popery, Revenge,
and hatred to all Piety, with the name of the Church. All that swear by the
name of the Lord, and make mention for the God of Israel, Is. 48. 1.
do not do it in. Truth nor in Righteousness.

3. Your not Prosecuting them, who play and drink, or walk is not any hearty
Concernment for Religion, or the honor of the Church of England, which ingages
you in these Methods, but rather an invincible Detestation to Holiness and
Truth as such. Could you with the like Impurity, shut up our Church doors, and
revile our Liturgy, and cast contempt on our Bishops, and all the other serious
and hearty Officers of our Church, who oppose and contradict you in your Lusts
and wickedness, it is not much to be doubted, but you would be as severe and
Tyrannous this way, as you be the other.

If you have such Love to the Church, why are you so mild and favorable, and
gentle toward the Papists, who are as great Enemies to the state as to the
Church? Why are you not for getting those Laws executed which are in force,
against Field and Street walkers, and those that haunt Alehouses, and Taverns,
and who are playing at Cards, or Dice, when they should be at Church? And those
who are rattling about in their Coaches, or other ways Conveying themselves
from one place to another, on the Lords day, and in time of divine Service, to
perform some idle and Sacrilegious visits?



Suppose you should force many to come within the Doors of our Churches, by
harsh and severe Proceedings, what is our Church the better for this? Can you,
together with outward Compulsion, infuse into their minds an affectionate Love
to, and unfeigned Approbation of our Service and worship? If not, you may make
our Church fuller of Hypocrites than she was before, but not fuller of real and
Cordial Proselytes; you may turn the places for our public worship into
Prisons, if you please, but you cannot by these mean's make the Dissenters a
willing People in the day of your Power.

The members of the Church must be Volunteers, and not Pressed men. Such as are
forced will never do acceptable Service. They will embrace the first
Opportunity to relinquish and bespatter us.

It has hitherto been the certain Property and Character of Heterodox,
Heretical, Popish, and Antichristian Churches and People, to Persecute and
oppress others, or to use violent, fierce, and ruining Courses to advance
themselves and their Interests. And it was the way of the pure Christian
Church, anciently, and since the Reformation, to use no Methods with their
Enemies, but what were full of Reason, Scripture, Meekness, and Christian
Forbearance.

The learned Bishop of St. Asaph, Sermon. before the House of Lords, November. 5
th. 1680. p. 8.
does determine the Question, who are the Church of God? Or who are the Enemies
of it? By bringing it to this issue. That they who are most given to hate and
destroy others, especially those who differ from them in Religion, they are not
the Church of God, or at least they are so far Corrupt in that Particular.

These Courses do not agree and suit with the Temper and Constitution of our
Church. And therefore I am afraid they who use these Methods, or countenance
and encourage them who appear boistrous in them, are either ignorant of, and
Strangers to our Constitution, or implacable Enemies to our Church. Instead of
doing the Church any Service, they seem to study to do her all the mischief
they can, under a contrary pretense. It is not the Genius of our Church, Id. p.
20.
she has no Doctrine that teaches Persecution, she has not Practiced it, as
others, when they were in Authority, I thank God for it, and I hope she will
always continue in that Temper, which being added to the other Marks of a true
Christian Church, may assure no that she is a Church according to the mind of
Christ.

It was one thing that did not a little Commend the Protestant Religion to the
world, that after it is Establishment in these Nations, tho Popery gained Power
again in these Kingdoms, and influenced it is Professors to treat the
Protestants with all the Cruelty and outrage that Religion does inspire men
with, or direct them to, yet when in Queen Elizabeth's Reign Popery was
cashiered, and the Protestants had the Power and Laws on their side, they used
no Violence, Fury, or revenge at all; Tho living in the midst of them, whose
dearest Friends and Relations they had Murdered, and tho Protestants could say
there goes he that burnt my Father, or he that Murdered my Brother, Id. p. 28.
or that brought them to that cruel Death, tho the Queen her self could say who
they were that in her Sisters time, dealt most insolently and barbarously with
her, yet when she came to be their Queen, for ten years, she touched not a Hair
of any of their Heads.

Notwithstanding Bonner had in the preceding Reign been a most bloody and
barbarous Persecutor of the Protestants, Dr. Burnets Hist. Refor. part. 2 d. p.
396.
and had often in his Persecution of them exceeded what the Law allowed, yet
this was not revenged upon him, no, so far were the Reformers from doing any
thing that might look like Revenge that he was suffered to go about in safety,
and was not made a Sacrifice to the Revenge of those who had lost their next
Friends by his means.

It was Peace, and Love, and Mercy, and Condescension and Meekness, which
brought Repute to this Church formerly, and adorned it in it is most flourishing
state: And why should you now change it is ancient Methods, if your Love to it,
be the same, and your Zeal as Regular, as was that of our first and best
Reformers?

4ly. 4ly.
In the fourth place this discovers what ill Offices they do (whether they be
of the Clergy, or in other places of Power) who are continually Exciting people
to inform against all Dissenters, without making any difference. Peoples
spirits are apparently overheated already. They are cast into too Violent a
ferment; And therefore rather then use any means to exasperate their Passions
more, we ought all in our places, to do what we can, to cool these hearts, and
reduce men to more calm, and gentle Tempers. Especially should this be the care
and study of them, who pretend they have a Right to that Character, of being
Ambassadors, and Heralds of Peace. Your loud Declamations, your Passionate
and envenomed Instigations, and your founding Alarms from the Pulpit against
Dissenters in general; will not please, nor gratify nor benefit any, but the
sensual, debauched part of your Auditors. This will endanger the creating ill
apprehensions of the way you pretend to, in the minds of the Soberer and more
harmless sort. Such kind of Preaching will be Interpreted, but like clapping
your Hands, and lowing on the Dogs, which instead of bringing People into the
Church, will be apt to drive them out of the Churchyard. St. Paul directs us
to a more Christian Method, and such an one as will, if generally, faithfully,
and diligently observed (and we are qualified to make use of it) make thousands
of more real Proselytes to our Church, than common Informations, Fines, and
other Punishments will make, 2 Timothy 2. 24. 25.

5ly. 5ly.
This calls for your Prayers for, and your Commiseration, and pity, and what
other help and Assistance you are able to Administer to them that are
Persecuted.

You have this day heard that your Neighbour-Protestants are in a very
Afflicted and Calamitous Estate. This calls for your Pity, your Prayers, your
Help, and what relief you can afford them.

You know not how soon your own Condition may be the same with theirs, if you
will resolutely adhere to your Religion, and dare not deny Christ and his
Gospel; you are at present safe, you enjoy the Protestant Religion peaceably,
but you have no assurance, this prosperous and shining Day will continue long.

Now if you would find help, and relief from others, when destitute, afflicted,
and persecuted, have some regard to, and let your Bowels yern over your
persecuted Neighbors, in this their day of affliction. Nature, Religion,
Christianity, all that is good and excellent entreat, and importune your
Charity. Can you deny these sufferers? Can you withhold any thing from Christ,
imploring and beseeching your Commiseration in these his afflicted, persecuted
Members? Can you eat and drink, and feast your selves, and be merry, and have
no concern for Christ's wandering, naked, indigent, distressed Servants and
Followers? Ye that put far away the Evil day, and cause the seat of Violence to
come near, that lie upon Beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their
Couches, Amos 6. 3. to the 8. v.
and eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the
stall, that chant to the sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves
Instruments of Music like David, that drink Wine in Bowls, and anoint
themselves with the chief Ointments, but they are not grieved for the
affliction of Joseph. Therefore now shall they go Captive, with the first that
go Captive, and the Banquet of them that stretched themselves, shall be removed.

But that you may be more duly affected with their Condition, Dr. Burnet's
praef. to his Hist. of the Rights of Princes in the disposing of
*Ecclesiastical benefices, etc. p. 54. etc.
I will lay before you the same Account, which is given of it, by the most
impartial, learned, and Celebrated Historian of this age. The account is this.

Those born in the Communion of the Church of Rome are required not to change
their Religion, which was left free before. Schools and Colleges are
suppressed in most places. The Churches which the Protestants had in the
Country or small Towns, are generally raised, and all Religious meetings in
private houses are forbidden. The Synods and Colloquies of their Clergy are
fordidden except a Popish Commissioner is present, the singing of Psalms is
Prohibited. When they are sick, they are forced to admit the Popish Magistrates
to come with Witnesses to exhort them to change their Religion: no Midwives are
permitted to Practice but Papists, that so they may baptize their Children,
Vid. Present State of the Protestants in France, and the policy of the Clergy
of Fran. to destroy the Protestants of that Kingdom.
upon which it may be afterward pretended, if they continue Protestants, that
they are reliapsed, because they were baptized by a Papist, and the Punishment
of this is Terrible. No Minister, Elder, or Deacon may go and visit their
flocks, to confirm them in their Relgion, when they are Wavering in it;
Accusations are brought upon the sleightest Pretenses against the Ministers or
others that are noted for their Zeal in the cause of Religion, upon which
Orders for their imprisonment are easily given out, and they are either forced
to fly, or are ruined by a long imprisonment. And the intendants of the
Provinces oppress them most unmercifully, with design, as may be easily
guessed, to drive them into a Rebellion, that so a pretense may be given to
destroy them all at once. No Protestants can be admitted to any Charge or
Employment, how mean soever it be. Nor may they be received to any Trading or
Mechanical Corporation. And to take from them all Confidence, or Credit in
Trade, if any Protestant merchant turns Papist he cannot be sued for his
Accounts, or Debts, for three years thereafter. And these Orders are much
heavier in the manner in which they are Executed.

The present Proceedings in Poictu show what the rest are to look for, the
Mercenary Agents of Mr. Pelisson prevailed so far on the Weaknesses and
Necessities of many, Id. p. 59.
as to draw them to adjure their Religion, but not a few of these soon after
repenting of that base Bargain, by which for a few Crowns, they had sold their
Souls, and openly Expressing their Horror for it, were clapped in Prison, where
they lie still in great Misery, only their Numbers are such that it seems it is
not thought fit to proceed to Extremities against so many at once.

But the Intendant of that Province, Mr. De Marilliac, whether directed by
secret Orders, or set on by the fierceness of his own Temper, or by his
Confessors is not known, Id. p. 62.
is resolved to take a severe Revenge of the rest of that Religion, for the
sake of those unhappy Relapses, and has treated them not as Peaceable and
Obedient Subjects, but as open Rebels, and declared Enemies. Their Goods and
their Houses are Robbed, and their Persons violently assaulted, and all that,
is done by the Intendants Order. The Soldiers under his Command are lodged only
in the Houses of those of the Religion, where they do not only ruin their
Hosts, by the Excessive Charge they put them to, and by the Contributions they
exact from them, but use all the means they can think of to frighten them out
of their Religion; tho the horrid Oaths and Blasphemies they break out daily
in, are but ill Arguments to persuade Men to turn. If they refuse to go to Mass
they Cudgel them, they Drag the Women by the Hair of the Head, with Ropes about
their Necks, they Torture some with their Screws, they bind Men of eighty years
of Age, and abuse their Children before their Eyes. And such of the Soldiers
as are not Guilty of those Cruelties, yet spoil and rob their Goods, and sell
them publicly, they threaten them often with Death, if they will not change,
having naked Swords in their Hands, or holding Pistols to their Breasts. And if
all these Means are Ineffectual, then they carry them in Sheets to Churches,
and fling Holy Water on them, and tell them now they are made Catholics, and
if they return again to their Heresy, they threaten them, they will Accuse them
as Relapsers. And when Housekeepers are by these Means quite Ruined, yet they
must not give up their Houses, tho they can keep them no longer, but are Fined
500 Livers if they quit them. And that which has always bin the Privilege of
the Miserable, is now denied them, for when they come to Complain of these
Violences to the Intendant, He without hearing them, or observing the common
Forms of Justice, sends them presently to Prison, and keeps them still there,
without framing any Process against them, and not content with all this, tho it
is scarce to be imagined what can come after it, or rise beyond it; when he
heard that Complaints were made of these Outrages to the King, he sent upon
that, his Officers to may of their Houses, to force them to Sign a Denial of
the Truth of these Violences, which they had Suffered.

And that which aggravates their Misery, and therefore renders them more
deserving of our Commiseration and Help, is, that they are a People, who have
done extraordinary Services for the Crown, and could never yet be charged with
any undutiful Demeanor to the Government. And they have the same Rights and
Privileges with the other Subjects, assured to them by as firm Edicts, and
binding Laws, as any by which that Nation is governed: And yet purely on the
account of their Religion, without the Guilt or Charge of any Fault, and in
direct Contradiction to those Laws which were made, and often Confirmed for
their Security, are they now Persecuted to the Degree before mentioned.

This shows that neither the best Services, the greatest Innocence, the highest
Merits, nor the most Sacred and Solemn Ties, Engagements or Laws can secure a
Protestant People from being treated as the vilest Criminals and Rebels, when
under the Power, Influence and Authority of a Popish Bigoted Prince:

6 ly, 6ly.
Which in the last place calls us all to prepare our selves for Persecution.
What Clouds do hang over us? What Storms do threaten us! We are none of us
Ignorant of the Attempts which have bin made, and are still carrying on, to
Supplant and Overthrow the Protestant Religion, and to bring in Popery amongst
us, as an overflowing Stream.

And that which greatly threatens our loss of the Gospel, and those Ordinances
we have long enjoyed, is both the great and general Increase of Wickedness and
Debauchery amongst us, and that too many of those who have pretended to desire
and endeavor our Security and Reformation, have set up for Atheism, or at
least have declared themselves Enemies to the Scripture, the Deity of Christ,
the public Ministry, and all Ordinances. And it is not much different whether
we have our Bibles, our Services, and public Administrations in Latin, or
whether we have none at all. These things do Witness against us, and unless we
do throughout the Nation, set upon a serious and vigorous Reformation, we may
expect our Candlestick will be removed; and that we shall either be stripped of
all our present Enjoyments, or at most but Inherit the Name of them. And if
such days do come, then all who will Live Godly, must certainly suffer
Persecution.

Nor do I at all doubt, but if either Popery, or Atheism, or both, have in
these Nations, the Countenance and Encouragement of a Prince, the very same Men
who are now Violent against Protestants, and pious People, will then with
greater Fury Persecute, Oppress and Destroy all that will either own and
worship God, or reprove themselves avowed Protestants.

Let us therefore study the Scripture diligently, be thoroughly informed in the
Christian Faith, get our Hearts raised to an unconquerable Admiration and Love
of the Blessed Jesus. Let us take heed of placing too much Confidence on a
Natural Resolution, or Humane Strength. Let us learn to resign up our selves
entirely unto Christ; and Pray daily that we may not fear any of those things
which we shall Suffer, but that we may be so strengthened and assisted by the
Spirit of Grace, that we may approve our selves Faithful unto Death. Thus we
may attain to Inherit a Crown of Glory, which God of his infinite Mercy bring
every one of us unto, for the Merits Sake of Jesus Christ, our Blessed and only
Savior, and Redeemer, to whom with the Father, etc.

FINIS.

