THE Justice of Peace HIS CALLING AND QUALIFICATIONS.

(...). Dion. Cass. lib. XXXVI. Page 13. Provida severitate cavisti, ne fundata
Legibus Civitas, eversa legibus videretur. C. Plin. Pan. Traj. Cap. XXXIV. Ye
shall do no unrighteousness in judgment; thou shall not respect the person of
the Poor, nor honor the person of the Mighty: but in righteousness shall thou
judge thy Neighbor. Lev. 19. v. 15. By Edmund Bohun Esquire

LONDON, Printed for T. Salusbury, at the King's-Arms next St. Dunstan's Church
in Fleet Street. 1693.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe first thing that is usually inquired after in a Book, is, who writ it? and
according as the Author is liked or disapproved, the Sentence often is passed
without taking the pains to examine one tittle of it.

Could my Name have g^^en any reputation to the Book, it had perhaps not been
concealed; but I am none of those, who have acquired any Fame in the World, nor
of them that desire it.

The only design of these following Leaves, is, to do good; and if I may attain
my end, I desire no thanks: And if I miss it, I am as unwilling to reap
Reproaches or Hatred; so that if I may but be unknown, it is all I aspire to.

I am forced by my Subject, to reflect sometimes sharply on the Follies, and
Vices of Men in Authority, and I must expect this will anger them, and it will
be a much easier Task (in revenge) to inquire into my faults, than to amend and
reform their own; and if they can find me as culpable as themselves, this will
be taken for a sufficient reason, why they should not endeavor to be better,
because their Reprover has his faults, as well as they, and, it may be,
greater.

The Author of the Whole Duty of Man, and all those excellent Pieces that
followed, is as much to be admired for his Prudent, and Modest Concealment of
himself, as for any other thing; and I am fully persuaded that those pieces
have done the more good in the World, because they seem to drop from Heaven,
and no man claims the Honor of having written them. And as I have endeavored
to imitate that brave Man: so I should esteem it a mighty happiness, if I might
be as little known, as he, and this discourse might but prove half so useful to
the World, as any one of his have done.

It was long since observed by Cicero, That there was not any sort of Life,
whether Public or Private, at home or abroad, whether a man conversed with
others, or himself only; which was destitute of its peculiar Rules, and that
the Excellence of Life consisted in Acting according to them, all as Turpitude
did in neglecting them. And the Lord Bacon in his Seventh Book of the
Advancement of Learning, having distributed that part of Morality, which relate
to the Duties of Men, into the General, or Particular or Respective, according
to every man's Profession, Calling, State, Person, and Degree, thus goes on. The
first of these, I have already observed, is diligently Cultivated, and
Explicated by the Ancients, and others: and the latter is by Parts also treated
of, though I never found it reduced into any perfect body of Science, nor do I
blame the thus handling of it in parts; and perhaps it is better so to do. For
who is of that Capacity or Confidence, that he either can or dare undertake to
discourse and desire pertinently, and to the Life, of the particular and
Relative Duties of all Orders, and Conditions of Men? And those discourses of
such Subjects as these, which are destitute of Experience, and are only drawn
from a General Knowledge, and Scholastic Learning, for the most part prove
vain, and useless. For though the Stander by do sometime see more than the
Gamester; and there is a Proverb which is more bold, than sound, as it relates
to the Censure of the Rabble concerning the Actions of Princes, That he that
stands in the Valley can best view the Mountain, yet it were much to be wished,
that no man would concern himself with these sorts of Subjects, but he that was
very expert, and well acquainted with them. For the discourses of Speculative
Men on Practical Subjects, seem nothing better to them that are Conversant, and
acquainted with them, than the discourses of of Phormio concerning War seemed
to Hannibal, who took them for mere Dreams, and Delusions. But there is one
fault usually attends this Experimental sort of Writers, that they never know
when they have commended, and Extolled their Province enough.

Thus far that Great Man has discoursed of these sorts of Duties, but I having
him in Latin have perhaps taken off something of the Elegance of his Style, by
turning it into English: yet it will give the Reader his sense of these
undertakings, and whether I have done my part well or ill belongs not to me,
but to him to determine; only I will assure my Reader I did not consult many
Books for it, but I have rather endeavored to represent things as I found them
by Experience.

Nor do I know of any one who before me has made any such Attempt, for tho
many have written the Law-part both in former times, and of late; yet the Moral
part is either totally neglected, or only to be found in Sermons, or some hints
in other discourses, which are very much too short to give a clear, and
satisfactory Account, and two much dispersed to be suddenly Collected.

Yet there is hardly any Subject, that more deserves or needs a discourse of
this Nature, whether we consider the Office I treat of, or the persons that are
employed in it.

The Office of a Justice of Peace is of a vast extent, and if my Reader be but
pleased to consult the Heads of this discourse, he will find it is no barren
Subject for Moral Reflections: there is no one Virtue in the World of which a
Justice of Peace, as such, will not sometimes stand in need, and there is no
Vice neither, which will not look worse in him then in another man; but I have
only selected them that were most pertinent to my Subject, and for the rest my
Reader may much better consult other Writers.

And I have endeavored to discourse of Virtues, and Vices, in another manner
then the Moralists usually do, and it did well befit me so to do, while I
considered them as the Attendents of a public person, which had a great
influence upon the Community. For a good Justice of Peace is a public
ble^^^ng, and does more good by his example (or might do; if such were not too
usually envied, and hated) than by his Authority.

And again, a Wicked Ruler by his ill example corrupts more, than he can reform
by his Severity.

If we consider the persons, that execute this Office, such a discourse must
needs be very useful; for tho the Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Ma^esties
Privy-Counsellors, and these Judges that go the several Circuits, and, in
short, almost all the Great Ministers of State and Great Men of the Nation, are
a part of them, and are named in all the Commssiions; yet the persons who
reside in the several Counties, and do actually execute the Office, are for the
most part, Noblemen, and Lay-Gentlemen, or Lawyers; whose Education has not
generally necessitated them to those Studies, that are requisite to fit them
for such Moral Reflections, and those, that are best acquainted with them, will
yet be pleased perhaps to see this discourse ready laid together to their
hands, and I am not without all hopes that some, or other may be so far
displeased with what what I have done, as to do it better; for I will not deny
that the Subject deserves a better Head, and Pen than mine: and it would please
me to see the use of this superseeded by a better.

But till this is done, I have only one Request to make to my Reader, That he
would heartily interpret what I have written; not out of a design to find
fault, and instruct my Betters; but kindly to represent to them the loveliness
of Virtue, and the baseness, and turpitude of Vice, that so my Reader may from
thence take occasion to reform himself in what is amiss, and to give God hearty
thanks for preserving him from the rest of those Crimes, which have not yet
touched him.

And as for those, who may take exceptions, I do assure them I never intended
to reflect personally upon any one man in the World, and I fear there is no one
passage in the whole Book, but what may too pertinently be applied to too great
a Number of Men, I wish it were otherwise.

But then this may be added to the other Reasons I have given, why I have
concealed my Name, to prevent the Rabble from making application of several of
the worst parts of my discourse, to persons for whom they were never intended,
and if they can once find out one, they will presently pretend they have found
out all the rest, and this was meant of this man, and that of the other; and so
I shall become accountable for all their wild Surmizes.

There is one other Exception which may lie against the whole, and that is,
that by telling the World what sort of men Magistrates should be, I have given
their Inferiors (who are also Naturally inclined to be more inquisitive into
the faults of their Superiors, then into that which is their own duty) too
great a temptation to consider what they are, or have been, and consequently to
undervalue, and despise them: but this is in their own power in great part to
prevent, by reforming what would have betrayed them to the scorn of the Many,
tho I had never been born; for Virtue and Vice were well understood before this
little piece was thought of, and men ever were, and always will be accordingly
esteemed.

The late Lord Chancellor Clarendon, in a Circular Letter to all the Justices
of the Peace in England, bearing date the 30th of March, 1665 tells them, I
assure you the King has so great a sense of the service you do, or can do for
him, that He frequently says, He takes himself to be particularly beholding to
every good Justice of the Peace, who is Cheerful and Active in his Place, and
that if in truth the Justices of the Peace in the several Divisions be as
careful as they ought to be in keeping the Watches, and in other parts of their
Office (the keeping up their Monthly Meetings, and suppressing Conventicles
etc.) the Peace of the Kingdom can hardly be interrupted within, and the Hopes
and Imaginations of Seditious Persons, would be quickly broken, and all men
would study to be quiet, and enjoy those many blessings God has given the
Nation under this happy Government.

All this is certainly true, and tho the times were then, as they are now, very
unquiet, and there was a formidable Conspiracy then set on foot by the
Republicans, and Dissenters of the Nation, yet the sole Vigilance and Care of
the Justices of the Peace disappointed it, and made it end in Smoke, to the
Eternal Reproach, and Dishonor of the Conspirators, which shows the excellence
and usefulness of this Order of men.

Yet give me leave to say, that those good Justices of the Peace, who are most
Active and Cheerful in their Places, are not always either the Richest, and
Greatest, or the best beloved, and most favored by the rest. And for this, Sir
Thomas Egerton, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, in the 44th of Elizabeth, in a
Speech made the 13th of February, 1601. in the Star Chamber, by her Maiesty's
express Command, and Printed in the end of the Historical Collections of the
four last Parliaments of her Reign, shall be my witness, who thus complained,
Is there any more fervent than others, in the business of the Commonwealth? he
straight has given him the Epithet of a busy Jack: but I know there be many
good, and I wish their number were increased; but who be they? Even the poorer
and meanner Justices, by one of which more good comes to the Commonwealth,
than by a Hundred of greater condition, and degree.

I wish this complaint were superannuated, and that our times were quite
otherwise, but alas such Justices of the Peace must not only be content to hear
worse Language than this; but there is too frequently Combinations made amongst
the rest, to cross and quash whatever they shall propose, be it never so just,
and reasonable, and nothing alleged for it, but that they are mean, proud,
busy people, and will perk up too much above their Betters, if they be not
thus mortified, and kept under, this is the worst sort of Respect of Persons,
that can be thought of, and most mischievous and irrational, that whereas Envy
ever rises by Nature, here it descends, and the Superior, who should love
and cherish the Industry and Vigilance of his Inferior, envieth and hates him
for being more serviceable, than he need perhaps to have been.

But let it be considered, who reaps the Advantage of all their Industry and
Activity, but the King and Kingdom, and these very men, that thus severely
treat them; if there were none such the Nation must needs in a small time be
ruined, for as the Lord Chancellor Clarendon takes notice in the above Cited
Letter. So much Artifice, so much Industry, and so much dexterity as this
People (the Enemies of the Government) are possessed with, cannot be
disappointed by a Supine Negligence or Laziness in those, who are invested with
the Kings Authority, or indeed without an equal industry, dexterity and
combination between Good Men for the Preservation of the Peace of the Kingdom,
and for the suppressing of the Enemies thereof. Now if instead of this, the
Justices of the Peace combine in Parties one against another, and the Great men
will neither do the duties of their Places themselves, nor suffer the meaner,
but more active, to do it for them; what can be the event in the end, but this,
That like a City besieged without, and divided within, we must sooner or later
fall a Prey to our Enemies, without Remedy or Pity?

But if these great men were capable of Reason, there would be no need of this,
and as they are not it is in vain to offer it, and therefore I must Address my
next request to the Judges and Ministers of State, that they would sometimes
enquire in to this, and without regard to the Fortunes or Titles of men,
support and encourage the more useful (if occasion so require) against the more
Potent.

I hope there will not be many occasions for this, but there may for what
follows, and therefore I will propose it in the words of the present
Lord Keeper in his Speech to Mr. Sergeant Sanders, at the the time he was sworn
Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, on Tuesday the 23d of January, 1682.
Page 8, 9. The Age is degenerate and full of Faults; Faults of Irreligion,
Morality, Debauchery, Quarrelling, Falseness and Faction, so full of Faults
that it requires more then a man to censure them, You will therefore consider
that inferi our Magistrates, and inferior Jurisdictions are to take a great
part of this labor off your hands, in that regard you will upon all Occasions
encourage and direct them to make them useful to you, and not overthrow their
Proceedings upon every slight Exception, to drive People to begin their Process
here at greater charge. And when Justices of the Peace act heartily, tho not
with so much skill in the Law, you will show tenderness to them, as Gentlemen
that serve the King, and the Public for nothing, and have not those
Assistances of Council and Officers that are here.

It were, it may be, but reasonable, that this tenderness should not only be
showed to their Proceedings, but also to their Persons and Estates, especially
those of the meaner sort, that so men may be the more easily indused to
undertake the Public Service: as for instance, in an easy excusing their
Attendance at the Assizes, when they have no particular business, that does
require their presence there. For seeing other Gentlemen of the like fortune,
who are not Justices of the Peace, do seldom happen to be summoned above once
in two years, it seems a little hard to force these to come twice in one year,
merely to fill the Bench with unprofitable Spectators at so great a Charge to
them, tho I know also that much may be learned by such an Attendance, and there
is no fear but as many, as can will take the opportunity of it; but this being
but my private opinion, is submitted entirely to the Judgment of my Superiors,
and had not been mentioned, but because the reason my Lord Chancellor gives
seems to extend to it.

The Lord Chancellor Clarendon complains, in the Letter I have so often
mentioned, That many persons, who are in the Commission of the Peace, neglect
to be sworn. And tells us His Majesty had given Order to his Attorney General
to proceed against them. This has been often since complained of by the Judges
of Assice in their Circuits also, but till the root of this mischief be cut, it
will never be otherwise, as these things now stand, no man that is in the
Commission of the Peace, can have this Dedimus Potestatem, without he pay about
four Pounds for it: and it being an employment which can bring him nothing but
expense, and trouble, it is no great wonder that men are not very willing to
part with their Money for it, and so many having stood a year or two, and the
Officers at last despairing to get any thing of them, are either left out
gratis, or for a small matter. So they that serve the King for nothing pay for
it, and the rest escape better cheap: and on these Terms it is no wonder if
there be frequent occasions for Complaints.

But this is not all, worthy, and good men who are fit to serve the King, do
thus avoid the service, and they that are no way qualified for it, being more
willing to part with their Money get into the employment, which they manage
accordingly.

To prevent all which inconveniences, it were much more for his Majesty's
Service, that the Dedimus Potestatem were freely sent down, and the Officers
rewarded for it out of the Exchequer.

But if this be not approved, it were better the Money were paid by the
Treasurer of the Division, to which such new made Justices belongs; and indeed
seeing the Country will reap the greatest advantage by it, it is most
reasonable they should pay the Charge of the Entrance, which may be done by a
short Act of Parliament.

It would not be reasonable only to make the Entrance into this Honorable,
and Troublesome Employment more easy; but the execution too. And to that
purpose, I will presume to offer a few more Considerations to my Superiors. In
many Cases there are so many, and various Acts of Parliament, that a man knows
not which to proceed upon, and they are sometimes contrary one to another. Now
if these were reduced into one, and all the rest repealed, it would much
facilitate the execution of the Commission of the Peace.

For instance, there are a great many several Acts of Parliament, concerning
the repair of the Highways, and they all are difficult to be executed in
relation to the chief thing, the Provision of Carriages, that depending upon
the determination of a Plough-Tilth, which no body knows what it is, and yet if
it were never so well known, that would not mend the matter much, because
considerable quantities of Land would never be brought into this so necessary
Work, what quantity soever were assigned to it, and many rich men would do
little or nothing, and leave the burden upon the poorer sort of men.

There have been two or three Temporary Acts of Parliament made since his
Majesty's Restoration, 14 cap. 6. 22 cap. 12.
to enable the Surveyers to repair the Ways by a Rate or Land Tax, but they are
all expired. Now, if this course were settled forever for the Carriages, and
only the Cottagers tied to do so many days work, all the other Acts of
Parliament might be spared.

But it would not be amiss then to give the Justices of the Peace power to
determine what should be paid by the Load for Sand, Gravel, and other materials
taken out of private men's grounds, or the wastes of other Manors, where there
is a want within the respective Parishes, without obliging them to fill up the
places, which is sometimes impossible, for want of matter, and always very
chargeable.

The Statutes, which concern the settlement, and Provision for the Poor, need a
review too, and some alteration, and when this is done, I recommend it to the
consideration of wise men, whether it would not be advisable to give Power to
the Grand-Juries, and Justices of the Peace, Assembled in their Assizes, to
make Bylaws with the Consent of the Judges, and to repeal, alter, or change
them as occasion requires, because this Affair is so different in one place,
from what it is in another, that it can hardly be brought under one general
Rule; and it seems but reason to entrust such, and so many Gentlemen, with a
Power which is granted to almost every petty Corporation.

So likewise the Statute concerning Lands given to Charitable uses, 39. Eliz. 6.
might be made much more useful, by Communicating that Power to any 4 Justices
of the Peace, without a Commission out of the Chancery, and allowing an Appeal
to the Sessions, 1
with a Trial by Jury. And indeed all Lands given to Charitable uses would be
better employed, if accounts were given to the Justices of the Peace, which is
already given in relation to those that are given to the repair of 13 and 14.
c. 2. c. 6. 14.
Highways, and the Relief of 22 and 23. c. 2. c. 20. 11.
Goals and Prisoners, and there is the same reason for the rest.

There is one thing of which no care was ever taken, that I know of, and that
is, for Guardians for such Children, as are neither so poor, as to be a Charge
presently to the Parish, and yet have not such Estates, as to be able to bear
an Application to the Chancery for that Purpose, many of which become at length
a Charge to the Parish, when what was left them, is consumed. Which might be
prevented by giving the Quarter Sessions power to appoint them Guardians, and
take security of them for a good Account, altering and changing them as
occasion serves, and compelling them to account, and make payment without Suits
of Law, which such poor Orphans Estates will not bear.

There are too many other things to be brought into a Preface, to so small a
Discourse as this, and therefore I will omit them, but there is one I cannot
pass over; I could never yet learn any power that was given to the Justices of
the Peace, to Summon or Compel Witnesses to appear in the Sessions, except it
were against Felons. Now it is most certain no Case can be ended without them,
and that very often they will not appear without Compulsion, and so many a good
Cause must and does miscarry. And this a thing, as worthy of a short Act of
Parliament, as any other I know of, if it were but to make the Remedy more
Authentic.

There are many Passages in the present Lord-Keeper's Speech, which I have
quoted above, that would have been of great use to me, if I had been so happy
as to have seen it before I had finished this Piece, but there is one which I
had much rather misplace here, then omit it altogether. Page the 6th.

A private man is praised for showing Humility and Deference to others in his
Conversation, and passing by Indignities.

But a Judge (and so proportionably a Magistrate) must take greatness upon him;
he must consider he represents the Kings Person in his Seat of Justice; he must
therefore be very careful to preserve the Dignity, that belongs to it.

He must have passions, but not of a private man, that may disturb his
Judgment, but he must assume Passion to set off his Severity, when the
greatness of the Crime requires it, but it must be so, as it may appear that
his Judgment governs his Passion, and directs it against the offense, and not
against the Person.

A Judge must be covetous, but not as a private man, for his own profit, but he
must be very solicitous for the Kings profit, knowing that the Kings Revenue is
like Animal Spirits, without which the Government would not be able to perform
its ordinary Motions.

All which excellent Rules, the last not excepted, do belong as well to
Justices of the Peace* as to the Judges, seeing so much of the Kings Revenue is
committed to their care, and it is the worst sort of Treason, that can be
starve our King.

And now, if my Reader thinks fit to go on and read the Book too, let me
conjure him to do it without Partiality, or Prejudice, and with a resolution to
reform whatever he shall remark to be amiss in his own Person, or Practice, and
when he has so done I will ask him no favor, let him think and speak what he
pleases of me, I care not how low I lie in his Esteem, how impertinent or
tedious, unlearned or ignorant, nay, how confident, or impudent I may seem to
be, so I may do him good, and if nothing else will do* even anger him into an
Amendment.

And if he will consider seriously of it, he must grant I can have no other
end, because I write neither for Money, nor Preferment, nor Glory nor any other
worldly interest, but merely for the public good.

And if any man is pleased with this Tractate, I only beg of him the favor of
one hearty Prayer for me and mine, and the good success of this Discourse, that
it may advance the Glory of God, the Execution of Justice and Judgment, and the
Prosperity and Welfare of the best Church, the best King, and the best Civil
Government in the whole World.

Living at a great distance, these Errata's have been made, which the Reader is
desired to amend with his Pen, and to Pardon the greater faults of the Author.
Errata.
Page 18. Line 7. dele then. l. 9. for that. r. then. p. 31. l. 22. for easy r.
rasy. p. 32. for profit r. Prophet. p. 48. l. 7. r. Ruined. p. 61. Parag. 2.
fine dele they find. p. 102. l. 10. for have r. had. p. 106. l. 10. for would
r. will. p. 110. l. 17. for has r. as. P. 112. l. 18. for mean r. can. p. 142.
l. 7. for expect r. except. p. 167. l. 19. for take r. give.

To the Making of a Good Justice of the Peace these Things are required.
1. Natural Abilities A Competent Apprehension. Judgment. Memory.
2. Civil Abilities A Competent Estate. A Good Reputation. A reasonable good
Education, and Learning.
3. Religious Dispositions consisting in A due Veneration of God. Love for his
Service in himself and others. A true Esteem of his Ministers. An earnest
Desire of the Salvation of all Under his Care, and Charge.
4. Moral Qualifications Prudence in all his Actions. Patience, Meekness,
Sobriety, Chastity, Industry. Courage, and Honesty in the Execution of his
Duty. And Humility.
5. Politic Qualifications A competent Understanding of the Nature of our
Government, and Love to it. Of the Nature of the English People. Of the several
Factions, that we have amongst us, and how (...) govern them.
6. Public Qualifications A Great Love of Justice. Impartiality in Executing
it. Aversion for those things that may hinder it -- Bribery. Prejudice, and
Prepossession. Favor, and Hatred. Covetousness. Irregular Heats, and Hopes.
Laziness.

7. Knowledge in our Laws and Customs By Reading. Observation and Practice.
Conversation, and Discourse with knowing and Experienced Men.
8. Prudent Execution of our Laws by -- Observing a due Method according to
Law. 1. In calling the Parties. 2. In hearing the Cause. And 3. In determining
it. Not denying, or delaying, or Perverting Justice. Not Extending, or
Diminishing his Jurisdiction. Not Proceeding upon his Own Opinion, or Humor
without Good Warrant.
9. Abhorrence of Perjury In himself by considering carefully the Oaths, which
he has taken. In others to be Avoided by his care to -- Administer none, but
Lawful, and Necessary Oaths. 2. To give good Admonitions, and sharp Reproof in
cause of failure.


THE Justice of Peace HIS CALLING A Moral Essay.
AS all the Works of God are perfect, The Introduction.
so are they full of Variety, and Wonder, whether we Consider the Works of his
Hands, the Fabric of the World, and all the Beings in it, or the Works of his
Providence in the Government, and Conduct of them, at once preserving what he
has made, and so disposing them, as to produce those Effects for which they
were Created, without their Knowledge, and sometimes against their Wills.

But tho this is true of all the Creatures, yet it is most apparent, and full
of Wonder, when it is applied to the Government of Mankind; for all the other
Creatures do pay a blind, and unerring obedience to the Laws of their Creation,
and do never transgress willingly, but Man being endued with discursive
Faculties, and Corrupted by the Fall, does very often act against what he knows
to be his Duty, and as often mistake it.

But then if we consider the Mass of Mankind, we shall find that there is
nothing in the whole World more Uncertain, and Unconstant, than Men, changing
like the wind very often to the quite opposite Points of the Compass, without
any Reasonable, and sometimes without any Sensible Cause.

Yet in this they seldom vary, that they are almost always unwilling to obey;
envious against their Sup^riours, jealous of their Conduct, and discontented
with almost all Events, they all think themselves wise, and good enough to
Command, and because this is impossible, affect a dispensation from all
Obedience, which they miscall Liberty.

And, which is yet worse, there never was, nor ever will be wanting a Sort of
Ambitious ill-natured men to instill into the heads of the Rabble a greater
Aversion for their Governors and their Government, be it never so Easy, Gentle
and Just; and a love for a Liberty, which they promise ^^em will Ensue upon the
ruin of the ^^rmer, by which Means this Natural ill ^^clination to
Licentiousness is yet more ^^flamed, and enraged.

So that a man may wonder to see so ^any Hundred Thousands Obey one ^ingle Man,
whom they never saw, and ^^om whom they Expect no Extraordinary ^^vour, and as
Seldom meet with it.

And if at any time their own natural ^^clinations, and the Cursed insinuations
^f their Tempters so far prevail, as to tran^^ort them into Tumults, and War,
and ^^ey prevail in that too so far as to destroy ^oth them, and their
Government, yet then ^hey Constantly, and Unavoidably fall under some other
Power, as bad, if not ^orse than the former, and so do but toss themselves from
one supposed misery to ^^other.

For since the Creation of the World was (...) never known that any Number of
men ^ived long without some Government or ^ther, nor can the Multitude subsist
without it any more, than the Individuals can without breath.

Some inquiring into the Cause of this, ^ave ascribed it to Fate, and the
Influence (...) the Stars, and others to the Nature of ^ankind.

But I cannot conceive it proceeds from any of these Causes; for taking Fate,
as it ought properly, for a blind and Natural determination of things to their
Events, it cannot be supposed that there should be such an inclination to
perfect, and unco^troulable Liberty in Man, without any possibility of having
it satisfied.

And as to the Stars, their Influences, and Aspects vary every moment, and are
different in one Country from what they are in Others. But this inclination
runs through all Mankind, tho it is sometimes restrained by External Accidents,
and is like the Seaever disposed to Motion, tho sometimes quiet, because no
Winds Excite it.

And as to any Natural Inclination in Mankind to be governed, and Acquiesce in
the Wisdom of Others, it is so contrary to the former of Living in perfect
Liberty, that they two are inconsistent, and cannot stand together.

And therefore I have ever thought the reason lay higher, and that it Must
proceed from some Decree of God Almighty which is irresistible, and
uncontroulabl^ and that he in his Divine Providence, has set Bounds to this
raging Sea, saying to it, Hither shall thou come, and no further.

For if it were otherwise, those strange Revolutions that have happened in the
World would Certainly have left us some instances of a People that had
attained, and continued in a state of Natural freedom for some time without any
Government, or Governors. For to speak the truth, that is the thing they all
seek.

On the other side, were there not such an Inclination in Mankind; why should
they so restlessly pursue that airy Notion, and for it venture the loss of Life
and Limbs? And what is the Multitude concerned whether one, or twenty, or ten
thousand command them, to do what they would not, or to suffer what they hate
above all things?

But God is a cause strong enough to Overruled this Ocean, always the same,
ever Watching over the affairs of Mankind, and making things fall insensibly,
and irresistibly into the Order he wills they should be in.

Accordingly he laid the foundations of humane Society in a Single Person, and
Made all the rest to spring from him like a Fountain; and enured them from
their infancy to obedience, and made them sensible of the use, and benefit of
Government, before they could consider what it was.

And as no Government was ever destroyed without force, so that force like the
Ashes of the Phoenix being warmed by the Sun of the Divine Favor, has ever
produced another to succeed it, and left the Multitude repining, and
discontented at those Chains it never could, nor ever shall break, till Time
shall be no more.

SECTION I.
IT is no less a Wonder to see how God in every Age, and Nation has raised up
Men to Govern, and endued them with such a proportion of Abilities, as fitted
them more, or less for that employment.

Man is not Naturally his Brothers Keeper, and great is the number always of
them, who are perfectly unconcerned for the Public Prosperity, or Misfortune
of their own Times, or Countries; till they find the danger approach their own
houses or persons, and then for the most part it is too late to prevent it. And
those few that are otherwise minded, do as often mistake, or but pretend the
Public Good; and yet after all this, there is very seldom Wanting a Sufficient
Number, so qualified, as to Keep the Several Parts of the World in some
tolerable order.

And the Wonder is the greater, if we consider, how often these men meet no
other recompense than Death, and Ruin from their Superiors, or Inferiors,
Domestic or Foraign Enemies; and although some few of the happiest attain to such
Fortunes, as may in some degree Compensate the Hazard, yet the far greatest
part seldom gain any thing by it, but disquiet, envy, poverty, and an uncertain
fame, and after all lie Exposed to more dangers, than those they govern.

This then must be another Effect of the Divine Providence, that as God raises
them up, and endows them with qualifications fit for Government, so he inspires
them with inclinations to go through with it, and Keeps them in that disposition
till others are fit to succeed them; in all things directing, and supporting
them so far as he thinks fit, sometimes to make a People Happy, and sometimes
Miserable, as his Justice, or his Mercy is deserved by them.

My Design is to discourse of only one sort of Governors, and that one of the
Lowest, the Justices of the Peace, and to describe, as well as I can what they
should be; for that having had the honor to serve my Country many years in
that Station, I have had opportunity to Observe some things in my self, and
others, that are Capable of Amendment, and all my reflections will produce some
good Effect or other upon my Self at least; and Whilst I describe what they
should be, I shall have often occasions to Consider the more Seriously what I
have been; from whence by the Assistance of God's holy Spirit, which I humbly
and devoutly ask, I may increase my repentance for what is Amiss, my gratitude
for what is not, and others may perhaps be Excited to join with me, and so some
reformation may follow, which never any Times needed more than Ours.

SECTION II.
OF those Qualifications which I have mentioned, some are Natural, others are
Acquired, but both are the gift of God; Tho the first are more immediately so,
and because they are the Foundations of the other, do naturally sort themselves
in the first Rank, and so fall first Under our Consideration; and because I
design to be as short as I can, I shall mention only three, Apprehension,
Judgment, and Memory.

Tho God has given more Apprehension to the slowest of Mankind than to the
subtillest of the Brutes, yet they, that are to Govern others had need have a
more then ordinary Quickness, and Vivacity; It being the design of almost all
that Approach them to delude and deceive them, and rather to extort, than
obtain a savorable Sentence by Just proof and truth; and they have generally
that jealous opinion of their Governors, as to Expect to go by the loss if
they have nothing to trust to but their innocence, and plain downright truth.
And from hence proceed those Crafty insinuations of the ill tempers, or actions
of those they Complain of in other instances, which are no part of the
Complaint, but only artificial flourishes to beget an ill opinion of their
Adversaries, that they may assure the Victory beforehand.

Others again are so little Masters of Language, and do so seldom appear before
their Superiors, that a man of ordinary Capacity can scarce tell what it is
they would have, and yet it may be the Complaint is just, and reasonable, and
the infirmity of these is as much to be pitied, as the craft, and subtilty of
the Other is to be discountenanced, and reproved.

And when both the Parties appear, and the business is ripened for a
Conclusion, the same difficulties attend it, the Crafty Knave is for avoiding
the Punishment of his Crimes, and the innocent simple Country man is as apt to
betray his Cause by his well-Meaning simplicity, if the quickness and integrity
of the Justice do not prevent it.

In greater Cases, and higher Courts things are first ripened by their
Officers, and then debated by Council, before they speak their judgments, and
so how unequal soever the abilities of the Parties are, the Case appears with
equal art on either side, and yet after all this the Briskness, and
Apprehension of those Judges is of great use to discern Truth from Falsehood,
and Appearances from Realities.

But in this case there is nothing of that nature to be Expected, neither can
the persons, nor will the Cases bear it, and therefore a Justice of the Peace
stands absolutely in need of a Competent quickness of Apprehension, without
which he will be liable to make great mistakes, form which great dishonor, and
damage will ensue.

But here it will not be amiss to give some men a Caution, whose defects lie on
the other side, and for want of Patience to hear a Matter Out, Catch at it too
soon, and think they understand before they hear, whose fault is greater and
more incurable then the other, and causes more injustice, and oppression; for
these quick men run away with a shadow, and will rarely be persuaded they are
under a mistake, and are for the most part a little insolent, and impatient of
Contradiction how softly soever it be Clothed, and these men are perhaps more
unfit for Government, then the former.

The Apprehension is the door, by which all things are Admitted, but the
Judgment is the house, that receives, and entertains them. And whatever the
difficulty of Apprehending the Case is, tho it may be a hindrance of dispatch,
it is rarely of Justice too, if the Judgment do at last attain to the discovery
of the truth.

But there is more required in a Magistrate than a bare understanding of the
thing, which is but in Order to a determination of it, and therefore is not so
considerable in its self, as in its Consequences and Effects.

There are three defects which seem to attend the Judgment, Darkness or
Obscurity, Confusion or Disorder, and Weakness, which proceeds from both.

Some men are of so Cloudy Judgments that they do with great difficulty, if
ever, hit upon the truth of things, Especially if it be Studiously disguised,
and Misrepresented, as for the most part is in reason to be Expected here; and
tho these are not to be despised for this Natural defect, but rather to be
pitied, and Assisted, yet it renders them unfit for Government.

The Reason of Others is so confused, that they do with as great difficulty
attain a Clear, and distinct Notion of any thing; and as their judgment, so
their discourse is dark, and Uncertain, and they can as little be understood by
others, as they understand them, themselves; and this must needs render all
business that is transacted by them, uncertain and full of Hazard.

The last, and Worst Defect is Imbecility, and Weakness, which if it be great,
is incurable; the Cloudy Understanding may at last, the Confused sometimes
Understand and hit the Mark, but neither Time nor Chance can cure that natural
Imbecility, which proceeds from them both, and therefore they of all men are
not fit for Government; and should never seek it, or embrace it if it be
offered to them, and it is great pity they should be suffered to Expose
themselves, and their Places, to Scorn, and Contempt by them that have Power,
and Means to prevent it.

Memory, is a Natural Faculty of Great Use in all Humane Transactions, but
Especially in Government, and that in the Lowest degrees of it.

For it is the duty of a Magistrate to Execute Laws, not to make them, and he
is to have an Eye to the matter of Fact at the same time too; now he that has
such a defect in that Faculty, that he can neither remember the Law, which is
to Direct him, nor the matter of Fact to which it is to be applied, is
certainly very unfit to be a judge; and so in Proportion in all the
intermediate degrees of it.

The Office of a Justice of the Peace is very diffused, and comprehends in it a
vast Number, and Variety of things; and it will consequently require a good
Memory to tell presently, whether any particular* case be within his
Jurisdiction, or No. Mr. Lambard complained in his time, (and that is near a
hundred years ago) that there were Stacks of Statutes imposed upon them to take
care of, and the Number is now perhaps double to what it was then. So that in
this respect also it is Necessary, that he who Undertakes this Office should be
a Man of a good strong Memory.

If any man doubts the truth of this, he will find upon trial, that no humane
Memory how great soever it be, can perfectly comprehend all the particulars
Exactly; and that it will be Necessary to have frequent recourse to the Books,
Especially in Statute Cases, without which many and great Errors must of
Necessity be committed; so that the Prudence of a Magistrate does consist in a
great degree in not Trusting too much to his Memory. But then that shows a
Necessity of having that useful Faculty to a good degree.

SECTION III.
THere are three other Accidental qualifications which are of great use, and
would be considered. A Competent Estate, a good Reputation, and a tolerable
good Education, and Learning.

The Justice of the Peace enters upon an employment that will occasion him much
loss of Time, some Expense, and many Enemies, and after all will afford him
little or nothing toward the bearing these inconveniences, but a little
unprofitable Honor attended with much envy, and had therefore need beforehand
be provided of a competent Estate at least, to support him in that employment,
or else he will suddenly repent, what he indiscreetly undertook, and it may be
intail the Mischief upon his Family, who will remember his honor with small
complacency, when they reflect upon his debts occasioned by it.

Nor will he, and his Family be the only Sufferers, the Country will, and must
bear a part in it too, Men of small Estates are very often of Mean spirits, and
dare not do their Duties where they Expect opposition, and have great and rich
men to deal with, and so betray Justice not for want of Skill, or Honesty, but
of Courage to undertake, and go through with it.

Besides, their Poverty will Expose them to great Temptations of Bribery, and
tho the profit that can come by it is very inconsiderable, yet the mischief
that will attend it is not so; for the perverting Justice in the smallest
instance, is a great Dishonor, and Damage to a Country; and the meaner the
cause, the greater the infamy; the Meaner the People are that are injured, the
greater the Clamor.

But of all men those, that are much indebted are the least fit, for that both
the Creditor, and his Friends must too often be gratified by the wretched man,
at the Expense of his Oath, his Integrity, his Honor, and his Justice, and all
occasions must be sought for this too, that the World may see how great a power
the Rich Clown has upon his Worship.

For these causes there was an Act of Parliament made some Ages since, which is
as follows.

WHereas by Statutes made in the time of the Kings noble Progenitors, it was
Ordained, That in every County of England Justices should be assigned of the
most Worthy of the same Counties, to keep the Peace, and to do other things, as
in the same Statutes fully is Contained; Which Statutes notwithstanding, now of
late in many Counties of England, the greatest Number have been Deputed and
Assigned which before this were not wont to be, whereof some be of small ( that
is ill) Behavior, by whom the People will not be governed nor ruled, and some
for their Necessity do great Extortion and Oppression upon the People, whereof
great inconveniences be likely to rise daily, if the King thereof do not
provide remedy: The King willing against such inconveniences to provide remedy,
has Ordained, and Established by Authority aforesaid, That no Justice of Peace
within the Realm of England in any County, shall be assigned, or deputed if he
have not Lands or Tenements to the Value of 20 l. by the year: and if any be
Ordained hereafter, etc. which have not Lands or Tenements to the Value
aforesaid, that he thereof shall give Knowledge to the Chancellor of England for
the time being, which shall put another sufficient in his place, and if he give
not the same knowledge (as before) within a Month after that he have notice of
such Commission; or if he sit, or make any Warrant or Precept by force of such
Commission, he shall incur the penalty of 20 l. and nevertheless be put out of
the Commission, as before, etc. ( But this Act Extends not to Corporations,)
and also, Provided, That if there be not sufficient persons having Lands, and
Tenements to the Value aforesaid Learned in the Law, and of Good Governance
within any such County, That the Lord Chancellor of England for the time being
shall have power to put other discreet Persons Learned in the Law in such
Commissions, tho they have not Lands, or Tenements to the value aforesaid by
his discretion. The 18 H. 6. cap. 11.

I have transcribed this Statute almost at large, because it makes so lively a
description of the inconveniences, and takes so exact a care to prevent them;
and it is to be observed, That xx l. by the Year at the making of this Statute,
was a Knights fee, and that they would trust to Nothing but an Apparent Visible
Estate, for it must be in Lands or Tenements, and yet was there not then the
Hundredth part of that business committed to Justices then, there is now, and
their Expenses that were consequently much less; and tho in case of Necessity
some Lawyers of a less Estate were Admitted, yet this was out of pure Necessity
in those ignorant Times; and then they were to be men of Good Governance, that
is, of a Good Reputation for their Lives and Integrity, and such men in those
time* might by their Professions be able to spend with men of good Estates.

But two inconveniences have arisen in our Times that were not in being then;
The first is, That Men of great Estate do too commonly leave the Country, and
spend their times and Estates in London, and other great Cities in perfect
Idleness, and Luxury. The Other is, That the Old English Industry is almost
totally Extinguished, and they that Live in the Country will not take that
pains their Ancestors did either for themselves, or their Country.

It is not at all likely that these two inconveniences will meet a Sudden, or
Certain Cure, and therefore it were to be wished, that men of Smaller Estates
and greater Industry might be encouraged by some Honest, and Convenient
Privileges and Advantages to bear this burden for the good of their Country,
without too much damage to their own Families.

2. After the Advantage of Wealth, I place that of Reputation, because, as the
World goes, it will not be easily had without the Other. And in this Case it is
of great Use to the Justice of Peace, and to the Government, if he have a good
Esteem amongst his Neighbors at his first setting out, and he ought to be
always Careful of it in all his Proceedings afterward; part of this may
descend upon a man, and part may be gained by himself with Gods blessing.

As the common People of England have always Lived under a Monarchy, so they
have been governed under their Prince by a Potent Nobility and a Flourishing
Gentry, and will certainly Envy, and Repine at men of no descent, when they
come to be set over them; but then if they be men of good Estates, and Great
Civility, and Virtue, this will soon wear off, provided it be not kept up by
the more Ancient Gentry, which seldom happens, if they be not Slighted to
prefer these New men.

But that infamy, which springs from ill Actions, is hardly ever to be worn
out, because every man that suffers, tho never so justly, by such a person,
will be sure to revive the memory of it, so that it shall never be forgotten.

Besides, men harden themselves against all Correction, and look not so much
upon their own deserts, as the faults of their Governors, and Consequently
become worse for their Chastisement, till at Last their Anger turn to Malice,
and that too is Advanced very frequently to a Contempt of the Supreme
Governor, and ends in Tumults, and Rebellion, Anarchy, and Confusion.

But let a man's Esteem be what it will, when he sets out, he must be as
careful to preserve it by his Virtue, to which Candor and Sincerity, Temperance
and Chastity, and all those other Moral Qualifications which make a good man,
are of absolute Necessity; and that not only in relation to himself, but to
those he is to govern.

For he is sure none of his Vices shall be concealed; all men will be prying
into his most secret Retirements, and will be as Curious to enform themselves
of the smallest of his faults, as they are negligent of the greatest they are
guilty of themselves.

And this is not all, they will from thence derive arguments to persuade
themselves they may with impunity, and safety transcribe the Copy, and imitate
those Vices they see in their Superiors, and take it very ill, if they find
themselves at any time mistaken; and if the truth might be spoken without
offense, I should ascribe much of the deluge of Impiety, Debauchery,
Intemperance, and other Disorders of Our Times to this, as to its proper cause.

For how can a Justice of Peace send a man to the Stocks for Drunkenness, when
he is hardly well recovered of his last Debauch, or punish a man for Profane
Swearing, with forty Oaths in his mouth? I could easily run this through all the
rest, if it were fit to do it.

This too renders our Gentry Contemptible, for the inferior people will ever
Envy the splendour of their Wealth, if they do not seem to deserve it by their
Prudence and Virtue.

And this too weakens our Government, by abating that Honor which is
absolutely necessary for its preservation, and gives too often the hearts and
affections of men, to those that have no right to them, and who employ that
Advantage to the ruin of those that have.

In short, if we are not resolved to ruin our Selves and our Families for
ever, and to become the most miserable, and infamous of all men, we must
forthwith retrive the Ancient English Bravery, and win the hearts of the People
by Justice, Chastity, Temperance, Courage and Loyalty to a due Esteem of us.

And to this let us add a solid and conspicuous Piety, which may shine forth in
our Lives and Conversations with that Luster, that none may be able to doubt,
or dispute the truth of it, and this, and nothing else will entail that Glory,
our Ancestors left us, upon our Posterity, and preserve the Monarchy, that gave
it to us, from a Second ruin; they that honor God shall be honored, and they
that dishonor him shall be lightly regarded.

But however, let all that are set up for Magistrates as Lights upon a hill, be
sure to set a good Example, and if not for the sake of Virtue, yet out of pure
fear of Infamy avoid all those Vices which render them, and their Offices
Contemptible.

3. It is not only fit the Justice of the Peace should be a man of a Competent
Estate, and a Good Reputation, but of Learning and a Good Education too.

By Learning, I do not understand the Utmost degree of it, nor all those Parts
neither that may be of great use to men of other Employments, but such a degree
of Learning as may fit a Man for Civil Conversation, and the dispatch of
business, and especially such Knowledge in the Laws and Customs of England, as
may preserve him from great and frequent Mistakes.

The Age we live in is full of Learning, and the great Plenty of Books that
come every day into the World, have fallen so thick in all places, that they
have not escaped the Soft Hands of Ladies, nor the Hard fists of Mechanics,
and Tradesmen, and every man affects to seem well read in Books, tho he has
not had the happiness to converse much with men; and therefore if a Justice of
Peace be not indifferently well qualified in this Point, he will sometimes
discover it, and that will (if it have no worse effect) betray him to the
Contempt of those, who ought to honor and respect him for his Place.

But if he be ignorant of the Laws and Customs of England in that vast variety
of business that belongs to him, he will never be able to go through with it, but
with great fear, or hazard of Mistaking.

And being as subject to the force of the Laws as other men, he will sometime
or other meet with those who will revenge his Mistakes with worse then bad
language, and seek a reparation out of his Estate for the Errors of his Office.

No man is born a Scholar, and therefore what ever Learning a Man has, must
spring from Education, and together with it, for the most part, Civility and
good Behavior is, or ought to be delivered, which takes off that Natural
Roughness and Asperity, which makes men unfitting to converse with others, much
more to govern them; and they that have not had the happiness to meet, or
embrace this, should do well not to Expose their unpolished Humors, and
Manners to the Contempt of others; who yet may be very useful men in other
Places.

SECTION IV.
I Have hitherto considered the Justice of Peace no further than, as a Man and
a Gentleman. But Blessed be God for it, England is a Christian Country, and one
of the best Parts of the Catholic Church too, and therefore not only the
Natural, and Civil Capacities, and Qualifications of Men are to be considered,
when Magistrates are to be chosen, but their Religions too, and most Especially.

By this I do not mean in this place whether they are Protestants, or Papists,
Phanaticks or men, who love the Church; (tho I shall Consider of this in due
time,) but whether they be good Christians. For many men account it an honor
to them, and a piece of good breeding, to Express no more reverence for God,
and Religion, than they do for a forsaken Mistress, to whom they pretend to
have made Love only out of Ignorance in their Youth, for want of understanding
better things.

I do not intend neither in this place to make an Exact Description of the
several parts of Devotion and Religion, but I only consider those parts of it,
which fit a man for Government, which I humbly Conceive are these.

1. A Due Veneration of God. 2. A Love for his Service in himself, and others.
3. A Good Esteem for his Ministers. 4. An Earnest desire of the Salvation of
all under his Care, and Charge.
As God is the Fountain of all Power, and the Author of all Government, So he
is the Supreme Governor, and Preserver of it, and by his Providence disposes
the hearts of Men, as he thinks fit, and in his Justice, and Mercy makes
Retribution to them according to their Deserts, but especially his Eyes are
ever upon Princes and Magistrates, to Reward them if they do well, to Punish
them if they do amiss, and abuse the Power which he has given them for the
good of Men, and his own Glory. And those men that have this Sense of him
deeply imprinted in their hearts, will ever have a great Veneration for him,
and, as occasion serve, express it by due consideration, that not only their
Actions (which are visible to men) but the most secret Motives of them, that
lie out of the reach of their Eyes, are open to God Almighty.

Those who Thus Reverence God shall be sure to have his Providence watching
always over them, to protect them in all dangers, and direct them in all
difficulties. And he will by it strike that aw and fear of them into the hearts
of the People, that shall keep them in better Obedience than all the force in
the World will do without it; and this will render their Government Easy, and
their Actions Prosperous.

But on the Other side, how can any man have the impudence to expect either
Protection, or Assistance from God, when he knows at the same time, that he
has not any respect in his heart for him?

Nor in truth do this sort of men do it, but trust wholly to their own Wit, and
Power, which always in the End deceives them, and leaves them to the Scorn, and
Contempt of the World, God in his Justice making this frequently the Punishment
of their Impiety against him.

All men, that have any Sense know it so necessary that the People should have
some Religion, and a great Opinion that their Governors are Pious, and that
without it there will be no possibility of Governing them, that they who have
expressed no inward Veneration for it, have owned a belief that it was a Crafty
Invention Juggled up betwixt the Priests, and the Princes of the World, to Keep
the Multitude in aw; which, tho it is false, yet it shows at the same time,
that these men are of opinion, that it would be difficult, if not impossible,
to keep the People in a due Subjection without it.

And Machiavel would not have his Lewd Prince without the opinion of Piety,
however wicked he really was. Now if this base Hypocrisy be of so great use in
Government, which is destitute of the blessing of God, and liable to be looked
through Every moment, of what Use must solid sober Piety be, which will shine
forth in all that a man does, or speaks, and procure at once the Love, and
Favor of God and Man?

2. This Reverence of God is to be expressed by a great, and constant Care to
Serve, and Worship him both Publicly in the Church and Family; and Privately
in the Closet: for God is so great a Being, that Nothing we can do but this, is
of any use to him, he stands in no need of us nor of our Service, any further
then as it tends to our own good here, and hereafter; and therefore it is
ridiculous to pretend to believe there is a God, and live Wickedly, without any
regard to his Service, nay prate Foolishly, and Atheistically in all Companies,
as some do.

But the Justice of Peace of all men is to be most religiously Careful to
perform his Duty, because the Eyes of all are upon him, and they will be sure
to follow his Example if ill, and the Inconvenience will not end there neither;
they will within a While revenge all their Piques against him, which will be
many, with Stories of his Impiety, and Negligence, and from thence argue, That
he is a man of no Religion, the Consequence of which is, That he is not Master
of any honor, or honesty; and so this dishonor will at last fall upon
himself, and end in contempt.

Nor does his Care like, that of Private men end, in his Family, tho it were
well if some extended it but so far, but he must take care that all under his
Jurisdiction do it; For so much is England degenerated from its Ancient
Devotion, by reason of the Divisions amongst us, that without this, not only
the Conventicle, but the Alehouse will be better furnished, than the Church; if
Care be not taken by them that are in Authority to Prevent it by a Severe
Search, and Punishment of these Miscreants.

Nay, to that height of Impiety are we grown, that if We trust to the Oaths of
them, that are to inform us, even Perjury shall be employed to delude us, and
the Law; a strange Religion this is in the mean time, to make use of the Worst
of Crimes to protect them, who pretend to be the Children of God, from Temporal
Punishment, and with them, and for their sakes, all that will run into
Debauchery. But so it is, and nothing but the Care of the Magistrate can
prevent it; and if he be not diligent to do his duty herein, he must answer it
to God, and Man.

It is not many Years since a War raised by these Religious men on that
pretense, destroyed our King, and brought our Gentry into the basest Slavery,
that ever fell upon them; they may, if they please, believe this shall never
happen again; but if it does, they can thank no body but themselves: and I am
sure they can neither expect reasonably any Assistance from God, nor Pity from
Men, if it should be otherwise, because they might have prevented it if they
would.

3. That men that have no regard for God, and his Service, should show no
Esteem for the Priest, is no great wonder; the Consequence is unavoidable: And
as this proceeded at first from the Other, So it may be a good Means to Cure
the distemper, to teach the People not only to Honor God, and his Sanctuary,
but to Reverence his Priests; and here the Magistrate may Contribute very much
by his Example, and Authority.

But then this Reverence is not due to all, who call themselves Ministers;
there are too many that are crept in amongst us, who are the Ministers of
Satan, Sowers of Sedition, and Upholders of Schism, the less the Magistrate
reverences them, the better it will be for him.

But there is one Sort of Kindness too commonly shown to Clergymen, that I
wish they would lay aside; and that is, their Inviting them to their
Drinking-Meetings, and almost forcing them, when there, to pledge all the
Healths, and go to the Bottom of the Glass too at every Round.

I cannot imagine where the Pleasure of this lies, the Wine would be as easy,
the Company might be as brisk, and the Frolic as pleasing, if the Chaplain and
Neighbour-Minister were Visiting the Sick, or Studying to improve himself. Nor
can I think they pretend to please God Almighty by it, whilst they render his
Service contemptible, and the Priesthood odious, and infamous: For my part, I
cannot believe this can proceed from any other, than the Devil, because it
serves no bodies turn but his, and the Enemies of Our Church; and I have ever
observed, the Atheist, and irreligious to be most guilty of it.

The best honor that can be shown to a Clergyman, is to remember he is more
immediately related to God, and out of a due respect to his Character, to curb
those little irregularities which at another time a man might fall into, and
indeed nothing is more contrary to Virtue, and Sobriety, than the Attempting to
Debauch them, whose Presence should restrain us from Excesses, and no Vice
exposes them more then Insobriety to the Contempt of the Rabble, and other
lewd Men, and certainly God will accordingly severely reckon with those who
thus dishonor him in his Ministers, and beyond all other men with Magistrates,
if they be guilty of it.

The Turks have a sort of men who pretend to be descended from Mahomet, and
wear Green Turbans, to distinguish them from the rest, and if at any time they
happen to offend any of the other Turks, they approach these Children of their
Profit with great respect, and having first very reverently taken off the green
Turban, and laid it by; they then bang the Man without Mercy, or Discretion,
but we never hear they endeavor to draw them into any thing Contrary to their
Law.

4. The Ultimate End of all Religion, is the attainment of the happiness of
another Life, and all that can be any way subservient to that end, ought to be
so used. And for this end did God Almighty institute all humane Society, and
Government also, and has ever since preserved them from Ruin. So that he
Expects from every Person that is placed in any degree of Honor, a more
immediate Care, and Concernment for the Salvation of their inferiors; and he
that does best discharge his duty in this respect, may Expect to meet the best
Recompense from God here, and hereafter.

Grotius has proved this so well, that I will not attempt to do it after him,
but refer the Reader for that, to his Piece of the Power of Magistrates in
Sacred Affairs, and pursue the Conclusion, of bringing it as much as may be
into practice. It is certain then, nothing can be more acceptable to God
Almighty, than this; and his Blessing is the best Reward any man can pretend
to, and the only one which almost a Justice of the Peace can Expect, and which
is really worth his thoughts.

There is nothing in the Next place will so effectually lessen his Cares, and
his Troubles as this; for if ever he can bring men to a true sense of this,
they will afterward be easily governed, and it will make his Office Acceptable
and Delightful to them, and his very Chastisements will be thought Kindnesses,
and be well resented.

But if men should prove unreasonable, yet God would certainly undertake for
him and protect him from their Violence, and reward his Virtue too, with the
Euges of a Well done thou good and faithful Servant, and he should thereby
assure his own Salvation however.

Section the 4th.
HAving thus dispatched those Religious Qualifications I did propose to speak
of, I come in the Next place to speak of those Moral Indowments, without which
the other cannot well be Supposed to be; the first of which I shall mention, is
a Prudent, and Wife Administration of all his Affairs.

As Reason distinguishes a Man from a Beast, Prudence.
So this Prudence is it which Exalts one man above another, and directs him not
only to what is just, but to what is fit. Justice teaches a man to give every
man his due, and Prudence directs him to do it Seasonably, and when, and where
to use Clemency, or Severity, as there is occasion for it.

And in Executing all Penal Laws, this is of great and daily use, and makes
those Laws a Blessing, or a Plague to men; and indeed he that always imploys
the utmost of his Power, will sometimes use the letter of the Law against the
equity of it.

Prudence will also make his proceedings Safe, and Regular, so that he shall
not fear to reflect upon what he has done, nor others to approach him, when he
is to do them, when they know beforehand, what they may Expect from him.

Prudence, and due Care in him to Search every thing out that comes before him
in the Course of Law, will prevent his being deceived, and the Cosequences of
it, his injuring others by that deception.

Next to Prudence I place Patience and Industry, Patience.
without which he can never hope to attain his End, he must not expect that
either Party will at first frankly, and ingenuously represent the truth of
things to him, one party will speak a little too much, and another a little too
little, and by this, and other Arts so disguise the thing, that, if he be not a
man of more, than Ordinary Patience, and Industry to Search it out, he will be
in great danger of Doing great injustice.

Nor will the putting Parties always to their Oaths do it, for many men have so
little sense of them, that it is almost all one to lie, and forswear
themselves; but yet giving them time, and cross-Examining them, or putting them
one from another, the truth will sometimes appear through all their disguises, and
will well recompense the loss of a man's time if at last he be enabled thereby
to do Justice, and promote Truth, and Honesty amongst men.

But on the Other Side, the impatient man is at the End of his business, before
he is well entered into it, and by making too much have, is the longer before he
can end it; a great man used to say, Stay; little, and we shall have done the
sooner; and for the most part overhasty Sentences come to a review, by appeal,
or otherwise, and then a man's folly is discovered in the face of the Country.

I would fain know of any man that sits in the Seat of Justice, how he would
take it, to have a Case of his own hudled up by another man, without due
Examination of the thing and its Circumstances, and so it may be meet with
disappointment, and disgrace, where he did least Expect it; and when he has
once thought Seriously of it, let him do, as he thinks sit.

But it is not a dull Patience without Active Industry, Industry.
that will do the business, he that storms and rages may sometimes hit upon the
right Case, and perhaps more frequently than he, that neither takes Care to
enform himself of the Law beforehand, nor of the fact at the hearing, but
hears with as little care, and unconcernment, as if he had nothing to do with
it; such lazy men are totally unfit for government, and should be laid aside,
as fast, as they can be discovered, or rather be prevented from ever coming
into Authority.

But there is another Sort of Men, that are as much too Active, and endeavor
to Search into things before the time, and without any Necessity; and this
sometimes brings great Mischiefs upon them, for which they are not much pityed.

Next to Industry, Meekness.
Meekness and Humility deserve the Place, tho some men seem to think the
contrary, and that no Virtues less become a Magistrate; The Character of Moses
was, That he was the Meekest Man upon Earth yet no man ever knew better, than
he, how to rescue himself, and to preserve his Place from Contempt; and no man
ever had greater reason to carry it with a high hand, who had God's Visible
Presence always with him to Countenance him, his Miraculous Power to Defend
him, his Infinite Wisdom to Direct him.

Rough, and rude Language never did any man's business, nor ever will; they may
be feared, and hated more than other men, who use it, but that will as often
hinder, as help them. And when it is once Known, men will either not regard it,
or contrive how to make their Advantage of it, by inflaming the Angry
Indiscreet man to such a height, that he shall do, and say he knows not what,
or by Flattery, and Assentation draw him to the quite Contrary Extreme. So that
if in the End he do Justice, it shall be by Chance.

When a Man is Kindly, and Civilly Treated, it softens him into repentance, and
makes him ashamed of his offense, and that disposes him to Amendment, and
Honesty for time to come; and he that so reforms but one man, has done a
greater work than he that Chastises many; and what ever the Event be, the
Party goes away well Satisfied with the Justice and Candor of his Judge, which
may work upon him afterward, tho it do not at the present.

For my part, I never understood wherein the greatness of calling a man,
Sirrah, and Rogue, at first sight, lay. It is full as easy to call him by his
Name, or Friend, and give him an assurance, that you are not his Enemy, nor
have any prejudice against him; and then it is ten to one, if he do not deal
ingenuously with you, and tell you the truth at first, and so save you the
pains and hazard of searching it out; and I have seen many men so wrought upon
by it, as to prevent the Justice, and Condemn themselves willingly to suffer
the Penalty of that Law, they had imprudently broken, if it run not too high.

But on the Other Side, ill usage does but harden men, and make them ascribe
what they suffer rather to the ill Nature, and Disposition of the Magistrate,
than their own deserts.

Besides, there is nothing that discovers a man's mean Extraction, and ill
breeding, so much as ill Language; and it is a foul disgrace to a Magistrate,
to seem to have ever kept Lewd, Mean Company, where only rude Language is to be
learnt.

The Sum of all is, it can never do any good; and will certainly do much hurt,
and therefore is most carefully to be avoided by every man that would preserve
his Reputation, and do good in his place, and the rest are not worth the
Instructing.

But yet neither is it fit to Countenance ill men in their Villainy, and
Wickedness, for that is to encourage instead of reforming, and punishing them;
but then let the reproof be rational, and grave, such as may work more upon
their reasons, than fancies, and to it add the Severity of the Law, and make
them feel you are in good earnest with them; and this will make a man more
feared, and revered than Loud Words without it. And to me it seems to be a
double punishment, first to Vent my Fury in bad Language, and then to inflict
the Punishment of the Law upon him.

Pride is yet a worse fault in a Magistrate than Passion; Humility.
for some men are Naturally passionate, but few men are Naturally proud, and
insolent; and those who are so, are of all others not fit for Magistracy.

One of the Worst effects of Pride is, to render a man incapable of
Instruction; and then be his abilities what they can be, he must Needs fall
into great Errors; no man can carry all the Laws of England in his head, and
always truly apply them without mistaking. And then if the man scorns the
Informations of his Equals, or Inferiors, he must Answer for his Error, as the
Effect of his Will. Whereas if he Humbly seeks, and Meekly imbraceth better
advice, tho at last he mistakes, he shall be pitied by God, and Man, and is
sure to save his Reputation, and the Comfort of having done the best he could
to prevent the misfortune.

But a Magistrate is not only to regard the Law, but the Fact; and this the
wisest of Men must learn from others, who were present, and took Notice of it.
And according to the Quality, and Number of the Witnesses is the thing more, or
less to be believed. And if a man will in his Price Suppose he knows this, when
indeed he does not, or believe he takes it right, when he mistakes the Matter,
or the Witnesses, and will not suffer them to reinform and direct him, he must
needs do great Injustice in the Conclusion, tho he Mean it not. And he must
answer for it.

Soloman says, Only by Pride comes Contention, Prove. 13. 10. And so it ever
is, Pride makes a man more apt to Mistake, and at the same time shuts the door
upon him, so that he cannot find the way out again; this makes him set himself
to defend his Error, as if it were a Castle, and take it ill that any man
should endeavor to dispossess him. So that he that Never so Kindly offers to
inform him better, is sure to meet not better reward than Contention,
Stubbornness, and ill usage for the present, and Scorn and Revenge for the
future, which either provokes men to seek the Ruin of these Insolents, or to
give them up to their own folly till that do it, and God in his Providence does
for the most part hasten on the Calamity.

But on the Other Side, there is nothing more Lovely in the Eyes of God, or
Man, than Humility; and the Greater the person is, the Greater the Luster of
it; it preserves a man from many Errors, and Apologizeth for the rest so
powerfully, that it is scarce possible not to forgive him, and the Honor of it
too Ascends from the man to his Superiors, and they are the better thought of
for his sake. It makes a Government acceptable to the People, and stifles
Discontents (the Seeds of Rebellion) in their infant state.

Sobriety, Sobriety.
and Chastity, are two Virtues that seem at first sight, perhaps, more to
respect the Person, that is master of them, than his Place; but yet they have
for all that a great influence upon the other, especially the first of them. By
which I Understand Temperance in Eating and Drinking.

Intemperance has Naturally some very ill effects upon men, which indispose
them for Government. As first, it takes off the Briskness, and Vivacity of Men's
Minds, and renders them dull, and heavy, and unfit for business. Yet he that is
to judge others, will always stand in Need of the greatest of his Abilities, as
I have proved before. And therefore, if he be not so far in Love with
Temperance, as to preserve his Faculties always in their Natural vigor, he has
thereby unmanned himself; and it will not be fit to set the Beast to Govern
others, when he is thus degraded by himself.

Secondly, Intemperance discharges the guards, that Prudence, and Sobriety
usually keep men under, and they become heedless of all things, neither
considering nor caring whether they do Right, or Wrong, Justice, or Injustice;
as indeed how can an intemperate Man, whilst his blood is in a ferment, be
able to Consider prudently of any thing. All that can be said for it, is, That
they are not always so; but tho they be not, yet if a man is frequently
intemperate, it will in time change the Crasis of his Blood, and Spirits, when
he is not actually distempered with a late Debauch, at least to such a degree,
as will make him incapable of that curious Sense, which is requisite in many
Cases for the finding that truth, which is concealed from him, with much
Artifice, and Industry.

The Justice of the Peace his principal Care is to provide for the Poor; for he
is the only Person, to whom their last resort is, who have neither means, nor
abilities of Complaining to the Superior Magistrates. Now how can that Man be
Sensible of their Miseries, who is almost always Gorged to the height, and is
insensible of all other Inconveniences, but those that spring from Satiety, and
Drunkenness? It Is true, these are not less than the other, but yet they totally
render a man incapable to Understand and Consider them. It was the Rich man's
faring deliciously every day, that made him think so little of Lazarus at his
Gate, till the Tables were turned, and then it was too late. And Great Men
would do well to remember his Catastrophe in time, and abate something even of
their Lawful Pleasure here, that they may be Excused from Suffering with him
hereafter.

To all this Add, what I have remarked already, the irresistible force of ill
Example, and the bad Effect it will have upon the Government, by introducing
Poverty, if it be not punished in the inferior people, and reproach and hatred,
if these or such like Magistrates do it; and a man would think a Small degree
of Ingenuity might prevail upon them to lay aside their Intemperance, or their
Office, and not keep two things so totally inconsistent each with other.

Much of what has been spoken concerning Temperance, Chastity.
may be Applied, and is Naturally true of Chastity too; but I have this further
to say for it, The English Nation is Naturally Chaste, and all that foul
spreading uncleanness, which has of late overrun this Island, is of a foraign
Extraction. And it may be a great question, Whether it is a greater Infamy to a
People to forsake its Ancient and Natural Virtues, or to embrace foraign and
Exotic Vices? But there is no question at all whether this base uncleanness
has not been propagated by the Contagion of ill Example, and descended from
the Gentry to the Commonalty; and I have known when Complaints have been
brought by Wives, against their Husbands for Keeping Misses, when they were
scarce able to find Competent bread for their own Families. The more have they
to answer for, who set them the ill Example.

This Crime is ever attended with Poverty, and when it grows general, the
Poverty becomes so too; and such Lewd men can neither bear Want, nor betake
themselves to any honest Course for the redressing of it, but generally turn
beggars, Thieves, Whiggs, Knights of the post, and take up other such infamous
Courses as Naturally tend to the destruction and imbroylment of our Government.

Most commonly those who follow this ill Course Long, are at one time or other
Snapt with that Filthy Disease. And it is very rarely seen that they are so far
recovered out of it, as to have afterward any Children that Live, and are
healthy. So it tends apace to depeople us who are already Exhausted by Ireland,
and the Western Plantations, and Leave us in the next Generation, a prey to our
Neighbors.

All which are strong Reasons to endeavor heartily the banishing of this New
risen Pest, and should make all Magistrates discountenance, and punish it to
the utmost rigor; and above All things to be Exceeding careful, that they do
not by their Words, or Actions give the People occasion, to think, or suspect
they have any Kindness for it.

Yet some Justices of the Peace, if they are to Examine an unfortunate Woman
about the Father of a base Child, will descend to such minute Circumstances,
and behave themselves so Extravagantly in the mean time, as if they took much
pleasure in the inquiry, and Meant to make the Criminal uncurable, by
Extirpating that Natural Modesty, that might have Cured her. Such men neither
regard God who is invoked by the Oath to be present, nor the dignity, and
honor of their Places, and do effectually teach instead of Correcting the
Crime.

I have Placed in the rear of all Courage, and Honesty in the Execution of
Justice, tho they will deserve to have been the two first; but I hope by
placing them in the Conclusion, they will Leave the stronger impression on the
Mind of the Reader.

Courage is so necessary a Qualification in Magistrates, Courage.
that God himself never omits it in his Charges to them; and there is good
cause for it. For they are sometimes to deal with Men Equal to themselves in
all things, and at others with their Superiors, and as the Nature of Mankind
stands, may justly fear hard usage for doing but their Duty. And yet we have
another difficulty that will try the most daring: we live in a factious Age,
and a Divided Nation, and a Magistrate must sometimes disoblige not only single
persons; but great Bodies of Men united for the carrying on ill designs. And we
have before our Eyes instances of many great Families, that have been ruin or
impoverished within the Memory of Man, for their Loyalty, and Honesty, and too
many have Considered the same may happen again; and this has made the
difficulty the greater, by les'ning the Number of them, that should have
overcome it.

But yet would men consider Seriously of it, this will never justify their
Pusilanimity, who have refused to serve the Public; or not performed their
Duty out of Cowardice. For God himself has promised to stand by them, and
protect them in the discharge of their Duty. Ye shall not Respect persons in
judgment; but you shall hear the Small as well as the Great; you shall not be
afraid of the face of Man, for the judgment is Gods, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. So he is
pleased to own the Act, and is bound to protect his own Minister, and he may
securely rely upon him that he will; for he has engaged his Veracity for it,
whose Power no Faction, how formidable soever, can Master.

And yet if he should Suffer a man to be persecuted for doing his Duty, Even
that is no such dismal thing, as is represented by fancy, and delusion; but
this subject has been so Excellently treated of by the Author of Jovian in his
Conclusion, that for brevity sake, I will refer the Reader to it.

Of Evils, the least is to be chosen; and in the state things are, we must
submit our Selves, and Families, as Eternal Slaves to these Factions, or defend
the Government against them, by a Courageous Execution of our Laws. We have
tried their Mercy, and Clemency, and found Solomon's Observation true, The
tender Mercies of the Wicked are Cruel. We have felt the Smart of being Loyal,
and if we were so treated for being obedient to the Laws of God and Man, we may
Expect as much Mercy in other instances, as we please.

We have tried what could be done by fair Courses, and Concessions, and our
Experience tells us, nothing but an entire submission at discretion will
satisfy these insolent Men; and this has inspired some Besieged Starved
Places with a resolution to perish bravely, but blessed be God we are not upon
such terms yet with them. But then this reproacheth our faint-hearted Gallants,
who dare not do their Duty whilst they have the Advantage Clearly on their
Side.

The thing is indeed not only possible but easy; for all Combinations against
an Established Government, besides the Providence of God, have the United
Forces of all good men against them; they are liable to many hazards, have no
Authority to Unite them, are, and ever will be distrustful each of other, and
faithless too, as occasion serves, and one Passion prevails upon another.

So that it is not Prudence, which makes men timorous, but want of Considering
the Nature of things, together with Infidelity, Distrust of God, and Cowardice;
and if any man will aspire to these Titles of Honor, and tamely purchase them
with Slavery, and Beggary, much good may his bargain do him, and let no man
envy his happiness.

And as to the rest, let them pluck up their spirits, and with the Rosolution
of English Men, and Christians bring under this Hydra, this Many-headed
Monster, and they may be assured the Event will answer their Desires, and will
find that the strength of our Factions lies more in our want of Wit and Will to
Suppress them, than in their own Ability to defend themselves, much less to
bring under, and ruin us.

But not only Combinations of Men, but single persons have sometimes overawed
Magistrates, and made them not dare to do their Duties; and here the fault is
so much the greater, as the Temptation is less. For why should a Justice of the
Peace, under the Protection of God, and the Laws, fear a Wealthy Clown, or a
Ruffling Gentleman? Let him be but once sure what the Law, and the Matter of
Fact is, and he need not fear any man.

But, it is a great disgrace to the Magistrate, and a great dishonor to
Justice, to have the Laws take none, but the poor helpless offenders, whose
very Innocence may be easily trodden under foot, and the great, and insolent
Offenders escape without any Chastisement. It were great reason rather to take
the latter, than the former; and tends more to the terror of ill men.

It is true, that sometimes these great and rich Malefactors do find means by
their Wealth, and Friends to trouble a Justice of the Peace on some other
pretense; but this does not often happen; God in his Providence preventing it:
and when it does, ought to be born, as other Calamities which God sends for
Causes best known to himself; and which, for the most part, end very well for
the Minister of Justice.

But on the Other Side, when a man has purchased their good will at the loss
of his Reputation, by denying Justice, or doing injury: he has but rendered
himself more obnoxious to their injuries, by showing his fear of them, which
makes them yet more insolent, and he has made God, and good men his Enemies to
boot: So that he is then become really miserable, and yet must Expect no bodies
Pity, or Assistance.

So that all things Considered, it is better to trust God, and rely on the
Protection of the Laws, and so to proceed to do our Duty, without the least
Consideration, Whether the Party Complained of be a Poor man, or a rich man,
but according to Gods Commandment, and Our Oath, to do equal Right to both,
which in all probability will be as safe, and much more honorable, and at last
bring a man to peace, according to that of the Psalmist, Mark the perfect man,
and behold the upright: for the End of that Man is Peace, Psalm. 37. v. 37.

There is another Fault, which is just the opposite to this, and does not so
often happen, yet sometimes may out of too much Pity, and Compassion, ill
Placed, and Worse Expressed; and that is when more regard is taken to the
Poverty than Innocence of a man, contrary to the Command of God, Thou shall not
Countenance a poor man in his Cause, Exodus 23. 3. That is, any further than
there is Right, and Reason for it.

I might perhaps not have mentioned this, but that it has been more frequent
here in England of late, than perhaps in all the World besides, Especially as
to our Penal Laws; for every Township with us being bound to maintain its own
poor Inhabitants, which way soever they become such; many men interest
themselves in the Cases of these People, and for fear they should become a
Charge to the Parish, connive at many of their Misdemeanors, and intercede with
the Magistrates in others for their non-punishment till for Want of timely
Correction for small faults, and through hopes of impunity, they become
insufferably Wicked, and are cut off by the hand of Justice, or grow Insolent,
and are a plague all the days of their Lives to the Places in which they live.
It is great pity the power of inflicting Corporal punishment instead of
Pecuniary, should not be Extended further than it is, for that is the way to
meet these small ill natured Animals. As for Instance, Many of them turn
Atheists, and never come at Church, only because they are not able to pay
Twelve pence for their absence. And I might instance in some other particulars,
but till this can be done, it is certainly much better to run the Hazard of
maintaining these men when they are reformed, than thus to suffer them to
become worse, and worse by impunity, till in the End they become not only
Extremely wicked, and troublesome, but poor also, and so the thing that was
feared falls upon them, which might in likelihood have been prevented by a
timely Severity.

By Honesty, Honesty.
I understand that Comprehensive Virtue, which in Scripture is called an Honest
and Good Heart; and includes in it Sincerity in a man's Words and Actions,
Veracity, a strong propension to do good to all, and fair dealing, without
fraud or hypocrisy; which make a man's Conversation Safe and Profitable, Easy
and Delightful, and was once the General Temper of the English Nation, till
Foraign Vices, and the Last Rebellion altered it.

Sincere Upright dealing is an Excellent quality in a private man, Sincerity.
but so necessary in a Magistrate, that without it, he will be in danger to
infect men, and make them worse, than they would have been, by Conversing with
them; for they will be sure to transcribe the Copy, and Outdo it too; they
will observe how he Circumvented and Deluded them, and they will try how the
same Arts may be made use of another time, for their Advantage, against him or
any other Neighbor, as occasion serves, till they turn errant Knaves unfit for
humane Society, and good for Nothing.

But this Sort of Dealing is not only mischievous, and hateful, but for the
most part unsuccessful too; for men will soon see through the thin pretense, and
discover the insincerity, that lurks behind it, and then all their Care will be
to Countermine it, and prevent the Cheat.

And where they cannot discover any fraud designed, they will yet suspect it,
and such a man's Words will have no Credit with them; and as for his Actions,
they will Eternally, and restlesly turn them and toss them to, and fro in their
Minds, to find the Secret design of them, entertaining a Thousand Surmises, and
Jealousies of them, and in the mean time what ever outward respect they pay him
out of fear or flattery, they will inwardly hate him, and always study to
defeat and Baffle him; and this must needs make his Life uneasy, and unsafe,
and his Actions unprosperous.

But on the Other Side, when a man is Esteemed an upright sincere man, every
body will love and trust him, and they will interpret his Actions Favorably,
and Heartily, and what ever he does, or says to them, will be regarded and
revered; and the more they try, the more willingly will they trust him, and
rely upon his honesty as their best Security; and when they observe the
Blessing of God, and the Love and Favor of Men, and good Success to Attend
such men, which very rarely sail, they will endeavor to be like them in the
One, that they may be so in the other too.

Veracity is a debt, Veracity.
that all men who live in Society ow each to others, our Souls being not able
to Communicate each with others, by reason of the interposition of our bodies,
God has given us speech, as a Means to Communicate our inward Sentiments each
to other for Our Mutual Good, and Comfort.

But the Liar perverts all these great Benefits of Society, and turns them into
Poison, he thinks no man can see the Contradiction, that is between his
Thoughts and Words, and from thence presumes he shall cheat his Neighbor, and
give him Chass instead of Corn; but he will certainly be deceived in the End;
for all men have a Natural Logic, that will in time, by Comparing one thing
with another, discover the Sophistry; and if they frequently trap a man, they
will never after trust or believe him.

Matters of Fact, and things that are past, can never be made out but by
testimony; either by Writing, or Word of Mouth; and According to the
Credibility of the Person that relates it, is the belief Stronger or Weaker,
that is bui't upon that Testimony: So that here is another great use of Speech,
for when a man is present at the Doing, or Speaking of any thing if he minds
it, it leaves a Picture, Impression, or Representation of the Words and Things
in his Memory, as in a Register; but then these Characters are visible to none
but himself, and the use of Speech is to represent them truly to others,
according as the man finds them; now the Liar in this instance plays the false
transcriber, fains things that he finds not there, and changes and varies what
he does, Extends it in some places, diminishes it in others, is certain when
he should be doubtful, and doubtful when he should be certain, and here and
there interlaces Circumstances, Words, and Actions, of his own, and then
fathers them upon others, and all the while relyes upon this single security,
That no body, but himself can Search his Memoires, and find out and prove the
Cheat, nay perhaps so often tells the Lie, that the the false Story defaces the
true, and at length impregnates his fancy with a false Conception, and he
arrives at that height of Folly as to deceive himself, and believe his own lie
to be a real truth.

And indeed for the most part the man deceives none so much as himself; for by
one means or other, the Cheat is at one time or other discovered, and very
often by himself, and his Accomplices; he that tells a Story truly, is but like
him that reads a Paragraph carefully, which will be the same, how often soever
it be done; but if he adds words of his own, and his Memory fails, he will
necessarily vary, and observing men soon spy the disagreement, and discover the
Cheat as plainly, as if they stood behind him and saw every letter, as well as
he; and if he have Confederates, it will be impossible to Concert beforehand
all the Circumstances so minutely, but that they will differ, and very often
Contradict one another.

And to all this must be Added, That as God is a God of Truth, So he is the
irreconcilable Enemy of Falsehood, and he is the Searcher of Hearts, knows all
things, and is present at all places; his Eyelids try the Children of men, and
he Understands their thoughts long before; and amongst the things that he
hates, and abominates, one is a false Witness that speaks Lies, Prove. 6. 19.
And he has assured us, Chap. 19. v. 5. A false Witness shall not be
unpunished, and he that speaks Lies shall not Escape. And accordingly in his
Providence he frequently detects them; and so if a man be not so foolish, as to
think he has Wit enough to escape the Justice and Providence of God, and the
Watchful Scrutiny of all those men he converses with, (which is impossible) he
must needs Expect at one time, or other to be discovered, and then he will so
far lose his Credit, as not to be believed even when he speaks truth, and will
(if no worse betide him) be hated and scorned of all men.

It befits Magistrates then, of all men, to be very careful to preserve their
Reputations unspotted from this Sin; and the rather, because the Law relies so
much upon them, that in many things their Testimony is Concluding, and no man
shall be allowed to Contradict them. So that they are entirely trusted with the
Lives and Fortunes of men; and the greater the Trust, the stronger the
Obligation not to deceive; and the greater Infamy if they do.

I include under the Name of Honesty, Beneficence.
not only Sincerity and Veracity, but Beneficence, or a great desire to do
good to as many as may be, which is an Excellent Virtue in a private person.
But so absolutely necessary in a Magistrate, that it will not be possible for
him, without it, to use his Power to that End, for which it was given, the Good
of Men.

The Lord Bacon says very well in his Essays, Power to do Good, is the true
and lawful End of Aspiring. For Good Thoughts (tho God accept them,) yet
toward men, are little better than good Dreams; Except they be put in Act: and
that cannot be without Power, and Place, as the Vantage and Commanding Ground.
Merit and Good Works, is the End of Man's Motion, and the Conscience of the
Same is the Accomplishment of Man's rest, Essay the XI. But this Advantage of
Place and Power is Naturally apt to be corrupted in ill Natures, and to
degenerate into Insolence and Violence, and then it is like a Sword in the hand
of a Madman, terrible to all men that come near him, and an instrument of
mischief. Of such men he says a little before, Power is a Curse; for in Evil,
the best Condition is Not to Will, the Second, Not to Can.

Now what can be more deplorable, than for a man in Authority to be looked upon
as a Wild Beast, and to fill all places where he comes with fear and horror?
to have men approach him as they do a Viper, with Caution, and a jealousy of
being injured, if they prevent it not. The constant effect of which is hatred,
in which the fear of Mischief ever ends.

But men approach those that are samed for much goodness, as they were Mortal
Gods sent by the Great and Immortal God into the World for the Good of Men; and
the Greater they are, the more Good they expect and find from them, and are
ashamed, and Angry with themselves, if they find they have deserved, and feel
the contrary.

From such as these no man need fear he shall meet any other than fair
Dealings, without fraud, or hypocrisy. For he whose highest Ambition is to do
good, will have an irreconcilable disgust to the other, wherever he finds it.
His Prudence will set him above the Arts of Dissimulation, and make him scorn
all Frauds, and Crafty Designs, as ignoble and beneath him, things which he can
never stand in need of, and would not use, if he did.

Honesty is said to be the best Policy; and it Certainly is so: for if a man
Converse with his Superiors, it saves him the trouble of Making many a hard
shift, to Excuse, or Color an ill Act, if with his Equals, it begets him
respect, and Wins them to a Confidence in him; and from his Inferiors it
procures him Love and Reverence. To all which God commonly adds his Blessing,
and makes his Undertakings Prosperous; however, he is at peace with himself,
and suffers none of those Terrors of an Evil Conscience, which terrify other
Men, when no other dare accuse, and Punish them; his Mind is quiet, and Serene,
and at rest in all Events, Contented with what is past, and Unconcerned for
what may follow, because his Trust is in God, and from men he does not fear
that ill usage, which he is not Conscious to himself he has deserved.

SECTION V.
I Have now done with those Moral Qualifications, which I thought were most
Necessary to be discoursed of on this Occasion; And I come in the Next place to
some few Politic Considerations, which I take to be absolutely Necessary for
the good Execution of the Office of a Justice of the Peace. Which are, A
Competent Understanding of the Nature of our Government, and Love to it.
Secondly, Of the Nature and Temper of the English People, especially those
Under his Care. Thirdly, Of the Several Factions we have amongst us, and how to
govern them. Of all which I will discourse in Order.


All the Governments that we meet with upon Record, have been either by Single
Persons, which are called Monarthies, or by a Number of the better Sort, which
are styled Aristocracies, or by the whole People, or their Representatives, and
from thence are called Democracies, or Mixed up of two or more of these, and
are thence called Mixed Governments, which, because they may be innumerable,
take their denomination from that Part of the Three I have Mentioned, which is
predominant in the Composition. But I shall not Need to be very Exact here, and
therefore I shall only take Notice of two; Monarchies, and Commonwealths;
which last do in common speaking include all those Governments wherein many men
have the Supreme Authority divided amongst them with Equal Power, and a Liberty
of dissenting.

Monarchies have this Advantage, that they are most Natural, and most Ancient.

As Adam, and Noah were the Fathers of Mankind, so they were the Universal
Monarchs, in that Right: and to their Right all the Princes in the World
succeed, and have the same Power they had, and ought to Use it accordingly, as
if they were the Fathers of their Subjects. And their Subjects ought again to
pay them those Respects that are due to their Fathers; the same Love,
Reverence, and Obedience, so that Treason is an Unnatural^ Crime, and Rebellion
against a man's Prince, is flying in the face of his Father. Which no
provocatin on the Fathers side can justify.

Monarchy is not only the most Natural, but the most Ancient Form of
Government, and most gerneral; look into all the Parts of the World, and in the
most Ancient Times, you shall find they were Governed by Kings; and this is
Truth so apparent in all History, that I never met with any Author of any
Antiquity, that contradicted it, nor I believe ever shall. And amongst all
those People that have of late been discovered in Africa and America, there is
no other Form of Government than Monarchy; and the same, and only that, is
found in China, and all the other Eastern Parts of Asia, which have been found
out of late Years too; so that it is very easy to find, and Name several
Nations who have lived under Kings ever since the Flood, as the Persians, and
Egyptians, and many other; but it is impossible to show that Place, or People
who have been always Governed by a Commonwealth; and as they have all sprung
out of Monarchies, so all the Ancient Commonwealths are long since swallowed up
again by Monarchies; and those that remain are in more fear of this, than of
any other thing whatsoever; which to me is a plain confession, that Nature
tends that way, which may be repelled, but cannot be extinguished.

As it is the most Ancient, and most General Form of Government, so it is the,
best; all Commonwealths have either been liable to Everlasting internal Broyls,
and Commotions, Insurrections, and Seditions, or have been secured from them
more by the fear, and dread of the Power of their Neighbors, than their own
Constitution; So Rome had no sooner mastered all her Neighbors, and destroyed
Carthage; but she fell into those Wars at home, that brought her under a
Monarchy again: and this was the fate of all the Grecian Commonwealths, so soon
as ever they grew rich, and powerful, they became insolent and unquiet at home,
and troublesome abroad, and from thence fell into such Broyls, as made them a
Prey first to the Macedonian Princes, and then to the Romans.

2. It is observed, That all Commonwealths are forced to maintain themselves by
much Injustice, and Ingratitude; it would make a man loath the Name, to see how
basely the Athenians, and other Grecians, the Romans, and Carthagenians used
their Bravest men, whom they commonly sacrificed to their Jealousies in the
End, least the Love of the People should have Advanced them to the Throne, and
very often without the least cause given by them; to their unthankful fellow
Citizens. And we have the like instances of a later date, but I will spare
those few Commonwealths, that are now in being.

3. If a Commonwealth once degenerates into Tyranny; and a Set of ill men get
the Power into their hands, it is scarce ever reformed but with the ruin of the
Constitution; for those ill men take care to fill up all vacancies by men of
the same Faction and Temper to prevent opposition; So the misery of the Subject
is as immortal as the Senate. But in a Monarchy, the death of a Prince in
possession, gives them relief. As it is observed in Tacitus, Hist. lib. 4. cap.
74. Vitia erunt, donec Homiues: sed neque haec continua, et meliorum interventu
pensantur. As long as there are men, there will be vices, but neither will they
be always the same; and besides that, they will be Compensated by the
Succession of good men. The first is common to all Forms of Government to feel
the Effects of Humane frailty; but the relief he mentions, is only to be
Expected in Monarchy.

4. If a Commonwealth falls into a Civil, or Domestic War, or be very much
oppressed by internal Dissentions, and Factions, or an External force, they
have then no other means to save themselves, but the Submission to a Temporary
Monarch; and of this the Romans may be my instance, who in all such Cases chose
a Dictator, who for the time was an Absolute Prince: and there was always found
a Necessity of something like it in all the rest, tho they have another Name
for it, and at last the Romans fell into such a state, that Nothing but their
submission to Augustus could preserve them from utter ruin.

For these and many other Causes, which for brevity I omit, I have ever blessed
God that I was born in a Monarchy, and a Subject to a Prince, who is settled in
his Throne by a long Succession, and an Undoubted Right, so that no Mortal has
any pretense against it.

Of Monarchies, some are Hereditary, others are Elective; the former has many
Advantages over the latter. As first, That the Prince in possession knowing he
shall be succeeded by his own Children or near Kindred, is bound to seek the
Welfare, and procure the Love of his Subjects to the Utmost: whereas Princes
that have only an Estate for life, are not so careful in that particular, but
use their present Advantage to the Enriching of their private Families; or the
Satiating their thirst after Pleasures.

Secondly, Elective Kingdoms are subject to many miseries during the
Interregnum which happens betwixt the Death of one, and the Election of another
Prince; whereas in ours the King never dies, but his last Breath conveys his
Successor to the Throne, and leaves no space for the canvasing of Factions, and
the laying a Foundation for Civil Wars, and the Competition of Powerful, and
Popular Men. So that I will conclude with the Words of my last cited Author,
Minore discrimine Sumi Principem, quam quaeri. There is less danger in
accepting, than choosing a Prince. And I cannot but think he that submits to
the Providence of God in this case, is in as fair a Way to be happy, as he that
is to trust to the Prudence of a Company of Factious great men.

Some Kingdoms are Governed Absolutely, and Arbitrarily, and others by Laws;
the first are liable to great hazards of being very ill treated, if a Prince of
an ill Temper, or little Prudence fall to their share. Our Princes have given
us such Security, as no other Nation has; That they will treat us well, They
have Assured us, that they will Levy no Taxes; but what shall be freely Granted
by us in Parliament; That they will not Repeal any Old, or Enact any New Laws,
without the same Consent of their Subjects; That no man shall be imprisoned
long without a Trial; nor Tried, and Condemned without the Verdict of two
Juries of Men of the same, or a better quality. And tho our Princes are not
punishable for ill Administration, yet all their Ministers, and Officers are.
So that upon the whole Matter, no Nation in the World is better Secured than
the English, from Extreme oppression, and injury. We have a Set of Excellent
Laws in force, and are sure to enjoy them, till we are willing to part with
them; We have a Property in our Lands and Goods, and can truly call them our
own, till we have forfeited them by our own Misdemeanor, and then we are sure
of a fair Trial, before the Law take them away. Our Poor are Carefully, and
kindly provided for; in all urgent occasions We have Magistrates dispersed all
over the Nation for our Security; and for the rest, our highest Courts are open
four times in the Year, where all men may have equal Right, the Poor as well as
the Rich; and besides, there come two of the Judges twice in every Year into
every County, that if any man has cause for it, he may complain, and have
Right done him. We have four Sessions in every Year, wherein the Justices of
the Peace, or a great part, meet to determine what a few could not, and by
Appeals redress their Errors; and there is not a Country Village but the King
has an Officer in it to Secure our Peace, and Apprehend Malefactors.

Now a man would think such a Government, as this should be beloved by all that
knew, and had Lived in it; and so it would without question, if it were not too
strict for ill men, who have designs upon their Neighbors Liberties, and
Fortunes, tho they pretend the quite contrary. And such Men are not fit to be
trusted with any share of the Government, in order to promote their wicked
purposes.

The Next thing necessary in a Justice of the Peace, is a Competent Knowledge of
the Nature and Temper of the English People, especially those under his Charge.

By the word People, I mean only those the Justice of Peace is to govern; for
all that are above that degree, are out of my Bounds, and need not be
Considered by me.

England being an Island, and lying Exposed to perpetual Changes of Winds, and
Weather, more than the Continent does, their Humors and Spirits are in
perpetual Motion; and this affects their Minds too, and makes them very
uncertain, and very much given to Change, if those that have the Conduct of
them, do not frequently inculcate the danger of it, and severely punish those
that give occasion to the beginnings of Commotions, that so this fear may
Counterballance this Natural inclination to Change.

2. The English Blood is very easily Irritated, and hard to be allayed, whilst
it is in its fury. Especially if it be inflamed with Drink, and Excess, or
exasperated with ill usage, and Injustice. And that is the true Reason why we
need so many persons to Keep the Pea^e amongst them, and so many Laws to Secure
it, and prevent Excess in Drinking, and Idleness, which is the Occasion of
Quarrels, and the Nurse of Poverty. And the great Care of the Magistrate should
be to Cure this, First, by preventing all Menaces, or Threatenings, by requiring
Sureties of the Peace of them that use them. Secondly, All Grievous Slanders,
such as tend to the Ruin of men's Reputation and Livelihood, by Securities of
the Good Behavior. Thirdly, All Excess, by a Severe Execution of the Laws
against Tippling, and putting down those Alehouses that suffer Disorder, and
Excess. Fourthly, To be sure not to give them any occasion to complain of
Injustice, and Oppression, by an Exact Care to Keep to the Rule of the Law,
which will Justify him, and keep them quiet; for I have not observed, but that
they submit patiently to that Severity, which the Law imposoth on them, if they
be once satisfied the Law is so.

3. What William the Conqueror observed of the Normans, is as true of the
English. If they be Governed Well, and Severely, they are Valiant, and in great
difficulties Excel all other men, endeavoring to master their Enemies: But if
this be neglected, they tear and destroy each others, for they Love Rebellions,
and Seditions, and are ready for all sorts of Mischief. Let them therefore be
restrained with severity, and be forced by the Rein of Discipline to keep the
Path of Justice; for if this Wild Ass be suffered to go Unyoaked, they and
their Princes will be Overwhelmed with Poverty, and Confusion; This (says that
Prince) I have learned by much Experience.

4. But then they must be Governed Well, that is, with Prudence, and Justice,
as well as with Severity; for it may be there is no Nation under Heaven so
impatient of Injury, and Wrong, as the English, and whatsoever is not precisely
according to Law, they will Esteem such, and when occasion serve, revenge it.
But neither can they bear too much Lenity, and Mercy; they grow insolent, when
they are Flattered, and Courted, and never regard those that seem to fear them.
The Advice therefore of the Conqueror is good, and as fit for our Days, as if
it had been given but Yesterday.

5. The English are not more Courageous in Visible and Apparent Dangers, which
they never fear, than Timorous and Suspicious of every thing they hear; the
most incredible silly Story in the World frights them into Disorder, and
Confusion, and, without Examining the truth, or possibility of the Report, they
rush into Action, and follow them that pretend to Lead them out of those
difficulties; And of this we had abundant Experience in the late Times, and
have lately had enough again to remind us of it; and herein the Care of the
Magistrate should be, to punish severely the Spreaders of Libels, and false
Reports, and the Fomenters of False delusory fears, and jealousies.

6. The English are very Religious Naturally, and in the Times of Popery almost
ruined themselves by their Liberality to the Church, and Monasteries; but the
folly of that being discovered at the Reformation, they have since run to the
other Extreme, and almost ruined the Church, by tearing what they could from
it; and they are now as mad of running after every new Sort of Teacher, that
pretends to show them an undiscovered Way to Heaven, as they were of the Monks
and Friars before; and this has a mischievous Effect upon the State too, and
will Eternally endanger our ruin, till it be redressed by a Constant, and
Severe Execution of our Laws against Conventicles, of which I shall speak more,
when I come to Consider our Factions.

7. In Ancient Times the People were so addicted to the Nobility, and fond of
their Gentry, that two or three discontented Noblemen made nothing to bring an
Army into the Field, and fight their Sovereign; but the Wars betwixt the Houses
of York and Lancaster having almost totally Ruined, and Extinguished the
Ancient Power of the Nobility. Henry the 7th by Politic Laws. Henry the 8th by
his Violence, and Queen Elizabeth by her Severity against the Great Men, and
Condescentions to the Populacy, have so turned the Tide the other Way, that the
People do now as much Slight, and Undervalue them: And to this the Factions in
Religion have contributed very much; for one of the first Principles these
Lanthorn men teach their followers, is to despise their Betters, and suspect,
and speak Evil of their Superiors, which Added to the Natural Envy all men have
for them who live in a more splendid condition, bids fair for the Extirpation
of all our Gentry, and Nobility, if they do not regain the Love of the People
by Virtue, and Extinguish these Factions by a severe, and constant Execution of
our Laws, as I said before; but however, this they may be certain of, the
Enemies of the established Religion are their Irreconcilable, and Sworn
Enemies.

And this brings me to the third Thing necessary to be known, viz. The several
Factions we have amongst us, and how to Govern them. Which I reckon to be
three, the Popish, the Puritan, and the Commonwealth Party; which is made up of
Men of all Religions in pretense, tho in the Bottom they may be suspected to
have none.

Popery was once the Sole Religion of England: Popery.
and although they were well disposed to throw it off by the Exactions and
Oppressions of the Court of Rome in the days of Henry the 2d, and King John, as
appears by the Complaints made of them in the Reign of Richard the 2d, and at
other times in Parliament; yet when Henry the 8th resolved to Extinguish the
Pope's Supremacy by an Oath, many stuck so heartily to it, that they Suffered
Death, of whom Sir Thomas Moore was the Chief, who had been Lord Chancellor of
England; and besides, that Prince maintained the greatest part of the Popish
Doctrine entire to his last breath; Edward the 6th reformed the Doctrine too;
but he Lived not long; and Queen Mary his Successor threw all things back again
into their former state, and reconciled her Self, and the Nation to the Pope:
Queen Elizabeth on the other side, fallowed the Example of her Brother, and
settled the Religion, as now it stands; but then these irregular Motions kept
men's Minds in great Suspense, so that they knew not what to think; and some men
had changed so often to Comply with their Princes, that at last they were
ashamed to change any more, and so Continued Papists in Queen Elizabeth's time,
tho they had been Protestants in the Reign of Edward the 6th. Others embraced
the Protestant Religion then; with a resolution to desert it again, if the
Times Changed; but their Children became sincere, and they died in that
Profession, when they never had any occasion to alter it with Safety. And many
through Prejudice and Education, and for Want of Means, and Ability to Examine
things, Continued in the Popish Religion; but yet the greatest part of the
Nation took up an hearty Aversion for it, out of a detestation of the Cruelty
they had seen used in the Reigns of Henry the 8th, and Queen Mary; and of the
Treacheries they had seen practiced against Queen Elizabeth, whom they
infinitely Loved and Admired.

And indeed the Length, and Prosperity of her Reign, had in all Probability put
an End to that Faction in England, if two things had not kept up their hopes,
and revived it.

The first of which was their Expectation, that Mary Queen of the Scots would
have succeeded her in the Throne, who was true to them; and when this was Cut
off by her death (tho that was a long time after,) yet they still flattered
themselves some other person of their Persuasion would inherit her Crown, and
put an end to their Sufferings: And the truth is, it is the Nature of Mankind
to hope for Extraordinary assistances from God, especially when they suffer for
Religion; and this is it that makes it so difficult to Extirpate those
Factions that are built upon that pretense.

The second thing that tended to uphold Popery in England, was the Policy of
Philip the 2d. King of Spain, who to revenge the Assistance the Queen lent his
Subjects in Flanders, then in a War with him; built several Colleges at Doway
and other places, for such Priests and Jesuits as fled over to him out of
England, and endowed them with some small Revenues, and these made it their
business to draw over as many of the English Youth as they could, especially of
the Nobility and Gentry, and there they bred them up in an invincible hatred of
the Religion by Law Established; and Others they sent over with Orders to
preach up Popery as much as they durst; and had it not been for this, there had
been very few Papists left at that Queens death, who reigned 44 Years.

Tho King James were infinitely disobliged by this Faction at his first coming
to the Crown, by the Powder Plot, and so made Severer Laws against them, than
Queen Elizabeth did; yet neither were they Carefully Executed in his, or his
Sons times, yet this Faction sensibly decreased, and a great part of those that
remained were ruined by the War; and the late Plot in this King's time has
proved very effectual to bring off many more from that Opinion; so that by one
means, or other, it is become one of the most despicable Factions in this
Nation; and if the Blow had been well followed, might perhaps have been
entirely ruined.

Had Queen Elizabeth's Methods been well pursued by all her Successors, they
must in likelihood have been Extinguished; but there was an Odd sort of Policy
taken up, which was to Slacken the Execution of the Laws against them, that
they might be a Counter-ballance to the Puritan Faction; which produced two
great Evils. First, They were so far from lending us any Assistance against the
Dissenters, that their Priests increased the Number of them by Preaching up
their Opinions, and Adding to them, as appears by a small Pamphlet called Foxes
and Firebrands, which proved they were the Fathers of Extemporary Prayers in
Public assemblies. And by several other such Stratagems which they employed
against us.

Secondly, These Dissenters made it their great business to inculcate into the
Heads of the Rabble an Opinion, That all the Lenity, that was used toward the
Papists, proceeded from a Love to Popery; which both made more Puritanes, than
there would otherwise have been, and made them better thought of by the Rabble,
so that instead of Diminishing, or Weakening that Faction, it increased it, and
added reputation to it; and the Papists made the same use of it, and drew over
some Weak, and Unsteady Souls to join with them; so that our Enemies increased
on both sides, but especially the Dissenters; and this was all we ever did, or
can get by that Extravagant piece of Policy.

Besides all this, the People will ever entertain jealous thoughts, and be
discontented at all those, that ever so little favor the Papists, and so long
as there is any Number of them amongst us, besides all the disquiet they give
us, the Factious Dissenters will take hold of that pretense to do us a
mischief, as time, and opportunity serve.

So I conclude it is the Interest and Duty of all Magistrates, to put the Laws
against them Constantly, and Vigorously in Execution, and especially those
against sending their Children beyond Sea to be bred in the Seminaries, and
Jesuits Colleges, where they learn more Malice and more Skill, than they
could do in England.

And because this is a work of time, it is their Duty in the interim to show
the People two things; First, That these relics of Popery are not in any
Capacity of doing us any great mischief, if we do not contribute to it by our
own folly they being few in Number, and generally hated. Secondly, That the
Dissenters are never a Whit better, than the Papists in many of their Opinions,
or Practices, especially those that relate to Government; and that tho they
have ever declaimed most furiously against Popery, yet they have always
maintained underhand a Correspondence with them, and they have mutually helped
one another to destroy us.

And even when the Dissenters knew it not, have they been influenced by Popish
Emissaries in disguise, who inflamed their fiery Spirits during our late
Rebellion, and drove them to that height of Fury, that they Murdered their
Prince, and an hundred thousand of their fellow Subjects with unheard of
Barbarity; and yet in the mean time little thought whose Agents they were, and
now the Secret is discovered, they pursue the same design, and lay all that is
past to these Papists, tho not one of a Thousand was so, as all the World
knows. It were more ingenuous to Confess their Error, and forsake all those
Courses, and Principles, which gave the Jesuits opportunity and encouragement
to push them on to such Lewd, and Wicked Practices.

Before I was aware of it, The Puritan Faction.
I am fallen upon the second Faction, which is the Puritan, this was at first
all of a piece, and all Pure Presbyterians; but in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, began to subdivide, and in the Late Rebellion they Crumbled into so
many, that they have now no common Ligament to Unite them, but their hatred to
the Religion by Law Established; and Presbytery which gave them all life, is
now one of the smallest, and most Contemptible amongst them.

The Rise of this was owing to the Marian Persecution; for many of our
Countrymen, especially the Clergy, were by the fury of it forced to flee into
Germany, where some of them settled at Geneva, Zurick, and other Places, which
had embraced Calvin's Method of Discipline, and so became in Love with the
Novelty of it; others stuck to that which had been settled here in England in
the Reign of Edward the 6th; and this Caused a sharp Bickering betwixt them at
Franckford in the Year 1554, in which they that stood for the English Liturgy
at last prevailed.

Queen Mary dying soon after, these too, got the start of the Genevists in
their return, and the Queen, who understood her own Interest very well, Settled
the Religion as now it stands; Knowing that Presbytery was Calculated for
Commonwealths, and destructive of the Rights of Soveraignity and Monarchy. Yet
She Advanced many of these men to Deanaries, and inferior Dignities in the
Church; and they again so far Complied with the Religion Established, as not to
make any open separation from it, tho they were ever, and anon Complaining of
Ceremonies and humane Impositions. The reason of their Compliance was, because
they had no great Party in England to back them; and the Reasons why the Queen
bore with them were, the Want of Learned men to supply those Places, their
Zealous Preaching against Popery, which was then the only Faction that was
feared, and the hopes many men had that in time they might become wiser.

In the first 9. Years of the Queens Reign, the Papists as well as the
Dissenters frequented our Churches, and Liturgy, and they began the Separation
both at once; and it is now apparent, that Hallingham, Coleman, and Benson,
three of the first Puritan Separatists, were Roman Priests in disguise. As is
undeniably proved by Dr. Stillingfleet in his Preface to the Unreasonableness
of Separation, etc. from that Pamphlet I lately mentioned, called, Foxes, and
Firebrands, which was Published by Dr. Nalson, and is in his First Voll. of
Historical Collections, reprinted; so that it is probable, if these Romish
Priests had not pushed things forward of Purpose to ruin us by Divisions, this
Faction might have expired with those men that brought it out of Germany.

But however, there were two things recommended it. The design of Extirpating
Episcopacy, made all those men favor it, who had a mind to the Bishops Lands,
and had any hopes to possess themselves of them, which were then Courtiers,
under the Queen, and some Country Gentlemen. Secondly, The inferior Clergy, who
were ambitious, and well conceited of their own ability, were highly pleased to
be infranchised from the Jurisdiction of the Bishops, and with the Assistance
of two Lay Brothers, to govern all at their discretion, and many of the Laity
had a mighty conceit to be tampering with Church Discipline, which the less
they understood, the better they thought they could manage it.

And Scotland Reforming at the same time, the Queen (who preferred any Religion
before Popery) suffered Presbytery to be settled there, tho, she might,
perhaps, have prevented it at first. And the intercourse that from
thenceforward was betwixt the Scots and Us, increased very much the Number of
Our English Dissenters.

Having thus won Over in time a Considerable Number of the English to join with
them, and finding there was no probability to persuade that Queen to unsettle
the Church again to introduce their Discipline; and Perceiving they got small
Advantages by Preaching, they fell a Printing Libels against the Bishops, and
Church Government, and Ceremonies, insolent Petitions to the Parliament, and in
Clandestine manner held great Meetings of their Party, and in them resolved to
set up their Discipline without Law, and against the Queens Will, and some of
them attempted to raise Insurrections in London, and were hanged for it, and
the rest prosecuted in the High Commission, and other Ecclesiastical Courts.

So they got small Advantage during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and not much
more in King James his time, his Majesty being perfectly well instructed in
their Principles, Practices, and Tempers in Scotland, by the Experience of what
he and his Mother had suffered by them; so dispairing of Prevailing by Art upon
the Crown, they Molded themselves into a State Faction, and by recommending
their disciples and favorers to the People for Good-Commonwealth-men, hoped in
time to Force the Crown, to vail to the Scepter of Jesus Christ, as they
Blasphemously called their Discipline, by getting them into the House of
Commons, by which means they plagued King James, and at last ruined his Son.

But these Good-Common-wealth-men, when they had got what they aimed at, had no
more mind to submit to Presbytery, than the King before them; and there were
such a powerful Quantity of Under-Suckers sprung up, that it was not safe in
the Uncertainty they were then in, to disgust them; so Presbytery was laid
aside first, and then persecuted, in England, and totally ruined in Scotland;
and Independency reaped the Crop of Advantage which Presbytery had sown in
blood; and by the Help of a general Toleration, there was as great a Swarm of
several Religions in England, as there was of Lice, and Frogs, in Egypt, till
at last the Land stank with them.

And the Common-wealth-men too, fared no better than the Presbyterians, for
when by a long Series of Hypocrisies, Perjuries, Treasons, Bloodshed,
insufferable Taxes, Sequestrations, Plunderings, and Decimations, they had
almost ruined and impoverished the Whole Nation, their own General and Army at
last turned them out of Doors, and took possession of the spoil, and left them
to share the Sin, and Infamy amongst them: And so the Nation, after a trial of
a brace of Tyrants, and half a dozen Sorts of Commonwealths, returned in the
Year 1660, to the same state it was in before, under his Majesty who now
Reigns, Whom God Long Preserve.

I have drawn this Narrative as short as ever I could, and by a Necessary
Consequence, I have been forced to Leave out many Particulars fit for
Magistrates to be acquainted with, in order to the fully understanding how
destructive these Men's Principles, and Practices are, both of the English
Liberties, and Government, and also of the Religion Established, and indeed of
all Monarchies whatsoever: But if the Reader desire further information, he may
have recourse to the Piece I cited above of Dr. Stilling fleets, and to Dr.
Heylin's History of Presbytery, who have Learnedly treated, with others, of
this subject at large.

All that I will infer from it, is, That be the difficulty what it will, these
Factions must be suppressed, and Extirpated, or the Government and Peace of
England can never be Secured; We all see how Near the brink of Ruin and
Destruction they brought us once before, and it is ridiculous to expect the
same causes will not produce the same effects, if they be not Overruled by the
Divine Providence, from which it is in vain to Expect any assistance, without
our Concurring endeavors as far as we can or may.

And this a man would think, were a sufficient Reason for the putting in
Execution all our Laws against them, who have treated us so hardly without, and
against Law, and by all the Crimes that ever were or can be perpetrated by men,
endeavored to destroy us; and he that can seriously reflect upon all this, and
yet believe that they mean us no harm, must be left to Experience, the Mistress
of Fools, for better information.

But then the Reader may be pleased to consider, it must be a constant as well
as a severe Execution, that must do the business, it is, as I said, a Work of
time, and Factions in Religion are not to be suddenly rooted out; except we
would depopulate our Country as the Spaniards did by banishing the Moors all
at once, the ill effects of which they have since found, but cannot Remedy.

For if we be sometimes Severe, and at others Careless; the one will enrage
them against us, and the other enable them to Execute their Malice upon us at
one time, or another; and it may be, when we least expect it, tho it is at all
times to be feared.

For they are a Faction in our Bosoms Strong, and Vigilant, who never did nor
will slip any opportunity to advance themselves, and bring us under, and they
will never want Monitors to incite, and stir them up against us, as long as
there is a Jesuit in the World, that is Knave enough to dissemble with God and
Man, and pretends he is one of their Party; And they will never want assistants
as long as the Commonwealth Party is in being, who can rely upon none but
these, for the Extirpating the Monarchy.

So I come to the third Faction, which is the Commonwealth Party, of which I
have been necesfitated to say something before the Time, of which Faction I may
safely say, that it is of no Antiquity, for in Ancient Times, when ever any
Contests happened betwixt our Kings, and their Subjects; tho they Deposed, and
Murdered several of their Kings; as Edward the Second and Richard the Second,
and Rebelled against others; yet they never went about to destroy the Monarchy,
but set up the right Heirs, or others of the Blood, in the place of the
Dethroned Prince; but for any Attempt to set up a Common wealth, all our
Histories fail us till the last Rebellion, and then upon the Murder of Charles
the first, they declared against Kingly Government, and for a Government
without a King, or House of Peers.

Some have thought this was no part of their Intention at first, but that they
came to it by the Event of Affairs, beyond their Intentions, but he that shall
seriously consider by what Steps and Methods they brought things about and the
Principles of the chief Men that managed their Affairs; can never think, that
they intended less when they began; tho they were forced to conceal their
designs because the discovering them too soon would certainly have defeated
them. And I have read, that one of them thanked God, that he had Lived to see a
Commonwealth settled in England, which he had designed to introduce 30 years
before.

And in the Close, they did what they could to have had Monarchy and the Royal
Family abjured tho they failed in the effecting it. Vide the short View of the
Late Troubles, page 471.

1. In the next place it is fit to consider, whence this hankering after a
Commonwealth sprung, and how it came to infect the English Nation; some have
ascribed this to the more frequent reading of Greek and Latin Authors, and tho
this might have some effect upon Tainted Minds, yet it is a Cause too weak to
produce such an Effect. And therefore I rather ascribe it, First to the
Presbyterian Principles, for as they are exactly Reipublican, as has been made
to appear, so the Men who first took up, and drive on those Practices, were all
of that Party to a Man, or of those that had ever mightily favored them.

2. In the next place, I reckon the Neighborhood and Prosperity of the Dutch,
who having by War freed themselves from all Obedience to their Prince, the King
of Spain, chiefly by the Assistance of the English, those Soldiers that had
lived many years amongst them, took such a fancy for a Common wealth, that
nothing could satisfy them without it, and accordingly I have observed, that
most of the Officers that the Parliament employed in the beginning of the late
War, had been bred Soldiers in the Netherlands.

3. As the Papists send their Children to St. Omers, and other places to be
Educated in an Aversion for our Religion; so these Commonwealth Men send
theirs to Holland, Geneva, and other such places; from whence they return
poisoned with Antimonarchical Principles, and are always seeking opportunities
to distaste the People with our Ancient Government.

4. The discovery of the West Indies brought a vast Wealth into Europe, much of
which falling into the hands of the English Nation, they grew Proud and
Ungovernable, especially after King James had put an end to the War with Spain,
and they had enjoyed a Peace of near Thirty Years Continuance, and that Trade
and Peace, and Wealth, should make men Ungovernable is no new thing, as long as
the Grecians and Romans were poor and weak, they lived contentedly under Kings,
but when they grew Rich, and Powerful, they threw off that Government, and set
up Commonwealths.

Two things afforded them great opportunities, if not Temptations to it: The
first was, the Poverty of the Crown. The Old Revenues were much impaired by the
Liberality, or Necessities of our Princes, and no relief could be had but in
Parliament, and there they knew so well how to truck, that no Prerogative no
Money; They would not freely give, but sell the King Supplies for Liberty; and
they took care too to increase that Necessity, by engaging the King in Wars,
and then denying him Money to carry them on, and to discontent the People at
the same time at the Unprosperous Events of them. Thus the Crown grew every day
poorer, and the People Richer.

Another thing was, the Factions in Religion, which howsoever they were
Managed, one Party or other were dissatisfied, and thereby disposed to Wreak
their Malice on the Crown, by Electing such Men to serve in Parliaments, as
were ill disposed to it. Whereas before, when England was all of one Religion,
it was scarce possible to pretend any thing, in which the whole Body of the
People were Concerned; So that these Animosities in Religion, ended in a Civil
Faction, and many Ambitious Men who cared for No Religion, did yet make use of
them, as tools to Work their Ends upon the Crown.

Two other things Contributed very much to the effecting their designs. First
Scotland led the Dance, and Rebelled upon pretense of Religion; and although the
King might easily have Conquered them by a Battle, or Blocking up their
Harbors; yet being a Tender Prince, and unwilling to shed the Blood of his own
Traitorous Subjects; he rather chose to end the Controversy by a Treaty; which
gave them time to Concert their Affairs with the English of the same Faction,
and that furnished them with means to raise another Army and enter England,
which necessitated the Calling of that Fatal Parliament, which had like to have
ruined the Monarchy, and Nation both at once.

Secondly, the Irish Papists Rebelled at the same time, and rising suddenly,
Massacred 100000 English, which so depopulated Ireland, that the King could
have no Assistance from it, the remaining English being hardly able to Subsist;
and the Parliament made another Advantage of it, by persuading the English to
believe the King had Procured this desolation there.

The City of London lent the Parliament Money, furnished them with Tumults to
Drive the King out of it first, and then with Armies to force him back again;
and too many of the Gentry were Lazy, and would not stir, timorous and durst
not, discontented, and willing the Crown should be reduced, tho not ruined.

But when they came to put the Project in Execution, and after the ruin of the
King's Forces, to erect their Commonwealth of England, there were other
difficulties that could not be overcome, their own Army that had done their
Drudgery, would not be Disbanded, and they could not force them. They had rid
their hands of one of the Three Estates that Constitute our Parliament, the
Spiritual Lords, at first. And there was a parcel of Lords Temporal, who for a
long time Acted with them; but at Last, being not able to digest the Insolence
of the Commons, stood off; upon which they Voted them Useless, and laid them by
too. So that all was then in the hands of the Commons.

They could not, or would not Dissolve themselves, in the state things then
were, for then the whole Power would have been in the Army, and Officers, who
might easily have prevented the Meeting of another Parliament, and the whole
Nation was dissatisfied to see them divide the spoil, and profit, amongst
themselves, without any hope that any, but they and their Relations should
partake with them in the reward, as they had in the danger; the Gentry were
generally known to have Wished well to the King, and the Rabble were to be
pleased, by suffering them to insult over their Old Masters, and the Royal
Party, tho Conquered, were not dejected, and the Godly Party were fallen in
Sunder, and the Independents were persecuting their Sire, Presbytery.

The Commons were a Body constituted of two Knights for every Shire, and two
Burg^sses for each Corporation; and the Latter exceeded vastly the former in
Number: and tho this inequality had not been much regarded Under the Monarchy;
yet now the House of Commons was to be made the Standing Senate of the Nation,
the Counties Would not endure it; if the People had suffered any Grievance
under the Monarchy, they Complained in Parliament, and had redress. But Now
they had no body to complain to but the Commons, and they, when the Case became
their own, Answered them with Blows, and Death.

So that what looked so prettily, and easy to be affected at a distance, when
i^ came to be tried, was found impracticable, and the most insufferable Slavery
in Nature, and one fell to devise one Remedy, and another another; but none
would do, and the Commons were not to be dispossessed of what had cost them so
many Lives to purchase it, so the Sword determined the Controversy here too,
and to the general joy of the whole Nation, the General, and Army-Saints sent
them packing to Consider, what they had done and what they deserved, but the
Wealth they had got by Villainy, did yet afford them some Consolation in this
World. As I said before.

I have been as short, as possibly I could, and I have purposely omitted many
things, which should otherwise have been spoken that I might be so; and now
with the Readers Patience, I shall enquire whether the design of extinguishing
the Monarchy, be really and totally laid aside at this day: to which I answer
No.

For first all the Principal Causes do still subsist, We have the same
Religions, which then we had, and they have the same Principles, and
Dispositions, and follow the same Methods they then did; they Educate their
Children in the same Places, and recommend the same sort of Men to the People
they did before. But there are some things, that stand in their way, which did
not then.

1. His Majesty has a better Revenue then his Father had, and this is a great
Block in their way, but they hope it will end with his Life, and in the mean
time we know, what has been done to Curb him in that particular.

2. His Majesty has a strong Guard always in Pay, so that Tumults are not so
safe, especially at White Hall Gates, as heretofore they were, and this is the
cause the Nation have been told, that they are Papists, and dangerous to the
Liberty and Property of the Subjects.

3. The Militia of the City of London, and the rest of the Nation is in Trusty
hands, and no Rebellion can for the present be safely begun, and therefore the
Chief Officers are Traduced to the People, as Men of Arbitrary Principles,
favorers of Popery, and Papists.

4. The Ministers of State are all represented to the People, as French
Pensioners, and Papists in Masquerade. What the meaning of this is, my Lord
Bacon shall tell you. This is a sure Rule, that if the Envy upon the Minister,
be great, when the cause of it, in him, is small; or if the Envy be General in
a manner, upon all the Ministers of an Estate; the Envy (tho hidden) is truly
upon the State it self. Essay the 9th. But then it is not so easy to destroy
them as it was before, because it is better known now.

5. Scotland and Ireland are quiet, and His Majesty has good Guards in both of
them to keep them so, whereas his Father had none, and tho there have been
dreadful Complaints of them, and diverse Attempts in Scotland to destroy them,
by the Covenanting Whiggs, yet it will not do, there they are still, and no
body can help it.

6. The Nation has a strong Impression left of the Miseries of the Late War,
the Bloodshed, Taxes, and Tyranny they then groaned under, and his Majesty
cannot forget the Methods that were used to destroy his Father, and Banish him,
and he will never give them leave to play over the Old Game, and this was it,
which made the Late Conspiracy to Murder him, so necessary.

7. The House of Peers have no mind to be Voted down the second time, and they
stoutly oppose what ever tends that way; and the Dissenting Lords have lost the
Assistance they formerly had, from the Popish Peers in that House, and may
protest and complain, but could never carry one Vote since; a manifest
Argument, how much the Puritan, and Popish Faction stand in need of each other.

8. The liberty of the Press was for several years lost, but since that
restraint ended, we have not wanted Seditious Pamphlets to incite the People to
another Rebellion, which were written by some body for something and were
bought up, and read by vast Numbers of People, who in all probability, had no
mighty Aversion for them.

The same Fears and Jealousies have been revived and buzzed industriously, into
the Heads of the People; but there is a cerrain Act of Parliament, that makes
it dangerous to Traduce the King, as they did his Father; but what no body
durst speak directly, they can slily insinuate, and avoid the danger of the Law
at the same time; and there are several other Acts of Parliament, which have
made the design of the Republicans difficult, which I will omit.

Now, I say, considering all these Difficulties that were not before, and that
all that were before are still in being, and that Men have naturally an
Aversion for hempen Neck-laces; I say, considering these things, any man, that
will, may see there has been as much done, as could be, toward the setting up
another Commonwealth, and more then the Gentlemen in 41 durst do, till they
have an Army to back them, and if any man be disposed to believe these things
come to pass by chance, and without any design, there is no reason why I should
disturb the rest of the world, by endeavoring any further to satisfy him,
which in all probability is impossible.

But there is one question behind still, and that is, What the Inferior
Magistrates and Justices of the Peace, shall do to prevent this Faction from
attaining what they aim at?

1. To which I answer, first, take away the Cause, and the Effect will follow,
the Puritan Principles, and Factions gave Being to this, and with them it will
fail, but as long as they subsit, and are powerful* the Commonwealth Party
will be so too, it is true that many forsake the Factious in other things, but
join with them in this, but then they are false at the heart, and have left the
rest, only because it was chargeable, being of that Party, and are to be
treated accordingly, and never to be trusted.

2. The People are frequently to be told of the Miseries they endured, during
the Late Times of Anarchy, and Confusion, that the Memory of them may not be
forgot in the next Generation; and by what means the Nations became involved in
them, that they may not have the opportunity of Re-acting the Old Tragedy.

3. The Government ought to be represented to the People as it is; that they
may know their own happiness, and live obediently under it. A good Man would
not endeavor to subvert any Government that were Established, tho it were none
of the best, because the Miseries that attend such Changes, are greater for the
most part, then those that are pretended to be removed by them, but for us, to
attempt to pull down one of the Ancientest, and best Constituted Governments in
the World, under which England has flourished so many Ages, and to deliver our
selves up into the hands of a Company of Ambitious Men, to be treated we know
not how, and Governed we know not which way, is perfect Madness.

4. It is well observed in Tacitus, Liberty and other Specious Things are
pretended; Nor did ever any man seek a Dominion over others and to enslave
them, but he made use of such pretenses for it. We have tried these Men, and by
experience have found that they are mere Pretenses, and that there is no
sweeter Liberty in the World, then to live under a good Prince, and God has
given us one to our hearts desire, let us not be such Fools as to catch at such
shadows as they offer to us, and loose the real, and solid good things we do
enjoy.

5. The Throne is established by Righteousness, Prove. 16. 12. And ancient
Histories afford us many instances of good Princes, that have been ruined by
the Injustice of their under Officers, when the People have been enraged by
them; Now every Inferior Magistrate may in this contribute much, to the
disappointing the wicked Designs of this Faction by doing Justice, and cutting
the Roots of all Discontents, before they rise to Assault the Throne, or spread
to undermine it. It is a common Complaint, that we have excellent Laws, but
they are ill Executed. I know the whole fault of all this ought not to be
ascribed to the Magistrates; but yet we are not such as we ought to be: If any
share of it lies at our Doors, and if the Throne be made odious and
consequently weak by our defaults, we must expect to suffer first, and to bear
the blame of it hereafter; our Oaths will keep us from joining in a Rebellion,
and our Loyalty make us obnoxious to their Cruelty, which as Tacitus says, is
the greatest Crime amongst Rebels.

If therefore neither the Memory of what is past, nor the sense of what is
present, our own nor others experience will prevail upon us, to prevent the ill
Effects we must in reason expect from the Conjunction of the Puritan, and
Commonwealth Factions United, and Fermented by the Popish; if we will still
resolve to try whether our Savior's Rule is true, That a Kingdom divided
within it self cannot stand, Math. 12. 25. then are we such men as deserve no
pity from God, or Men whatever follow.

But on the other side, if we would buckle to the Work, and with Zeal, and
Industry, and Patience pursue it, by God's Gracious Assistance, we might soon
bring under these two Factions, and in time Extirpate all the three, not by a
destruction of their Persons, but of their Pernicious and Disloyal Principles,
and whoever has but the least share in this great work, shall be blessed in
this, and all succeeding Generations.

SECTION VI.
I Come in the next place to speak of a sort of Qualifications so necessary in
a Magistrate, that without them he would never be able to discharge his Duty,
as he ought, which I shall reduce under these three heads.

1. A great Love to Justice. 2. Impartiality in executing it. 3. Aversion for
those things that may hinder it.
Solomon says, It is a joy to the just to do Judgment, Prove. 21. 15. And
except men take a joy in it, Judgment will certainly be ill done, if at all,
especially by those men who have no other reward for it, then the satisfaction
of their own minds, and the sense of having served God and their King and
Country in a Station, that brings them no personal Advantage. We may say truly
of the Justice of Peace his Calling, that there is much Noise, and no Wool, and
as for honor, the better he is the less he must expect it, in this perverse
Generation. Envy and Ill will he may be sure to reap, but for any sollid
satisfaction, unless what results from the Peace of his own Mind, and the
blessed hopes of a Future Reward from God, the Righteous Judge of Men and
Angels, he will find himself miserably deceived in the Event, if he at all
expects it.

And this is not the worst of it neither, difficulties he will meet, that will
require the utmost degree of Patience, Prudence, Industry, and Attention to
dispel them, and without Gods particular Assistance, it will not be done at
last, but instead of doing Justice, he will do Injury, and Injustice, and he
will have cause to complain, Dum falsum nefas exequor vindex, scelestus incidi
in verum nefas. Whilst I pursued and punished an imaginary, and supposed Crime
in another, I have committed a real one my self, and this will be a great
misfortune even then when it is no fault, and much more when it is.

When these, and a thousand other difficulties which no man can foresee, are
considered, it will I suppose be easily granted, that he that is to encounter,
and overcome them; had need have a strong, and almost invincible Love to
Justice to enable him, and support him in his undertaking. And perhaps if it
were well considered, there is not a greater instance of the Divine Providence
in the Government of the World, then that so many friends to Justice can be
found as there is, Men that Court and Espouse her purely for her own sake,
without any other Dower, then that of Sorrow and Vexation of Spirit, whose
Business, Pleasures, Recreations, nay their very Prayers, and Meals are
interrupted by their thankless, unprofitable, uneasy employment, and yet God
for the good of others sweetens all this, and ties them as close to it by the
Cords of Love, as a Hen to her Eggs, and Chickens, from which she can never
reap any advantage.

But then those that are not so qualified, should in Prudence never attempt to
meet these Rampant Lions, which they may be sure are in the way, and if any of
them will not consider it beforehand, his own experience will soon inform him
of the truth of what I say.

I speak not this to discourage any man but to forewarn him, that he may be
provided with a resolution equal to the opposition, which only Love can
inspire; fear it is true has sometimes made Men Valiant, but then that is a
forced Courage, which will not last; lay the man a golden Bridge, open him a
way, and you may be sure never to be troubled more with his Valor, or his
Justice.

But he that loves any thing pursues it through Fire, and Water, and Death it
self cannot extinguish the desire. Tell him of dangers, and he replies, At
contra Audentior ibo, but I am resolved to master them. These and these only
are the fit Men to serve in this Honorable Employment, and may God Almighty
bless and reward those we have, and send more such Heroic Souls into the
Field, to discountenance Faction, and Vice, and to protect Innocence, Religion,
and Virtue.

And to the rest I shall offer two, or three things to be thought of at their
leisure. Will any man in his right Wits expect Peace without Justice? What were
the World but a Hell of Misery, and a Chaos of Confusion, if every man might
say, and do what he list? Were it not for the public Justice to terrify some,
and cut off other Malefactors, your House would be a Castle to you indeed, but
surrounded with such dangers, that you should neither eat nor drink, nor sleep
in Peace and Security, and the more Opulent your Fortunes were, the greater
would be the temptation to destroy and impoverish you; go into the fruitful
Countries of the Mogull in the East Indies, and you shall find vast Spaces of
Rich Soil desolate, and unhabited, only for want of Country Magistrates, to
protect the good, and punish the disorderly, for that Prince sends but few
Governors into his vast Provinces, and they reside in the great Cities, so that
the Poor and Remote have small advantage by them, and so would it be in England
if all men were of your minds. But you will say there is no fear of that, but
then you shall be as accountable to God, and your Country, has if it had really
happened, for tho man cannot punish these Sins of Omission, God can and will.
But you must gain Portions for your Children, and increase your Estates, yes
and your Sorrows too, to see all your Labors end in Smoke, a Civil War destroy
that in an hour, you have been carking for many years, and your Beloved
Daughter become the Prey of a Lieutenant, or a Captain at the best, who has
nothing to Jointure her in, and takes her and all the Thousands you have
scraped together for her, in part of payment for the public service, or
dis-service, as it happens, and it may be your Grandchildren may after all
this have the honor and happiness to be Tapsters, or Ostlers in some great
place. When if the Public had been better minded, your Daughter and her
Descendants might have been happy. These are no vain speculations, so that if
men would consider seriously of it, they would love Justice, if not for it
self, yet for the Consequences of it.

2. Next to the love of Justice impartiality in doing it is to be considered,
for it is possible to turn Justice into Wormwood, and Gaul, the best and
sweetest of things into the bitterest^; and here so many by-ways offer
themselves, that a Justice of the Peace had need be a man of great Sincerity,
and Integrity to avoid them, and pursue the straight Path of Justice.

Some Men have that Veneration for Great Men, that they durst not oppose their
Wills, or Humors in any thing, be it never so unreasonable, or unjust; and
here if a Controversy happen between a poor Servant, Labourer or Tenant, and
the Lord of the Manor, or other Rich Person, all the Arts in the World, all
the shifts and tricks imaginable are upon such an occasion, to be mustered up
to prove the poor Party in the wrong, and the rich one in the right, ^is
Witnesses (if he have any that dare stand by him,) are to be defamed; all his
whole life is to be searched into, to find a flaw in it, tho nothing to the
purpose; if the man still stands stoutly to it, and will not surrender at once
his Integrity, and his Case, hands and eyes are lift up in Admiration at his
Impudence; if he speaks one word for another, or indiscreetly what had been
better omitted, then for a loud fit of Laughter to put him out of Countenance,
that the Legerdemain may be better carried. If nothing else will do two or
three bawling Attorneys, must be called into the business that the success may
be assured, nay and it is well too if Mr. Justice can excuse himself from
passing a promise before hand, that he will determine in favor of the
Gentleman.

If I should speak all I mean upon this Theme, it would look as if I designed a
Satyr or a Libel; But that is the furthest thing in the World from my thoughts.
I do heartily blush, and grieve to think such things should be done amongst
Christians, but that will not Remedy the Evil.

Let such men know then, that God has made both the Poor, and the Rich, and he
cares for both alike, and whoever he be that shall thus abuse the trust
reposed in him, shall sooner or later be recompensed by him, according to his
deserts, and the greater he be, the greater his Crime and Punishment, for
Mighty Men shall be mightily tormented.

And let him not think neither that his Chastisement shall not overtake him,
till he comes into the next World, which if it were true, would be a silly
Comfort, that is, that he should only be damned for it, but it is ten to one if
he meets it not presently, his own Conscience will at one time or other
reproach him for it, the very Person he thus favored, will ever after repute
him a poor low spirited Coward, or a Knave, and however he may Flatter and
Caress him for the present in show, yet Condemn, and Scorn him in his Heart,
and draw him along from one iniquity to another, till he become odious, and
contemptible to all that know him, and the poor injured Party will be sure to
revenge his injustice, by telling the Story, and after a while it will find
belief, and then as the poor are most numerous, he will have many Enemies, and
no Friends, for never did any man purchase a friend by injustice, and what the
Effect of all this may be at last, I leave to all men to consider.

It is almost the same thing to favor a poor man, only because he is poor, tho
it does not happen so frequently, for if he be in need, and necessity, thou
may draw thy purse, and relieve him, but what have thou to do with that,
which is another Man's, the great Boy must not have the little Boys Coat,
because it is fit for him, or he has need of it, but every man must have what
is his own, otherwise you may call it what you will, but Justice it is not.

Besides these two, there are two other differences which may often happen in
those that come before a Justice of the Peace, he is to do Justice at home
amongst his own Neighbors, and some of them are his Kindred, his Friends, or
their Relations, others are under his displeasure, and may have offended him or
his, in something or other, and these two affections of Love, or Hatred, are
great Corrupters of Truth and Justice, and the Historian took great care to
prevent this objection, by saying, ( Mihi Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, nec
beneficio, nec injuria ^ogniti.) Galba, Otho, and Vitellius were not known to
me, either by their injuries or benefits, if they had, there might have been
some reason to have suspected his Relations of them, but this is much more
powerful in a Justice of Peace, or Inferior Magistrate, then in an Historian,
they all hope their Writings shall live and be read by all Men, and there can
hardly be a delusion of that sort imposed upon the World, but one or other by
one means or other, will discover it, or the piercing Wits of Men will find it
out from the very Historians themselves, but those things that are to be done
but once, and are often never more thought of, are not of that Nature, and may
possibly never be discovered, or soon be forgotten, as some men think; but this
is a very great disception, when a wrong Judgment is passed, all men will make
it their business, to discover how it came to pass, and if there were any
former kindness or quarrel tho many years before, will conjecture that to be
the Cause, especially if the Justice does not give good reason for what he
does, and they will suspect it where it is not too, and therefore it is good in
those Cases to do as little as a man possibly can, without the Conjunction of
others.

For say a man could escape the Eyes of all Mankind, (which is very difficult
if not impossible) yet he can never delude God, he penetrates the bottom of our
hearts, and discovers our most secret inclinations, and affections, and will
surely punish us if he finds they lead us to pervert Justice* and Judgment, and
besides this Sin it includes in it Perjury too, for it is contrary to our
Oaths, and he that can hope to digest these two grievous Sins, will hardly much
regard any thing I can say unto him, but must be left to time, and the Justice
of God, to learn the contrary.

Respect of Persons is in some sort a worse and more fatal Crime then Bribery,
for both Parties may bribe me, but no man can make himself my Kinsman, or grow
rich in a moment, and therefore it is impossible to correct it, besides it is
observed that such men are of a base unconstant Spirit, for there are degrees
of Love and Hatred, Hopes and Fears, and such a man will comply with one Party
one day, and another another day, without Justice or Reason, as his Interest or
Passions lead him, so that no body is sure of him, for he will as the Scripture
says, offend for a Morsel of Bread, that is, for any thing or nothing, and
therefore all men should avoid them, as they would a Thief or a Cut purse.

There is another sort of Partiality that springs from things, some Men have a
kindness for some Vices or Factions, and they love that in another, which they
cherish in themselves, and so if any Complaint be made, they wrest, and bend
the Laws to comply with their humors, and interests, and sometimes they
stretch, and sometimes they shrevil, and shrink them up to nothing, and this is
direct Partiality; the same Offense should have the same Punishment whoever
commits it, and every Offense that very punishment, which the Laws have
appointed and no other; and if any difference is to be made, let it spring from
some Consideration in the Persons or Things, and not from us, punish a poor man
according to his Offense, and his Poverty, and not according to your affections
toward him, but if you discover any such thing within you, be sure to curb it,
at least to suspect it, and punish your Friends according to Law, and your
Enemies something less, if you must do it, and so in relation to other things;
a man should be most severe against his own Vice, to show the World he is not
desirous it should follow his example, tho when all is done, the best way of
Correction is for a man to begin at himself, and having formed his own Life
according to Law, and Reason, then to try what he can do upon others.

I will in the next place consider those things that do most usually hinder,
and obstruct the Execution of Justice; against which a Magistrate ought to arm
himself, with an habitual and invincible hatred, and as often as occasion
serve, declare it to the World that men knowing his resolution beforehand, may
not dare to tempt him.

The first of which I reckon Bribery, which is so frequent an Impediment of
Justice, that both the Laws of God, and Man have taken frequent notice of it,
and severely threatened it, and it accordingly is attended with great Infamy for
the most part if it meets no other punishment, and the greater in a Justice of
the Peace, because the Persons and things that come before him are of that
small Consideration, that he cannot in reason expect a Bribe in his whole Life,
that would tempt a man of any Generosity to do an ill thing. What is half a
dozen Chickens, or a Couple of Capons to a Man of Worship? and yet for such
pityful prices have some men sold their reputations, and laid themselves open
to the scandal, and derision of the World. It was a sharp reflection that was
made upon them in Parliament, in the 44th year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
when one said, a Justice of Peace was a living Creature, that for half a dozen
of Chickens will dispense with a whole dozen of Penal-Statutes. I believe as
there was not then, so there is not now, many such pityful Animals Crept unto
the Bench, and advanced to that Honorable Employment, but then the less the
number is, the more easily the Commission might be purged of these Vermin, who
are a shame to the rest, and a great vexation to all their inferior
Neighbors, and a dishonor to the Government.

The ways by which Bribery is attempted are so various, that it is impossible
to enumerate them all, sometimes the Wife, the Children, the Clerk, are
purchased underhand to recommend the Case to the Justice, and obtain a promise
of him when he least thinks of it, and so if the man be easy, he is bribed and
knows it not, and in this Case the best way is for a Man by his Actions to
demonstrate to the World, that none of these have any power over him, or can
influence him this or that way, and when men find themselves deceived, they
will give over those tricks, and be ashamed they were ever guilty of using them.

Another Method is to offer their service as Laborers, at small or no wages,
upon urgent occasions, and then these days work are chalked up upon the Dorman,
or behind the Door, and woe to the next man that gives the least offense to the
Leather Breeches, his Worship is obliged to give him a Cast of his Office too,
in his turn, and he is hard hearted and ungrateful, if he will not gratify the
Clown with a little Injustice, and Perjury, in exchange for his Labor.

Sometimes the Justice has something to buy or sell, and then the bargain is
driven with respect to his place, and what is lost, is to be made up with
Advantage out of the depending quarrel.

If the Justice of the Peace be a Practicing Lawyer, then he shall have a Fee
for his Advice, which he is bound to defend too into the Bargain, be it right
or wrong at the next Sessions, or else he loses his Client forever.

Sometimes general Promises are thrown out, such as these, It shall be never
the worse, or I will not be unthankful, and the like, which are like empty
Caskes thrown out to entertain the Leviathan with.

In short, to go about to enumerate them all is impossible; And to prescribe
any other Remedy against them, then a ridgid and inflexible Honesty, is to no
purpose; for this Winding Snake will creep up and steal upon a Man by such
unforeseen ways, that it will not be in his power to prevent its approaches,
tho he may easily and safely with St. Paul, shake off the Viper into the fire,
if it fix upon his hand, and then the Exposing those that attempt it, to the
World, by telling the Story publicly, will deter others from the like ill
Courses, and a better remedy can no man invent.

Prejudice and Prepossession have the same ill Effects with Bribery. Prejudice
and Prepossession.
And indeed, Bribery aims at Nothing else, but to forestall the Judgment, and
if that follow from any other cause, the effect is the same; it is all one to
the Defendant, if the Justice Sell, or freely Surrender his Judgment to the
Complainant, if he find him disposed to Condemn him before he has heard him,
credulous of what ever is objected, but intractable and imperswasible on the
other side. So that Bribery and prejudice have this in common, that they both
blind the Eyes of the Wise, and pervert the Words of the Righteous, Deuteronomy. 16.
19. and of the two, Bribery is the more Excusable, perhaps, because there is
some temptation in it, but the other sells his Reason for Nothing.

It is well observed by the Lord Bacon in his Advancement of Learning
concerning Prejudice and Prepossession, Book VIII. Chapter 2. Parab. 17. The first
information, in any Cause, if it a little fix it self in the Mind of the Judge,
takes deep root, and Wholly seasons and prepossesses it, so as it can hardly be
taken out, unless some manifest falsehood be found in the Matter of the
Information; or some cunning dealing, in exhibiting and laying open the same.
For a bare and simple defense, tho it be Just, and more Weighty, can hardly
compensate the prejudice of the first information, nor is of force in its self,
to reduce the Scales of Justice, once swayed down, to an eqnal Balance.
Wherefore it is the safest Course for a Judge, that Nothing touching the proofs
and merit of the cause, be intimated beforehand; until both Parties be heard
together. Thus far this great Man, who was once Lord Keeper of the Great Seal
of England. And a Justice of the Peace is in much more danger of being
prepossessed than a Judge, because the Complaint is made at first immediately
to him, and he may afterward be more easily approached, yea, and deceived too
than a Judge, as being not so well versed in affairs, or prepared for the
Execution of his Office by his Education, and therefore should be the more Wary
and Jealous of himself.

Sometimes the prejudice is of an Ancienter date than the Complaint depending,
and is sometimes the fault, and at others the misfortune of the Party: if he
have given just cause for it by his former misdemeanors, and ill Life, then he
can blame no body but himself, and yet the Justice ought not to condemn him in
his very thoughts, till he is clearly proved Guilty; for the Worst of Men may
be Wronged, and every man is supposed at first innocent, and afterward
penitent, till the contrary be shown, not by surmises, but by proof. But alas,
we live in so False and Slanderous an Age, that the Fame of very Good men is
often blasted behind their backs, and it is become a common practice for men to
blacken their Reputation, whose Persons or Estates they design to Ruin; and
for the most part, more mischief is done the Party by these Underhand
Accusations, which he can never answer, then by all the direct proof. And
therefore the Justice of the Peace ought to suspect all informations that are
from the purpose, as Slanders, and designed for no other purpose than to
prepossess him with an ill opinion of the party.

What I have said will in some degree discover the Mischief of Prejudice; but
there is this further in it. Reason is the Light and Eye of the Soul; Now if
the Eye be simple, the Whole shall be full of Light; but if it be darkened with
prepossession, how great is that Darkness? Matthew. 6. 23. and I may add, how
incurable, how inexcusable too? It is certain we shall all stand before the
Tribunal of Jesus Christ, and whatever Judgment we here pass upon Things, and
Persons, shall be there reviewed, and therefore it befits us to be very exactly
careful that we do not draw upon us a just Condemnation from that most
Righteous and All-seeing Judge, by condemning our Fellow Servants through
Prejudice, and Prepossession Wrongfully.

Nor let us ever think, that we shall escape the censure of men, for they will
certainly at one time or other discover the Cheat, and esteem us according, as
they find cause, tho perhaps they will not dare freely to tell us their minds,
and if they never should, yet our Consciences will Accuse us for it, and God in
his Providence, will take care to punish us for it, and that it may be in the
same way we have offended.

So that he that can be secure in the midst of so many dangers, and open his
Ears, and expose himself to every secret Whisper against a Man, is a Person
disposed for ruin, and does neither deserve the Advice, or Pity of any Man.

Bribery, and Prepossession do for the most part spring from others. Favor and
Hatred.
Favor and Hatred take their Rise from our selves, and are as great
hindrances to Equal, and Impartial Justice, as the other two; there is no man
so mean, but he may by Accident, or upon Design, oblige his Betters, and beget
in them a good opinion of him, and most men are naturally apt to do it before
hand, and all the little Arts of Flattery, Obsequiousness, and Courtship are on
such occasions made use of, and many a man has been drawn in by them, who
would have abhorred a Bribe.

Nor can any man on the other side live so innocently, as at all times to avoid
the displeasure of his Neighbors, and a Justice of Peace is as capable of
resentment, as other Men, and in some degree more, because Pride, and great
Expectations of Submission, and Regard do naturally follow Power in all its
degrees and Circumstances, and the least opposition, or defeatexasperates such,
more then ten times as much would another, so that the Natural Consequence is,
that a man in Authority, and Power will have many pretending Friends, and if he
be not the more careful, as many real, or suspected Foes, and if his Love, and
his Hatred have any room left for their Activity in the Execution of his
Office, they will betray him to many Inconveniences, and Acts of Injustice,
which he would otherwise have avoided.

Whereas Justice should in this respect be blind, and not see the Parties, but
the Fact on one side, and the Law on the other, and then with discretion, and
impartiality, without Favor or Affection, Hatred or ill Will give to every Man
according to his Works.

But in the State man is, this is so difficult, that if Reason and Religion be
not called in to our Assistance, it will not be done, the man has injured me,
and therefore another, is false Logic, but yet so powerful, that it is almost
impossible to see the Fallacy, especially whilst a Man is under the Dominion
of Anger, and Hatred, which are powerful Passions, and the Argument is as weak
the other way; the man is an honest man, and therefore would not do amiss, or
complain without good Cause. Why, he is a man still, and subject to all the
Infirmities of Flesh and Blood, and therefore I ought not to surrender my self
blindfold to his Conduct, but diligently search out the truth.

And indeed if men would entertain low and humble thoughts of themselves, they
would seldom be mistaken, but if I think my Smile, my Nod, my kind Word, or
Look, a mighty Obligation, and make a Muster of my Friends, by the List of my
Flatterers and Admirers, I shall soon have a large Roll, but they will in
Adversity appear to be what they are like, false Musters in Peace appear in
their Ranks, and Files a full Body, but in time of necessity, and need, be like
the gleaning after the Vintage, thin and of no use, and every Act of Injustice
I do, will diminish the number of my Friends, even of those for whose sakes I
did it, and increase the number and fury of my Enemies.

But on the other side, Exact and Impartial Justice is venerable, and lovely in
the sight of God and Men, and even those that suffer by it, will when the smart
is over, love and revere the man that Administered it to them, so the upright
Impartial Magistrate shall in the end have fewer Enemies, and more hearty
Friends then the other.

If there were nothing but this to be said for it, there were reason enough to
banish all our Affections, and Passions, when we sit down in the Judgment Seat,
and Act as if we were then newly dropped from Heaven, without Friend, or
Acquaintance, Enemy, or Injurer, but if we cannot so divest our selves of our
former dispositions, it is fit to send the Parties to some other Justice, that
is not in our Circumstances, or at least to be very wary and careful what we
do, and say, that we may be able to justify our selves to God and Man, and our
own Consciences.

Covetousness is another great hindrance to the Execution of Justice,
Covetousness.
and therefore the Advice of Jethro to Moses, That he should provide for
Magistrates, able Men, such as fear God, Men of Truth, hating Covetousness,
Exodus 18. 21. was very good and thought fit to be recorded for our Instruction;
and to the same purpose was the Admonition of Queen Elizabeth of Famous Memory,
when she advised the Justices of the Peace, that they should not deserve the
Epethites of prowling Justices, Justices of Quarrels, who counted Champerty
good Chevesance; sinning Justices, who did suck and consume the good of this
Common wealth: and indeed they that are eagerly intent upon increasing their
own Estates, do seldom stick at any thing that may tend to promote their great
Design, but employ as well their Authority, as their Wits to that purpose, not
caring what the public suffer, so their private Profit may be advanced by it,
in order to which any thing is to be done, or omitted.

But such men (if there be any such in Authority) should do well to consider
the grave advice of Bishop Sanderson, Sermon. the first, ad Magistratum. The
Private is not distinguished from the Public; but included in it: and no man
knows what Mischiefs unawares, he prepares for his private Estate in the
end; whilst thinking to provide well enough for himself, he cherishes in the
mean time, or suffers Abuses in the Public. And Zenophon in his Margin gives
the reason; for with the Public, all the Wealth of private persons is either
saved or lost; so that the most Covetous Man if he were not short sighted, and
half witted, would be the most careful to preserve what he so much valued, even
for his own sweet sake, by preserving the Public.

I know notwithstanding it is impossible to convince such men of their Duty or
Interest, the Advantage is present, the Danger is remote, and at a distance,
and he must make use of all opportunities to increase his Wealth, and let them
that come after, or other men take care to secure it.

I wish therefore our Superiors would now and then look over the Commissions
of the Peace, and if they find such men crept in, fairly lay them by, that they
may have leisure to follow the Chase after the Eagle, that makes her Wings, and
flies away toward Heaven, where few of these Thrifty Gentlemen ever come.

Irregular Heats and Hopes, ^rregular Heats and Hopes.
are great hinderers of Justice, as to the first, it was well observed by Sir
William Scroggs in his Speech to the Lord Chancellor in Michaelmas Term, 1676.
when he was admitted one of the Justices of the Common Pleas. As to the
discharge of my duty betwixt Party, it is impossible to be performed without
these two Cardinal Virtues, Temper, and Cleanness of hands.

Temper comprehends Patience, Humility and Candor. It seems to me that saying,
Be quick to hear, and slow to speak, was made on purpose for a Judge, no
Direction can be apter, and no Character becomes him better, and he that would
not be said to have but one Ear, methinks should be ashamed to have none, and I
appeal to your Lordships Experience, if a patient attention accompanied with
indifferent parts, and a competency in the Law, with a mind fairly disposed for
Information or Conviction, will not as to use and common benefit, exceed the
profoundest Knowledge, and most towering Understanding, that is attended with
an impetuous have, either out of a glory of speaking, or too great a fullness of
himself. And for Humility, tho I will not say that every impatient man is proud
(because that may arise from other Causes) yet every proud man is impatient,
sometimes of Information, always of Contradiction; and he must be violent to
maintain his own Imperiousness.

Thus far that Great Man, whose words I rather chose to transcribe than to
express my own thoughts, because I expect they will derive a great Authority
from the Speaker and Place, where they were spoken; and to my understanding
they are as fit, and more necessary for a Justice of Peace, than for a Judge.

How ill does it become a Migistrate who is a Minister of God to the People for
Good, and should be a Terror not to the Good but Evil? to become so to all that
come near him, through his Impatience and Fury, sparing neither Equals nor
Inferiors, and very often flying in the Face of God Almighty, by his
Irreligious and Detestable Oaths, and Imprecations, which are no unusual
effects of such passions.

God Almighty is said to be slow to Anger, and of great Kindness, and that he
repents him of the Evil, that is, the Punishment we have deserved, when he is
just going to inflict it. It becomes then his Ministers to be like their
Master, and to be so far from being incensed against the Innocent, and those
that have not offended them, as to pity, and treat fairly the most provoking,
and worst Malefactor.

The Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God, Jam. 1. 20. No how can
it? A man that is of that fiery temper is like the Furnace in Daniel, not to be
approached without danger, if God does not restrain his fury; and he that is
not able to use his own reason, and govern himself, will be less able to Govern
others.

This is not said that a Magistrate should be like Esop's Block, and suffer
himself tamely to be trodden on, no, he ought to be a Terror to Evil Works, for
he bears not the Sword in vain, Romans 13. 4. But then let men fear his
Justice, not his Passion, his Rebukes, and not his Taunts.

Irregular hopes are full as bad, some men do ill things by way of pre-emption,
they will comply with a Brother Justice in any thing, though it be never so
unjust, that he may do them the like favor at another time, or that he may at
least not retaliate them with a mischief, thus they hope by Injustice to become
more powerful with their Equals, and more dreadful to their Inferiors, than if
they should always too stiffly stand for Truth, and Justice, they have observed
that Compliance makes friends, and that inflexible honesty creates a man many
Enemies, and instead of trusting to the Providence of God for their Protection,
they lean to their own Wisdom, but how unsafely, the Event in the end will
satisfy every man.

Some affect Popularity, and they hope by being remiss and careless in their
duty, to acquire the love of the People, and gain the Title of Moderate Men, a
good word; but of late much abused, but then they are very often mistaken, and
if they be not, what is Popular Praise but Words? and they are nothing but
Wind, a cold Reward, and as for their Love it is more fickle and unconstant
than the Wind, and less to be trusted to, as they have found by sad experience
in their distresses, that have relied upon it, and yet when all is done, it is
more often acquired by Justice and Truth, than by a slavish Compliance, and
Flattery, because they are naturally jealous of the extraordinary
condescentions of their Superiors, and look upon them as Designs.

The last hindrance of Justice I shall mention, Lasiness.
is Lasiness, or a dull Inactivity; Men undertake the Public Service without
considering beforehand the difficulties that attend it, and when they perceive
it troublesome, and laborious to go through with the Work, and that they shall
reap much ill Will, Envy, Reproach, Hatred, and Discontent for doing nothing,
but their Duties, and no present Profit, they sit down discouraged, and like
the weary Pilot, commit the Boat to the Waves, and the Winds, and let her drive
at Random. Such men should consider, that Perseverance to the end is that which
God Crowns, and that man is born to trouble as the Sparks fly upwards, and that
there is as many troubles at every man's heels, as there is before him, only if
he goes on bravely, and resolutely, and conquer them that stand in his way, the
other shall never overtake him, but if he yields, he is sure to be crushed
betwixt them, and to be destroyed ingloriously, and without pity.

Others look to nothing but the Credit, Honor, and Reputation they shall gain
by it, and if they can acquire the Title of Right Worshipful, and have their
Neighbors stand bare-headed to them, they have their Designs. Now this is such
a pityful piece of Vanity and Folly, that it were to be wished (if there must
be such) that they might be as lazy as is possible, that they may do the less
mischief; but then methinks the very fear of being thought such, should rouse
all that have but one Spark of true English Generosity, and make them study
their Duties diligently, and then perform it industriously and thereby regain
their Credits here, and a more excellent Reward hereafter.

SECTION VII.
THe next thing requisite in a Justice of Peace, is a competent knowledge of our
Laws and Customs, for by these he is to warrant his Proceedings, and if in
this part of my Discourse, I happen to commit any Error, I desire beforehand
to bespeak the Readers Pardon, for I never had the happiness and honor to be a
Member of any of the Honorable Inns of Court.

My Reader then need not fear I will set him upon the Purchase, or reading of
all the Body of our Laws, for tho it might be useful to a Justice of the Peace,
yet it is not of absolute necessity.

It is said of one of our Statesmen, that his Learning was not great but
useful, and he did not know much, but he practiced what he knew diligently, and
this is an Excellent Character of a Justice of the Peace. Much knowledge may
puff a man up with a high Conceit of himself, but when all is done, Honesty and
Industry are the Qualities that best befit a Magistrate.

The knowledge may be attained in a small time, if a man will make it his
business, and there is three effectual means for it.

1. Reading. 2. Observation and Practice. 3. Conversation and Discourse with
Knowing and Experienced Men.
Natural Sagacity, and Reason may teach a Man many things, but it is an ill
thing to trust to it in point of Government; the Commission of the Peace
directs us to proceed, Prout secundum legem and Consuetudinem Regni Nostri
Angliae, aut formam Ordinationum vel Statuorum Praedictorum, fieri consuevit
aut debuit, that is, as ought, and has been used to be done, according to the
Laws and Customs of England, or the Form of the Ordinances, and Statutes
aforesaid, and these are not to be known without some Study, and Reading, so
that he that has an Aversion for Books, will never make a knowing Justice of
the Peace, tho he may stand as a Cipher to make the number greater.

Nor will he Act with any certainty or security to himself, his business being
to apply the Laws, and not to make new ones, and at one time, or other he will
meet with them, who will make him sensible of his ignorance to his Cost, if he
commit any great Error, and without doubt he will be Guilty of many.

It is a shame for an English Gentleman to be ignorant of our Laws, tho he live
never so privately, they are the best part of our Inheritance, the effects of
our Ancestors Prudence, the Charters of our Freedoms, not from Subjection, but
Misery and Slavery under it; they are at the same times the Monuments of the
Favors of our Princes, and strong Obligations to love, and serve them, and as
occasion require to spend our Bloods, and Estates in their Service; for our
Kings have not treated us like Vassals, or Slaves, but like their Children,
laid no grievous Burdens on us, but such reasonable, and just Commands as we
either chose by our Representatives in Parliament, or ought to have chosen for
our own goods.

But certainly they do ill deserve this happiness, who will take no pains to
understand it, when they might so easily do it, being freed by their Estates
from a necessity of Bodily Labor, and furnished with Money to buy Books, and
leisure to read them, which is too usually spent in Luxury with greater
Expense, and sometimes with the Ruins of their Lives, and Fortunes; besides,
for want of it they are the more subject to be wheadled into ill Practices
against the State, and exposed to the Craft, and Rapacity of Lawyers, who teach
them the value of this knowledge, by the price they pay for it.

But then Justices of the Peace are not only obliged, as they are Englishmen
and Gentlemen to this Study, but as they have promised upon Oath to be
Executors of the Laws, and it betrays a great stupidity of Mind, or
Irreligion, to swear to do equal right to the Poor and to the Rich, after their
Cunning, Wit and Power, and after the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and
Statutes thereof made, as the Form of the Oath is, and then never concern
themselves to know what those Laws and Customs are, and to mind the Statutes
of England, no more then they do the Edicts of France.

And that which renders the thing the more inexcusable, is the great pains and
care many Learned Men have taken, to make Collections of those things, that are
most necessary for the Justice of the Peace, so that no man can want a Tutor,
if he have but a Will to learn, and they are written too with that Variety of
Method, that they will fit any man's humor, who is not given up to sloth and
negligence.

I can never admire enough the Learning of Mr. William Lambard, how nice and
curious he is in his inquiries into the Origin of those Powers, that are given
to the Justice of the Peace, and the reasons of them, his Brevity, and the
Perspicuity of his Style, which makes him very useful, tho there have been
great Additions of late, made to that Office by new Statutes.

The diligence of Mr. Dalton is not less to be valued, nor the Exact Method in
which he has digested so great a variety of things, which are again made more
valuable by the Additions made in the Late Impressions.

How Curious and Subtle is Sir Edward Cook, in his readings upon the great
Charter and other Statutes, which are of great use to a Justice of Peace,
because they will give him hints, and general Rules for the interpreting, and
understanding those Statutes he took no notice of, and those too that have been
made since his death.

What a Vast Variety of Reading and Learning has he shown in the Pleas of the
Crown; and yet he has so couched and contracted it, that the Volume is but
small tho the worth is in estimable.

The Exactness of Mr. Poulton in his Book De pace Regis and Regni, is much to
be admired, where beginning at the root of all public disorders, the corrupt
unquiet hearts of men, he shows how they proceed from one degree to another,
till Menaces, and Threatenings grow up at last into Rebellions, and Treasons,
all along proving what he says by Quotations of the best Law Books.

The Conciseness of the Lord Hales in his Pleas of the Crown, Sir Mat. Hales.
is not less to be admired, then his Integrity and Prudence, in so contracting
them.

And Mr. Chamberlain's Complete Justice, and Mr. Keebles Assistance, etc. want
nothing but an industrious, and grateful Age, to make both the Books, and
Authors more highly valued, and indeed they cannot be too much esteemed.

And as for the Statutes, Mr. Keeble has done the Nation a mighty piece of
Service, in his Exact Re-printing of them, in an excellent Table of his own,
but there is in my poor judgment one thing still wanting, and that is an Index,
or Table of the Statutes under those Heads or Titles, which the Justices of the
Peace have occasion to use them by; which are different from the Lawyers common
places, so that there should be another Table on purpose for the Justices of
the Peace, which might be drawn in a Sheet of Paper: the only Person that
attempted this to my knowledge, is one Mr. Wa. Young in a small piece styled a
Vade Mecum, Printed at London in 1660. In the beginning of which is a Table
containing about five Leaves, which is of vast use for the speedy finding of
any Statute that a Justice of Peace has occasion to use, but yet it is
imperfect not only as to the New, but Ancient Statutes.

There is another thing, which I have wished for, and that is an exact
Collection of all those Cases, which immediately concern the Justice of Peace,
in which their power, or ways of Proceedings are called in question, out of
the Year-Books and Reports, recited in the same order of time as they are
there, at length, without any abbreviations, and only translating into English
such as are in French, which would be of great use.

Now if a man should attempt to read all these Books which I have mentioned,
which relate to the Office of the Justice of Peace (the Statutes expected,
which are only to be consulted upon occasion) it were no very grievous Task,
and yet he might learn his Duty thence, without any other or very little help
from Books.

But in the mean time it were to be wished, that some men could be persuaded to
read but one of the short ones first, and then one of the larger pieces, I mean
Dalton or Keebles Assistance, and then the short piece again to fix things in
their Memory, and if I were worthy to advise them, it should be Mr.
Chamberlain's, for I take that to be the very best that ever was written.

As reading begins knowledge, Observation and Practice.
so Observation and Practice fixes it, he that reads without reflecting upon it
at the time, and noting diligently what may be useful to him afterward, loses
both his Labor and his time, many men complain of a bad Memory, when the fault
is their own, they read carelessly, and take no pains to imprint any thing upon
their Minds, either then or afterward, and then it were a wonder if they
should remember what they never considered, nor understood, but read on and on
and think upon something else.

Others pretend they would read more if they had a good Memory, this is a
pretense only for Lasiness, laying their own fault upon God and Nature, for
Memory is a Natural Faculty common to men with many other Creatures; but on the
other side if they would read more, and note as they go they would certainly
retain a part of it, tho perhaps not so much as others do. But then there is a
third sort of men who pretend to have ill Memories, who in truth never read at
all, these belie their Natural Faculties, it is true they remember little or
nothing, how should they? the Memory is but like a Storehouse, in which if
nothing is laid up, nothing shall ever be found, if what is good for nothing,
such as is laid in will come out, and not be in the least amended there.

Observation does something, but Practice is the great sixer of Notions in the
minds of men, he that his a Natural Fool, will yet by often going away learn it
at last, how much more men of Competent Natural Parts, and such only are fit to
Govern others? and the truth is, they that have the strongest Memories will yet
in time lose their Notices of Things, if they do not excite them by
Meditations, and Practice, and that sort of knowledge I am speaking of, which is
not Natural, but Artificial Reason, and depends not for the most part upon the
innate Principles, but upon positive Institutions, and agreed Methods, is most
easily lost, so that I have ever observed the most industrious men are the most
skillful, and many men who read little, but have been very much employed in
business, have by that learned more then others have done by Books, only tho
they had better parts, so that a Man shall rarely find a Man excellently Versed
in any Practical Knowledge, that has not fixed it, as well by exercise of it,
as by Observation and Reading.

Observation and Practice fixes, Conversation.
but it is Conversation and Discourse with Knowing and Experienced Men that
extends Knowledge, much reading dulls a Man, but discourse at once revives what
a man knows, and increases it by the Addition of another Observations too,
and dispells that Melancholy which attends retirement and solitude: It confirms
a man more in his Opinion, when he finds another man of the same mind, and
rectifies his mistakes, before they become dangerous to him, or to others.

But then it must be with Knowing Men, for no man can communicate to another
that which he has not, he may mislead him, or confirm him in Error, and so
make his mistake more fatal; but other good he can expect little from him,
except it be the diversion of his Chat.

When the Person with whom we converse, has not only a Speculative, but a
Practical Knowledge too of any thing; if he appear honest and disinterested, we
may rely the better on his Judgment, and the little Stories, which he will be
able to tell of things well, or ill done, will strangely dwell upon the memory,
and fix things, and at the same time rectify the Judgment too. It was well
said by the Lord Bacon, Set before thee the best Examples, for imitation is a
Globe of Precepts; and for that end were Histories written, that one Generation
might learn from another, and take Example what to follow, and what to avoid;
and Discourse is of the same Nature, tho not so perfect.

I may then justly detest their ill nature and folly, who when they meet with
Men of Knowledge and Experience, and willing to Communicate both to them, envy
and traduce them, and when they have nothing else to say, think to make them
Odious, by saying, They love to talk, and are conceited of their own Knowledge
or Abilities, and are Proud men; why, if all this were true, it is better to be
Proud of Something, than of Nothing, and yet the last happens oftenest; solid
Knowledge will make a man humble, when there is nothing so conceited as
Ignorance: and a communicative Man is better company, than a close churlish
Nature, who values himself upon the Ignorance of others, which shall never be
rectified by him. And it is usual for these men too, to learn from them, whom
they thus traduce.

Secondly, I may justly reprehend them who spend all their time in tittle
tattle, about their Currs, and their Kites, their Debaucheries, and
Recreations, or, which is worse, in defaming their Neighbors; but if any
useful Discourse is begun, that may tend to the Public Good, or to make them
wiser, or better, are ill at ease, till it be ended, turn sick, and are ready
to surrender their overcharged Stomachs.

It Is true, the Age in which we live, is learned; but if this humor prevail a
little more, the next will not only be debauched, but barbarous, and ignorant.

SECTION VIII.
THe End of all that knowledge I have been discoursing of in the foregoing
Section is for Practice; for that makes it truly beneficial, a Man had better
be totally Ignorant of all Laws, than to Study them to find ways to defeat
them; that so he may at once avoid the Directive, and Coercive Power of them.
But the Great design of a Good Magistrate is a Prudent Execution of them, by
observing a due Method according to Law. 1. In calling the Parties. 2. In
hearing them. 3. In determining the Cause.

It is an old, and a just Complaint, that no Nation has better Laws than this,
nor hardly any that executes them worse, and yet we are possessed with an
Hydropical thirst after more, the cause of which is, that every man would be
free himself, and have another bound; but of what use are the best Laws without
severe Execution? If we design nothing but ostentation; in my Judgment the Book
of Statutes is big enough all ready. We are almost in the same condition with
the Ancient Romans, Nec vitia nostra, nec remedia eorum far possumus, we can
neither bear our great and manifold Vices, nor the Remedies of them.

And it was the Observation of a Wise man, Corruptissima Repub. plurimae Leges,
that most Laws were made, in the most corrupted States. But then never was any
People amended with Ink, and Paper, and Laws are no more, till they be put in
Execution. It was good Advice which Tiberius gave the Senate, that they should
not teach the World by ineffectual Laws, what Vices were too strong for their
Authority; for which he gives this reason, That when Men had once prevailed
against that Remedy too, Neque metus ultra, neq, pudor est, there was neither
Fear, nor Modesty left to amend them. If we think much to Execute those we
already have, to what end should we desire more? If we think it burdensome to
Obey our old Laws, why should we desire to increase the weight, except it be to
show by the breach of more, how much we despise them?

But as in the making, so in the executing of Laws, there will be occasion to
make use of much Prudence, and Discretion to make a dextrous Application of the
General Rule to the particular instance, and to order the Business so too (if
it be possible) that the Offender may be Reformed, and not Ruined; it is
impossible to give any General Rule, or Advice in this Case, but it must be
left to the discretion of the Magistrate. Only the Saying of the last Lord
Chancellor will ever be found true. Happy is that Government where men Complain
of the strict Execution of the Laws. And if I might presume to give the Reason
it should be this; Severity prevents Offenses, whereas too much lenity
increases them, and makes the Offender by Custom, and Time incorrigible.

When a Complaint is brought before a Justice of the Peace, his first care must
be to consider diligently, whether the Case be within his Jurisdiction; for it
is no unusual thing for mean People to complain to them in Cases, in which they
can afford them no Relief, and it is much better to consider this at first,
than when it is too late; for then a Man has betrayed his ignorance, and
indiscretion, if there happen nothing worse.

Some Men have a custom to extend their Power beyond the just bounds of it,
that they may have the more Business; and others will not do what they might,
and ought, either out of fear, or ignorance, or unwillingness to be Troubled;
neither of these are good. It is unsafe, and often injurious too, to stretch
the Jurisdiction beyond its due bounds. And it is unjust on the other side to
deny Men the Benefit of the Laws, when it is in Our Power to Right them: And
therefore a Good Magistrate will avoid both the Extremes, and neither give his
Neighbors Trouble to no purpose, nor spare his own Pains when he can serve his
Country. And herein he will soon find the great Benefit of his Care to inform
himself Exactly of his Duty, without which, it will be very difficult to
determine whether he has a right to meddle, or no; and if he thinks he has,
it will not be amiss (at first especially, and afterward in all doubtful
Cases) to consult his Books, and so go on or desist, as he finds Cause. And the
Safety will sufficiently Compensate for the Trouble.

When he is resolved to grant a Warrant, it is an excellent Way to enter into a
Paper Book to be kept for that purpose, first the Name of the Complainant, and
of the Party against whom the Complaint is brought; and then the Complaint, in
as few words as is possible, and then read them to the Complainant, that if any
Mistake has been made in the Names, or thing, it may be rectified, and then
recite all this again in the Preface of the Warrant; for I am utterly against
all General Precepts (except it be in some few Cases which seldom happen) it
being unreasonable to call a man to Answer to the knows not what, when if the
Case had been Expressed, perhaps he could have produced Witnesses to have
cleared his innocence, and so have prevented further Charge, and Trouble; and
Mr. Lambard gives another good reason for it, viz. Because the King's Writs do
always express the Cause of Complaint.

When the Warrant is once granted, it is not fit to hold any further Discourse
with the Complainant, or afterward, till both Parties appear face to face, to
prevent Prejudice, and Prepossession; yet you shall have many such Complainants
that will endeavor to get a Promise from the Justice of Peace beforehand, that
he will Determine the Case for their Advantage, which is directly contrary to
all Justice, and Honesty.

Others are as earnest to have the Warrant retornable before the Justice that
granted it, and no others, which should never be easily granted, first because
it includes in it a Tacit reproach of the rest, as not Men of Ability, or
Honesty. Secondly, Because it defeats the intention of the Law, which has made
them numerous, that every man might have an impartial, and and indifferent
Judge; and yet if there be good reason for it, it may be done; But then the
Justice has bound himself to be as kind to the other Party as he can possibly
be, because he has deprived him of the favor he might have found from another
Justice of the Peace.

When the Defendant appears, read the Complaint to him, and ask him what he
says to it; and if he confess it, then there will need no Proof; if he deny
it, endeavor to find out the Truth, as far as is possible without Oaths to
avoid Perjury, by cross Examining of all Parties, and if the Truth can so be
found out, the pains is well spent, but if it cannot, Oaths must be given.

When the Matter of Fact is once stated, then have recourse to the Statutes, or
Books, as the Case requires, and read them to the Parties, that the Law may
pass the Sentence, for this instructs and satisfies all Parties, and shows that
you have done them no wrong, and it is of great use too to the Justice of
Peace, and makes the Statutes, and Books very familiar to him; and gives him a
good Assurance, that he has not done amiss.

Then Enter in the same Book the Appearance of the Parties, the Evidence given,
and the Determination thereupon made, as short as is possible, and dismiss them.

Some may imagine, that this Keeping of a Book is very troublesome, but if they
would try it, they would find the contrary; when the Art of making short
Entries is once learned; and yet if it were, the Use would outweigh the
Labor. For First, It inables a Man to answer for his Actions many years after,
which were impossible without it. Secondly, It prevents forgetting his Business
before it be ended, which many do for want of it, who bind Over men to the
Sessions, and forget the Business before they come, and then can give no reason
for it. Thirdly, It inables a Man sometimes to discover his own Errors by an
after-reflexion on his own Actions, and the Reasons of them. Fourthly, He may
at any time show what Sentence was passed in any Case, by which I have seen new
Quarrels that were arising prevented. And if just upon a Sessions they be all
read over, he shall have a Prospect of all he has done that Quarter; which
will be of great use. I know many of these things are not of absolute
Necessity, but upon Trial, I persuade my self, they will appear so useful, that
no man will repent the Experiment, especially no new Beginner, who is concerned
to be more careful, because he is more subject to Mistake.

The Statutes are so numerous, and withal so variously Penned, that it will be
impossible to remember them exactly, and so it will be necessary to Consult
them frequently upon all Occasions, and in order to the speedy finding them,
the Table I mentioned in the last Section will be of great use, and the
Justice, who takes these Methods, will find the Benefit of them so great in a
small time, that he will never leave them; but the other and shorter ways are
so uncertain, and subject to Error, that no man can avoid committing fatal
Mistakes, who follows them.

In this Part of our Business Two things are to be avoided, Unnecessary Delays,
and Precipitated Have.

There is very little difference betwixt denying, and delaying Justice; only
the latter is less injurious, for then the Party may go to another Justice, or
desist, without much Expense of time, which is of great value to Poor Men;
whereas the making them dance Attendance from time to time to no purpose, may
do them more Wrong than that of which the complain. And an Overhasty
Determination of a thing before it be well understood, is no less injurious;
and therefore carefully to be avoided.

I will Conclude this Section with a few Excellent Rules of the Lord Bacon's.

1. Seek to make thy course Regular, that Men may know beforehand what to
Expect: but be not Positive, and Peremptory. 2. Express thy self well when thou
go from thy Rule. 3. Embrace and invite Helps, and Advices touching the
Execution of thy Place: and do not drive away such, as bring thee Information
as Medlers; but accept of them in good part. 4. Give easy access. 2. Keep
times appointed. 3. Go through with that which is in hand. 4. And interlace not
Business but of Necessity.
I will only add this, that what I have Written in this Section, is intended
only for the private Hearing in the Hall, and no where else in the main; and
that it is offered to Consideration, and not prescribed as of Necessity.

SECTION IX.
AS the Justice of Peace enters his Office with the taking Three several Oaths,
Of Oaths.
which are included in the Dedimus Potestatem, viz. The Oath of Supremacy, and
of Allegiance, and that belonging to his Office; So he has very frequent
Occasions to Administer Oaths to others in the Execution of it; and therefore
it befits him to study well the Nature, and Obligation of an Oath, that he may
Preserve himself, and others (as much as in him lies) from the Sin of Perjury.

It might therefore not seem impertinent to Discourse something of both of them
in this place, but that more Learned men than I, have prevented me in it, and
it is impossible for Me to say any thing, which has not been said before on
this Account.

Instead of which, I am rather inclined to deplore the Miseries of the Age, and
Nation in which we live; for it may be that since the Creation of the World,
there is not one to be found in which Perjury and Disregard of the Obligation
of all Oaths, have taken such Deep rooting, and become so Epidemical, and
General.

If we inquire into the Reasons of it, we shall find two, which have
contributed especially to it, Factions, and Irreligion.

The Popish Faction led the Way, and long since by Papal Dispensations taught
Christians to play fast, and loose with those dreadful ties, which honest
Heathens revered, and trembled at; and to Uphold their tottering Greatness,
Decreed at last, That Faith was not to be kept with Heretics; a Doctrine which
they have since most religiously observed, when it has been safe as they
thought, whether to their greater Infamy, or Damage, I shall not now inquire.

The Dissenters at length embraced (in the beginning of our late Confusions)
the same Opinion, and being to undertake a War against their King; were
Necessitated to absolve themselves from the Oath of Allegiance they had made to
him, and afterward the same Necessity brought them to take the Covenant which
was contrary to that Oath, the Engagement which was contrary to both; and so on
they went Swearing Contradictions, and imposing them upon the People, till no
body did any longer regard what they Swear to, and they became so Persidious
too, and distrustful of each other, that this Persidy and Perjury in which they
had put their greatest trust by a just Judgment of God upon them, ruined all
their Designs, and brought their Affairs into such Confusion, that they were
forced to Submit to His Majesty, and accept a Pardon from him, whom they had
abjured, but a few Months before.

But the Nation being once infected with this Leprosy of Perjury, tho one
cause was gone, the War, yet the Factions kept up the Distemper; partly to
secure themselves against the Laws made against them, and partly in hopes to
make great use of it in another Revolution, which they have lived in
Expectation of ever since.

So they Minted new Doctrines, That it is better to Trust God ( i. e. to try
whether he will be as good as his Word, and Punish them for false Swearing)
than Man. That it was a less Sin (if it were any) for a Man to forswear
himself, than to betray a Godly Brother to the Wicked, or to inform against him
to his loss.

And as they taught, so they practiced, they took all Oaths, and kept none; And
if any body was scrupulous, and fearful, they tried what Persuasion would do;
if that failed, they fell to close Revenges, Defamations, Suits at Law on other
Pretenses, and all the Ways they could, till at last partly for Love, partly
for Fear, they brought incredible Numbers of Men to Perjure themselves for them.

Thus our Ignoramus Juries, our Perjured Constables, our
Conforming-Nonconforming Ministers, our Sacramentary distinctions into Legal,
and Spiritual Sacraments; our Moderate Magistrates so called, and our
Journeyman Freemen were produced.

So that by degrees things are now come to that pass, that no man can tell how
to trust his Life, his Honor, his Fortunes, to the truth of a Witness, or
Jury; for Men have learned to serve themselves in their private Concerns of the
same Engine that have wrought such wonderful Effects in the Public; and the
Contagion has spread it self so vastly, that there is hardly any security left.

Nor have the Dreadful Judgments of God upon the first Inventers, the learned
Writings, and Sermons of the conformable Clergy, nor any thing else that could
yet be thought of been able to put a stop to it.

Nay the Atheism, and Irreligion, which the Observation of all this impious
Villainy has produced, joined with the Debauchery of the Times, have given a
great increase to it; so that now not only the demure Hypocrite forswears
himself for the Glory of God, and the Good of his Children; but the Atheist,
when there is occasion, does it by their Example, for his Own sweet sake, and
his Friends.

But what will be the Effect of all this? Without Oaths there can be no
Administration of Justice, no Determination of Controversies, and without
Truth, and Honesty in those Oaths, there can be as little Justice in the Event.
That Perjury that did a man a Kindness to day, may ruin him to morrow, and in
probability will do so. Besides, no man almost can manage a Perjury so
cunningly, but that it will be known, not only to God, but to some Men, who
will afterward distrust and hate that Man to the day of his Death; even the
Party, for whom he did it, will be forever after jealous of him. So that a Man
that is once guilty of this Sin, if he be not prosecuted for it by Public
Justice, will yet be infamous, and suspected by all his Neighbors; so that if
Men were Wise, tho they did not fear God, yet to avoid the Hatred, and distrust
of Men, they would avoid this detestable Sin of Perjury.

But if they could conceal it from the Knowledge of all Mankind, can they
deceive their own Consciences too? no sure; and if they did but mind it, they
should find many, who have afterward had so deep and grievous a sense of this
Sin, that they have put an end to their own Lives to escape the fury of it,
others have died Distracted and Dispairing, and those, that have recovered by
the Mercy of God, have yet many of them lived miserable, unfortunate,
uncomfortable lives ever after.

And after all this the Judgments of God Almighty come up in the Rear with a
Vengeance so much more heavy as it is the flower. It is observed by the Author
of the Wisdom of Solomon (Chap. 14. v. 30, 31.) that those Heathens, who swore
falsely by their Idols, were yet for those Perjuries punished by the true God.
For it is not (says he) the Power of them by whom they swear: but it is the
just Vengeance of Sinners, that punishes always the offense of Sinners. If the
true God seemed thus careful to preserve Religion amongst Men by avenging the
Injuries, that were done to false Gods by those that worshipped them as true,
which he often did in pity to the deceived World, because without Religion
Communities would degenerate into Bands of Thieves and Herds of Beasts, each
one preying upon another, and keeping no more Faith, than Necessity could
enforce, (as is well observed by the Author of The Life of Agathocles) than by
a necessary Consequence he is much more obliged to assert his own honor basely
abused by Pretended Christians, and we may be sure he will, for he has never
yet failed to do it.

How many Princes trusting to the Papal Absolutions have been destroyed by
their own Perjuries? what did the Emperor gain by the breach of his Faith at
the Council of Constance, or any other Prince since? what did our Dissenters
Gain by all their Perjuries between 40 and 60? what are they the better for all
those they have procured or abetted since, is not the hand of God against them
in all they undertake, defeating all their Projects, and Designs, and making
them every day more Odious, than others?

For my part, I do not fear that perjurious Projects will ever prevail, or do
any body any good: but the Crime being spread so vastly, I fear a National
Judgment, a Calamity that shall be as general as the Sin, and then no man will
be free from suffering the sad Effects of it, tho those that have procured it,
will smart most by it; and this is enough to oblige every good Man, that loves
his Country, (especially all Magistrates) to stand in the gap, and to prevent
the further Growth of it, as much as is possible by discountenancing it, and
punishing it too, as occasion serve.

Some are of Opinion, this Sin might be stopped by a severe Law against it, but
I am of another mind; and I heartily believe more innocent than guilty Men
would suffer by it, if we had such a Law, because these wicked Wretches make
Parties to uphold one another, and will lay things so well together, that it is
almost impossible to discover the Cheat; and then as for Oaths to prove them,
that they never want; whereas good Men are not so vigilant, suspecting as
little ill, as they mean, and so would be more exposed to the force of such a
Law.

But as for Public Officers (especially Constables, and such like) I wish
together with their Oaths they might be compelled to enter a Recognizance of
the same Condition with their Oaths, which if it were but of small value as X,
or XX lib. it would work much upon them, and in a great measure put a stop to
this Impiety; for some that do not reverence an Oath would yet fear to forfeit
their Recognizance, and in time Religion would return and take away the
necessity of such double Obligations.

As for Private Concerns there is excellent provision made by a late Statute,
29 Car. 2. Cap. 3. and the extending it to a few more particulars might be very
useful; and till this can be done, Men must commit as little, as is possible to
Verbal Testimonies, by taking all things they can in Writing.

2. Another of the best, and most effectual means that is left to stop this
inundation of Perjury* is for Magistrates to express a great detestation of it,
not only by their words, as Occasion serve, but by their Actions too, by
showing themselves to be exceeding Careful not to do any thing, that is
contrary to their Oaths, and sometimes giving that for a reason of it; for that
makes a greater impression upon the Minds of Men, than any words without it,
because it is at once a Verbal and a Practical Declaration, and their Authority
will make it the more taken Notice of and regarded.

The Oaths of Supremacy, and Allegiance are so frequently Administered, that I
need not take any further notice of them here, but that which more immediately
concerns the Justices of the Peace, is as follows.

YE shall Swear that as Justice of the Peace in the County of C. in all
Articles in the King's Commission to you directed, you shall do Egal Right to
the Poor, and to the Rich, after your Cunning, Wit and Power, and after the
Laws and Customs of the Realm, and Statutes thereof made: and ye shall not be
of Council of any quarrel hanging before you: and that ye shall hold your
Sessions after the form of the Statutes thereof made. And the Issues, Fines and
Amerciments that shall happen to be made; and all Forfeitures which shall fall
before you, ye shall cause to be entered without any Concealment (or
imbefilling) and truly send them to the King's Exchequer; ye shall not let for
Gift, or other Cause, but well and truly you shall do your Office of Justice
of the Peace in that behalf: And that you take nothing for your Office of
Justice of the Peace to be done, but of the King, and Fees accustomed, and
Costs limited by the Statute: And ye shall not direct, nor cause to be directed
any Warrant (by you to be made) to the Parties, but ye shall direct to the
Bailiffs of the said County, or other the King's Officers (or Ministers) or
other indifferent Persons, to do Execution thereof. So help you God.

You shall do Egal right] the very way of Writing which word Egal instead of
Equal, shows this Oath is of great Antiquity, and that it has been very
carefully Transcribed, when there have been so much scruple made of changing a
G. into a Q. according to the Latin, and our present Authography, and it would
be a burning shame to us, if we that are Sworn should be less careful of the
Articles in it, than the Clerks have been of the Letters.

And that ye shall hold your Sessions] how they can Answer it, to God or Man I
know not, who reside in any County; or act as Justices of the Peace in it, and
yet never appear at any Sessions by the space of many years together, without
any lawful excuse, or hindrance, or those who come and take the King's Wages,
and before half the Business is done, betake themselves to the Tavern, leaving
two or three to finish, and conclude the Business; so that if any Controversy
arise, it must be left to another time, or ended as it can, rather than as it
ought, it is true neither of these Disorders can be Punished by the Court, but
then it is because the Law supposes, that Men of that Quality will not need
it, but will religiously observe their Oath, so that the fault is so much the
greater; because it cannot be Punished, but by God only.

I shall not make any more Reflections on this Oath, because this whole
Discourse is but a kind of Commentary upon it, and whatever I have omitted is
taken notice of by Lambard, and other Writers.

But the Care of a Magistrate ends not in himself, but is to extend to Others,
and therefore he ought to take great heed, that he minister none, but Lawful
and Necessary Oaths. Secondly, That if he find Men ignorant, he give them good
Advice, and sharp Reproofs in case of the least failure.

By Lawful Oaths, I mean such as the Laws, and Customs of England will allow
him to give; and therefore before he take an Oath, he ought to consider whether
he have Power to do it; for tho he has a great, yet he has not an unlimited
Power as is manifest by that Parenthesis which is so frequent in our Statutes (
which Oath the said Justices are by this Act Authorized to Administer) which is
repeated almost, as often as a new Power is given them, and for the most part
in these very words. And yet I doubt not, but when good Reason requires where
ever they may Hear and Determine, they may do it upon Oath tho the Statute does
not so Express it; for they are to take the best care they can that they be not
deceived in what they do by false Information, to which end an Oath may be
sometimes absolutely necessary.

But Magistrates are not only to avoid Giving Oaths in all Cases where they
have no Authority; but also in as many of the rest, as they can; I have read
that the Turkish Country-Magistrates which are like our Justices of the Peace,
Determine almost all Cases without Oaths, and yet (if they are not corrupted by
neither Party) will by Queries, observing the looks of Men, when they Answer.
Laying things together, and comparing one thing with another, and by making all
the several Parties tell the Story one after another, or so much of it as they
know, by these, I say, and such like Methods, they will so pick out the Truth,
that no Oath could do it half so well. Now I know this Way is troublesome, and
will take time, but it will discover the Truth sometimes, when Oaths would not,
and save the Perjury too, and so is worth the while. And I have observed also,
that Men who are in Passion one against another, do little regard the Religion
of an Oath, and yet their very Passion will discover the Truth without one, if
a Magistrate will have but a little Patience, and give them time and liberty of
Speech: but on the contrary, Men do generally revere an Oath when they are
quiet, and undisturbed, and a Magistrate may best give an Oath when they are in
that temper, and rely upon the truth of what they say.

Secondly, Oaths would not be given in things that are not of some Moment; It
is good to hear what a Person can say before he is Sworn, and if it be nothing
to the purpose, then not to Swear him at all; but if it be, then to Swear him,
and bid him tell the Story the second time, and observe if he vary, by which
means the Truth may be often found out.

Thirdly, It is good to bring things into as narrow a compass, as is possible
by observing, wherein the Parties agree, and wherein they differ before any
Oath be given, and this will determine many Cases without an Oath, the Parties
agreeing at last about the Matter of Fact; and if it will not, that only in
which they differ is to be proved upon Oath, which will be liable to less
hazard of Perjury than the whole.

If the Justice of Peace observes the Party who is to take an Oath be ignorant,
or young, it is good to show him the Nature of it in short plain words, and to
tell him the Danger, and great Sin of Perjury, and how severe God is against
it, and for that purpose to Allege the Third Commandment, or some other such
like short place of Scripture, which will have great effect upon untainted
minds.

If he finds at any time after an Oath given, that any thing is spoken that is
not truth by the Party Sworn, it is good to give the Party a grave sharp
reproof at least.

It is an usual thing not to grant a Warrant of the Peace, but upon Oath that
the Party who requires it, does not do it upon Malice, but purely out of fear.
Yet if it be well observed, there will be found many Instances of Perjury in
that case. And therefore I think it were much better to grant a Warrant to show
cause why the Surety of the Peace should not be granted, and so Examine the
pretended fear when both the Parties are face to face, than to pursue the old
Method of Swearing the Complainant, and then making the Warrant absolute;
Especially, if there be not a grievous hurt, or some other apparent cause for
it. I have often found by this way of proceeding, that I have prevented
Perjury, and delivered an Innocent, and sometimes an Injured Person from
Vexation; for it is no unusual thing for ill Men to Swear the Peace against
others by way of Prevention, when they have given them too much cause to do it
to themselves: and at other times by way of revenge; when they have for good
cause been forced to find Sureties. Now in such instances as these, it is good
to prevent men from being actually forsworn, even when they are too much
disposed to it.

And when all this care is taken, there will be many Perjuries committed, how
much more when there is none of it? But the Justice of the Peace when he has
done what he could to prevent it, may comfort himself, and believe that God
will not lay another man's Sin, which he could not hinder, to his Charge: but if
he Swear men rashly, and without due precaution, he as well as they must
without doubt bear a part of the blame in the sight of God.

The Conclusion.
AND now I have with the greatest brevity I could, run thorough all those
Particulars. I thought fit to Discourse on, in relation to my Subject, and tho
it might have been better done by an abler Person, yet never did any man enter
upon any thing with more sincere, and candid intentions for the Public good.

And all that remains, is to persuade those that are or shall be Justices of
the Peace, to reflect seriously upon what I have Written, and then if they do
not approve of my thoughts, they may yet give them occasion of others, and in
all likelihood much better, and it may also possibly excite some other Person
to do it better, and so oblige the World, and me in the first place.

But in the mean time, I humbly beseech all Magistrates, that they would
seriously consider Three things:

First, That they are the Ministers of God, and that is so honorable a Title,
that Constantine the Great took much Pride in it; but then it will become them,
that Wear it to act as such, for God is a severe Judge of Unprofitable
Servants, and much more of slothful and wicked ones, for whom he has provided
a Punishment equal to the greatness of their offense, and the dishonor they do
him.

And on the other hand, none shall enjoy more happiness in Heaven, than they
who have not only been good themselves, but have labored to make others such,
by governing them with Prudence, and Discretion here on Earth.

Secondly, They are the Representatives of their King, and it is the greatest
Disloyalty, and Infidelity imaginable to pretend to Serve him, and then
Dishonor him to his People, and deceive him in the Trust reposed on them.

Thirdly, The People whom they are to govern, will certainly rise up in
Judgment against them, if they mislead or misuse them; for tho perhaps they
cannot help themselves for the present whatever injuries they suffer, yet their
Redeemer is mighty; and with him is no respect of Persons.

And when all this is seriously thought of, I do not fear that they will treat
their Monitor unkindly, who had no other design in this, than to make them
happy here, and hereafter, by exposing those Vices that prevail more in
general, upon Men for want of Precaution, than out of any Affection they have
to them.

A Prayer.
O Thou who art the Sovereign Judge of the World, seeing it has pleased thee to
call me into the Number of the inferior Judges in it, Grant, that I may
administer Justice truly and indifferently, to the punishment of Wickedness
and Vice, and to the maintenance of thy true Religion and Virtue. And, to that
end, enlighten my Understanding, that I may choose what is Just, and Right in
thy sight, without respect of Persons; and pursue the same with Courage, and
Industry. Quiet all Divisions amongst us, that we may not hinder each other,
nor dishonor thee by our Contentions. Set a Watch, O Lord, before my Mouth,
and a Door with a Guard about my Lips. Give me a meek, patient, humble spirit,
that I do nothing through Strife, or Vainglory, but that I may patiently hear,
and submit to the reasons of others. And finally, in all things direct thy
Servant into those things which may tend most to thy Glory, the good of thy
Church, the Service of our Sovereign, and the Peace and Happiness of my
Country, that when I shall appear before thy Tribunal to receive an an Eternal
Sentence, I may not perish forever, but that thou may Remember me for Good,
and spare me in that day. Grant this, O Blessed Judge and Savior, for thy own
sake. Amen.

FINIS.

