A SHORT DISCOURSE OF THE True Knowledge OF CHRIST JESUS.

To which are Added, Some Passages in the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc.
and its Vindication.

With some Animadversions on Mr. Edwards's Reflections on the Reasonableness of
Christianity, and on his Book, Entitled, Socinianism Unmasked.

By S. Bold, Rector of Steeple, Dorset.

For other Foundation can no Man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ,
1 Cor. 3.11. LONDON: Printed for A. and J. Churchil at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row. MDCXCVII.

Philip. III. 8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.


THE Apostle does not here speak of any thing that was proper to himself either
as an Apostle, or a Christian of an extraordinary growth, but what was common
to him, with every True Believer, or sincere Christian. For these words are but
part of the Illustration he annexes of that Property of true Believers of
Christians he had laid down in the last Clause of the third Verse of this
Chapter, who have no confidence in the Flesh.

In the seventh Verse he relates the different Opinion and Judgment he had of
Matters with relation to Justification and Salvation before he was Converted,
from what he had of them after his Conversion. Those things which before his
Conversion he reckoned Gain, i. e. which he thought were the matter of a
Persons Righteousness, the things which being enjoyed would Justify, and
render a Person acceptable to God, and warrant his being confident of
Salvation, he accounted Loss, after he was effectually Regenerated: Because he
then knew that Christ alone is our Righteousness, and that he only can save us.

In these words he declares again, with great Earnestness, that he looks upon
the possession and enjoyment of all those things he formerly thought would
constitute Persons Righteous and Happy, and every thing else distinct from
Christ, that any can place their confidence in, to be of no more moment and
consideration to these Purposes than heaps of Dung, and Dross can be to the
nourishing of a Man's natural Life, and to the making of him Wealthy. And as
Christ ^^ne is our Righteousness, and he only can justify and save us, so it
is by the knowledge of Christ, that we come to be interested in Him, and to
receive from him those, and all those singular and inestimable Benefits and
Blessings He is entrusted to dispense. This knowledge of Christ Jesus is so
adapted to this end, has such a Connection with it, by Divine Ordination and
Appointment, has such an Excellency in it, such a Power, Efficacy, and Virtue
for the deriving of these Mercies and Blessings to us from Christ, that all
other things are perfectly insignificant to this purpose, but when depended on
for Justification and Salvation, are a very great Detriment and Damage.

In order to a more distinct understanding of these words, I will briefly
consider four things in them, and then conclude with showing some Uses we
should make of what shall be discoursed.

The Four things I shall briefly consider are, First, The matter of this
Knowledge the Apostle speaks of.

Secondly, What kind of Knowledge it is of this point, which the Apostle does
thus magnify and extol, and give such a preference to?

Thirdly, Wherein the excellency of this Knowledge does consist? And,

Fourthly, The account the Person who knows Christ Jesus aright, does make of
all other things.

First, I shall consider what is the matter of this Knowledge the Apostle here
speaks of, or what is the object to be known. This he expresses in these
words, Christ Jesus, that is, that the Person, God had promised to send into
the World to be the Savior of Sinners, was Him who is generally known, and was
signally distinguished from other People by this Name Jesus; or that He who is
commonly known, and peculiarly spoken of by this name Jesus, is the Person God
did design, and promise to send into the World to be the Savior of Sinners.
That this Jesus is the Christ, the Person God has anointed and commissioned to
this Office; and that He is the only and the all-sufficient, and most gracious
Savior of Sinners. That Jesus is the Christ (the Person God has commissioned
to be the Savior of Sinners) is the Proposition I conceive the Apostle here
speaks of, the object of that Knowledge here commended. And this is the Gospel
strictly and most properly considered, Luke 2.10, 11. Act. 4.12. The fulfilling
of the Prophecies which went before concerning the Messiah, or the Person God
had promised to send, in this Jesus; and his declaring that he was that Person,
and doing such things to confirm the truth of what he Taught, as could not be
wrought and effected but by the extraordinary and immediate Power of God,
afford sufficient Evidence to persuade Men of the truth of this Proposition,
that Jesus is the Christ. This I take to be the matter or object of that
Knowledge the Apostle here speaks of. Not that I think a bare speculative
Knowledge of this Article or Proposition is the Knowledge the Apostle does thus
magnify and set such a value on. Therefore I shall consider,

Secondly, What kind of Knowledge of this Proposition it is, the Apostle does
here speak of. And it is such a Knowledge as does effectually determine the
Person, and cause him to resign up himself entirely to Christ Jesus to be saved
by him in his own way. Such a knowledge of him, as makes the Person to take him
for his Lord; so that he will use his serious, honest, and best endeavors to
understand what he has taught and revealed, and will assent to, believe and
observe whatever he shall attain to know He has taught or revealed; and will
depend wholly on Him to receive from Him in his own way, the benefits He is
entrusted to dispense. The notional and speculative knowledge of Christ Jesus,
has its usefulness, being the Foundation on which the other is builded, but it
may be without the latter, and therefore is not saving, but the latter cannot
be without the former, no more than a Superstructure can be without a
Foundation. A Man may have a notional knowledge of a Truth that is of
extraordinary moment and usefulness, and yet not be duly affected with it; his
knowledge may have little or no influence on him, because he does not apply it
to its proper end, he does not descend to consider how much it does concern
himself. Were there a Person that could infallibly cure some certain Distemper,
and the proof of this Truth were most strong and clear, so that there were no
room for doubt and exception, a Person who does not apprehend himself annoyed
with that Distemper, though he is satisfied that such a Person can infallibly
cure it, will not be prevailed with, and determined by his knowledge, to yield
up himself absolutely to his Conduct, though when he comes to be convinced that
he is dangerously ill of that Disease, and that he cannot be cured any other
way, but by committing himself entirely to that Person, his knowledge will have
this effect on him, that he will render himself up entirely to his guidance and
management. When we are thoroughly sensible that we are Sinners, under the Curse
of the Law, and justly obnoxious to the most heavy displeasure and wrath of
Almighty God, and that there is no way for our obtaining Peace with Him, Pardon
and Salvation, but by Jesus Christ, then our knowing him to be the only, the
all-sufficient, and a most compassionate and gracious Savior of Sinners, will
dispose and influence us to resign up our selves without reservation to his
Conduct, and to rely and depend on Him to save us in his own way. He came to
seek and to save those who are lost, who are truly sensible of their lost
estate. All your knowledge will not avail you to Salvation, though you can
Discourse ever so accurately on every point in your Bible, till it have this
effect on you, to make you resign up your selves unfeignedly unto Christ as
your Lord. But the Person who is brought to this, is Christ's Disciple, a true
Believer, and real Christian, though as yet he does not know any other Doctrine
Christ has taught, but only engages heartily to use his best endeavors to
know and understand his Lord's Will, and to assent unto and perform the same,
as he shall attain the knowledge of it; and resolvedly applies himself to
fulfill and execute that engagement with ^^ll Industry and Fidelity. This is
that which constitutes and makes a Person a sincere Christian, a real Disciple
of Christ, and a true Believer. And his regular outward signifying and
testifying of this, gives him a Right to the external Denomination of a
Christian, etc. The true notional knowledge of Christ Jesus is the same for the
matter, with the spiritual and practical knowledge of Him; but this latter
makes the Person perceive the usefulness and necessity of Christ Jesus to
himself, and begets in him suitable Affections to Christ. He who thus knows
Christ Jesus is sensible, that He is the most necessary and useful Good to him,
and therefore cannot but love him, resign up himself entirely to Him, trust in
Him, and labor to understand and know his Will, that he may explicitly
believe what he has taught, and actually observe and perform what he has
appointed and commanded, that thus he may approve his Fidelity, and obtain the
ends particularly or more especially intended by his Lord, in the several
instances he shall understand to be taught by Him, relating either to Belief or
Practice. He knows that Christ Jesus is worthy of all his Service, and
therefore gives up himself unto Him, implicitly and without exception, to
follow his Conduct, both as to Faith and Obedience. Thus when he finds or
understands, that Jesus Christ has taught that He is God, and that He
commissioned his Apostles to teach so, and that they did it very expressly, he
heartily assents to this Truth, and believes, that He is God, because He has
taught it. And his not being able to solve all difficulties that curious and
contentious People may start about this matter; or to say much, or any thing
concerning the Mode, or way how He is God, is no obstacle to his firm and
steadfast Belief of it, seeing he knows Christ has declared it; no more than
his not being able to reconcile some matter of practice he understands Christ
has enjoined him, to his worldly Interest, can excuse him from performing it.
Because his Resignation to Christ was absolute and entire in both respects, and
he did not Capitulate with Christ, to believe nothing but what he should be
able to dive to the bottom of, and give a rational account of the mode and
manner of, or to obey him only in such Instances as he should know how to
reconcile to his worldly Interest and Convenience. What falls short of this
practical knowledge of Christ Jesus, is not in Scripture account the knowledge
of Christ Jesus. He that says I know him, and keeps not his Commandments is
a liar, and the truth is not in him, 1 John 2.4. This is that knowledge of
Christ Jesus, the excellency whereof is such, it obscures and stains the Glory
of all things which can come in competition with it. So that the true Christian
accounts all things but loss (as the Apostle expresses himself) for the
excellency of it. Which shall lead me to consider,

Thirdly, In what the excellency of this knowledge of Christ Jesus does
consist. Concerning which I shall mention these particulars:

1st. In the excellency of its object, (which is the revelation or discovery
God has made that Jesus Christ is the Person He has sent and commissioned to
be the Savior of Sinners) and in the proportion it has to the special
Intendment of that Revelation, viz. that we may resign up our selves entirely
to him, and thereby be made his Disciples, and be interested in Him, as our
Savior; or more briefly, that we may believe in Him, and be saved by him, or
be made true Christians, and partake of the Benefits which belong to them. It
is not the bare knowing that there was such a Person as Jesus Christ in the
World, no nor that He was the Son of God, and assumed our Nature, etc. but that
He was sent, appointed, and commissioned by God to be the Savior of Sinners.
This is the immediate, the most proper, and strict object of Christian
knowledge, and saving Faith. Had the Son of God, merely of his own accord,
assumed our Nature, performed the most perfect Obedience to the Law, and
suffered Death for our sakes, how great soever the intrinsic value of his
Condescension, Performances, and Sufferings would have been, this would not
have constituted or made Him the Savior of Sinners: Nor would our knowing and
believing all this, have availed us to Justification and Salvation. That which
makes what He did and suffered to be accepted for us, and makes Him the Savior
of Sinners, was his being appointed and commissioned to be their Savior. And
it is our knowing Him to be the Person that God did send and commission for
this purpose, and knowing it so, as to answer the design of this Revelation,
which does make us Christians, and interest us in Him as our Savior. For I
have given them the words which thou gave me, and they have received them,
and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that
thou did send me, John 17.8.

2dly. In that it is a special effect and fruit of the Holy Spirit of God. I
will give them an Heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my
People, and I will be their God, for they shall return unto me with their whole
Heart, Jer. 24.7. Wherefore I give you to understand, that no Man speaking by
the Spirit of God, calls Jesus, accursed, and that no Man can say that Jesus
is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. Though the Lord Jesus does not
oblige himself not to give forth the special Influences of his Holy Spirit to
any, but in and with their serious using their natural Abilities, and the
common assistances of the Spirit generally afforded, in those ways he has
appointed, in order to Peoples partaking of his supernatural Aids and
Blessings, yet he obliges us thus to make use of the means he has ordained;
and we have not any reason to expect these supernatural effects any other way.
When he does extraordinarily, and out of his common and Instituted way, work
on, awaken, convince, and effectually convert Sinners, as he did Saul, when
Traveling on such a wretchedly wicked design toward Damascus, he does it not
as King and Ruler, but as absolute Lord. And when we find our selves so
enlightened, and powerfully wrought on, in the use of Instituted means, that we
are effectually determined to yield up our selves entirely to Christ, as our
Lord, this effect is from the special influence of the Holy Spirit, and must be
attributed unto Him. Faith is the gift of God, though ordinarily conferred along
with out making use of the natural Powers we are endued with in the ways and
methods instituted for this end, as reading and hearing the Word, Meditation,
Prayer, etc. There is no natural connection between our employing of our natural
Abilities and Powers in these ways, and this happy effect, for God has not
obliged himself to bestow this Blessing by the Rules and Laws he has
established to observe, in the ordinary way of his Providence, in ordering and
governing the World, so far as does concern and relate to Man. The connection
between them is purely Gracious, by virtue of the Laws and Rules He has fixed
to proceed by, in the dispensation of his Grace. We may by that concurrence God
affords in the way of his ordinary Providence, attain to as great a measure of
speculative, notional, discoursive knowledge of what the Gospel does teach, as
we can of those matters which are treated of in other Books, provided we do
proportionably apply our Study to them. But when in our using our natural
Abilities these ways, we are brought to close unfeignedly with Christ, and
yield up our selves entirely to his Conduct, this is owing to a divine
Influence vouchsafed beyond the ordinary course of Providence, and is from
God's proceeding with us according to his Law of Grace. Though we cannot
apprehend in what way the Spirit does effect, and bring about this excellent
and happy change in us, so as certainly to distinguish what is done by the
Spirit, from what is done by our natural Abilities cooperating; yet we know by
the effect that He has exerted his wonderful Power, and to Him must all the
Glory be ascribed, who is the principal agent in this business.

3dly. In the singular and inestimable Benefits which do accrue unto us upon
our thus knowing of Christ Jesus. Of which Benefits I will now name but these
two.

1. God's justifying of us, and owning us to be in the Covenant of Grace. By
Justification I do mean something more than his Pardoning all our past Sins,
even a change of our State, his acquitting and discharging us from the Law of
Works, as a Covenant of Life. Were all my Sins freely pardoned, and I left
under the Law of Works, this Pardon would not avail me any thing, if my Life
were at all continued, for my very next performances would fall so short of
what that Law requires, I should immediately be in the same state I was in
before my Pardon. We are all under the Law of Works till we do so know Christ
Jesus, as to yield up our selves unreservedly unto his Conduct. Indeed, we are
not now so under the Law of Works, as our first Parents were immediately on
their Transgression, and before that gracious Promise that the Seed of the
Woman should break the Serpent's head, was given them, for till then they were
purely under the Law of Works, and had no remedying Law to make use of for
their Relief. We are naturally still under that Law of Works, only we have this
advantage, that now there is a Law of Pardon, or a remedying Law concurrent
with it, if we will make use of it. But till we comply with, and accept of that
Law, i. e. do yield up our selves absolutely to Christ Jesus, the other Law
stands in full force against us.

Our so knowing of Christ Jesus as has been mentioned, is our actual
consenting to the gracious tender and offer God has made to all Sinners,
without excepting any, whereby we come to be really in the Covenant of Grace.
What is ordinarily called the Covenant of Grace, is only the Declaration and
Testament which Christ has made of the Grace of God, or the Blessings he will
bestow on all those who do or shall unfeignedly consent to yield up themselves
absolutely to Him. It is a Covenant only with those who do thus consent unto
it. And upon our giving up our selves thus to Christ, God owns us to be in
Covenant with Him. Of this Covenant Christ Jesus is the Mediator, to whom it
pertains to see, that both parts of the Covenant thus consented to be
performed. We are to do what is assigned to us, i. e. we must follow Christ's
Conduct in every thing we shall know he has ordained for us, and therefore
must use our honest endeavors to understand what he has taught; and upon our
doing so, we come to be entitled to the Benefits God has promised, which
Christ is also to see accomplished, and made good unto us. When we know Christ
Jesus a right, we are delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into
the Kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1.13.

2. Power to perform such Obedience as God will graciously accept. This
knowledge of Christ Jesus, which is a special effect of the Holy Spirit, is not
a dead notion, but the Light of Life, a divine vital principle, which has an
influence on all the Powers of the Soul, and Faculties of the whole Man,
spiriting and directing them all in a good measure, in ways suitable to its own
Nature, and the end for which it is given. It possesses the Soul with a
predominant Love to Christ, and influences the Person to labor after a
Conformity to Him. It puts the Person upon considering and enquiring what
things He, whom he has taken for his Lord has revealed, what he does Command,
and in what manner it behooves him, now he has thus resigned himself to Him, to
behave himself; and it furnishes him with ability to execute the same, by
deriving fresh supplies of strength from that Holy Spirit who is the Author of
this divine vital Principle. It disposes and enclineth him to do those good
Works Christ has commanded him, and to use those means Christ has enjoined,
in order to his receiving greater measures of the influences of the Holy
Spirit, Ephesians. 2.10. Such a Person's Good Works and Obedience are accepted with
God, not because of their intrinsic worth, but only for the merit of Christ,
who has procured the Law of Grace, and is the mediator of the new Covenant.
Our best Works cannot merit Salvation, that is the purchase of Christ's Blood.
We are justified and saved by Faith, and that is the Gift of God; so that we
have nothing to boast of, tho very much for which we are to be thankful. Our
good Works are an evidence of the truth of our Faith, and that our knowledge of
Christ is of the right kind: And such is the Grace of God through Christ, that
the more we abound in them, the greater shall our Reward be; not because of
their Merit, but because of his gracious Promise, assigning degrees of Glory,
in proportion to our abounding in new Obedience. We do not derive Power from
Christ to merit any thing for our selves, but we receive from Him Power to
perform such Obedience as shall for his sake be accepted and rewarded. Upon our
performing such Obedience, we shall receive freely the Blessings He has
merited, and which for his sake are made over to us in the Covenant of Grace.
Our Works of Righteousness and Goodness do not make us Righteous and Good, but
they prove and discover us to be so, i. e. that we are endu'd with a divine
Principle, have our Natures changed, and do know Christ Jesus aright, as vital
acts do not make a living Creature, but they prove that the Creature which
performs them, has a principle of Life from which those acts do flow.

4thly. Another excellency of this knowledge is, that it puts a check to vain
Curiosity, to a search after empty and less necessary Speculations, and
delivers us from all carnal and groundless Confidence, and engages us to a
commendable Diligence, by determining our enquiries after such things as are
most certain and true in themselves, and will be most useful and profitable
unto us, by advancing us both in intellectual and moral Accomplishments and
Perfections. For it obliges us to employ our honest and best endeavors to
understand, and make a right use of what Jesus Christ has taught and revealed;
which are matters of such excellency, that all other things are of little
account with those who understand the use and importance of these, as the
Apostle plainly testified, when he said, he accounted all things but loss, etc.
Which brings me to consider,

Fourthly, What account he who knows Christ Jesus aright does make of all other
things. The Sense a sincere Christian has of the excellency of this knowledge,
discovers it self in the great alteration it makes in his Opinion and Judgment
of all other things from what they were before. He does set now a just estimate
upon all worldly Enjoyments, and outward Privileges relating to Religion, and
external performances in Religion, according to their several Natures, Places,
and Ranks, to their use and ends. He does not absolutely condemn them, as evil
in themselves, or as altogether useless to any good purposes, for should he do
so, he would be faulty. He owns them to be the good Gifts of God, that a very
good use may be made of them, is thankful to God for them, if he enjoys them,
and praises God for bestowing them on others. He acknowledges they have a
beauty and excellency considered in their proper place and season. But then he
esteems them as the Apostle did, as altogether useless to the business here
spoken of, viz. to be the matter of our Confidence, yea, extremely hurtful when
depended on for Justification. To be but loss, yea dung when compared with, and
set in opposition to this knowledge of Christ Jesus, which has an excellency
in it, unspeakably greater than all other things have, and which alone can
avail and profit us to Justification and Salvation, That divine Light which
discovers Christ Jesus to a Person, as the Person commissioned by God to be the
Savior of Sinners, and effectually causes him, from a sense of his own Sin
and Guilt, to yield up himself entirely to Him, to be saved by Him in his own
way, does discover all other things to him in such a true and disparaging
manner, that he plainly perceives they cannot bear any proportion with Christ;
and therefore he accounts them to be loss, as to the business of Justification.
If I do not esteem Christ Jesus worthy enough to be the sole object of my
dependence, I do not know him aright. And if I set up any thing in the World,
as that I will trust to, and depend on for Justification, more (...) Christ, or
equally with Him, I acknowledge a greater, or an equal virtue and efficacy in
that, with what I pretend to believe is in Christ for this purpose. Or if I
depend on any thing together with Christ, though in an inferior degree, I do not
take him to be the only and all sufficient Savior of Sinners, and so have not
that knowledge of Christ Jesus here spoken of. Indeed, there are other things
we may depend on, and make the ground of our Persuasion and Confidence, that we
are Justified and shall be Saved, as those which are sure, certain, and
never-failing Evidences of our Interest in Christ, as our Savior, and that we
do know Him aright. But there is not any thing but Christ and his
Righteousness, we may trust to, and depend on for Justification and Salvation,
i. e. as that, for the sake of which we shall be Justified and Saved.

From what has been discoursed we may take notice,

First, That Persons may have great Measures of speculative Knowledge
concerning Christ Jesus, and what he has taught, and not be True Christians.
The Apostle indeed does tell us, that whosoever believes that Jesus is the
Christ, is born of God, which is the same with his being a True Christian, 1
John 5.1. but it is evident, beyond all doubt, by his following discourse, that
he does not speak of a bare speculative Knowledge, but of such a Knowledge and
Faith as I have been giving an account of. Such a Knowledge or Belief that
Jesus is the Christ, that is, the Person God has commissioned to be the
Savior of Sinners, as does effectually cause a Person to resign up himself
entirely to Him, does constitute him a True Christian. Whatever Knowledge or
Faith People may have, which falls short of this, will not profit them to
Justification, nor have a due effect and influence on their Lives. The most
pompous Pretenses will not prevail for our acceptance with Christ, where this
is wanting, Mat. 7.22, 23. Therefore,

Secondly, We ought to make a thorough and impartial search concerning our
selves, whether we be true Christians. Whether we are so fully persuaded that
Jesus is the Christ, that we do sincerely yield up our selves, without any
reservation to follow his Conduct. It is not enough that we call our selves
Christians, and pretend to own him for our Lord, as Mat. 7.22, 23. discovers.
But we must justify the Truth of our owning him to be our Lord, by employing
our selves heartily to understand what He has taught, and to believe, and make
such use of what we attain to know He has taught, as we shall perceive he
intends and appoints. For,

Thirdly, Though a right knowledge of this one point, that Jesus is the Christ,
does constitute and make a Person a Christian; yet there are many points Jesus
Christ has taught and revealed, which every sincere Christian is indispensibly
obliged to endeavor to understand, and make a due use of. When a Person
becomes a True Christian, he does resign himself (as you have been told)
entirely unto Christ Jesus as his Lord, and obliges himself, without any
reservation, to use his serious, honest, and sincere endeavors to know what he
has revealed, and to assent unto, and make such use of what he shall attain to
know he has revealed, as the nature, or particular intendment thereof (so far
as he shall know the same) does direct. He does not capitulate and compound
with Christ, that he will assent unto, and make such use as he orders, of just
such a number of Articles, but will be excused from concerning himself to
extend his knowledge, or practice any further. It is out of my Reach (and I am
persuaded it is out of the reach of any Man, or Body of Men) to assign a
precise number of Articles which are necessary to be explicitly known and
believed by all sincere Christians, and beyond which no Christian is obliged to
endeavor to proceed in his Faith and Obedience. Peoples Capacities,
Opportunities, and Advantages are very various and different. Many things may
be necessary for some Christians to believe, which are not necessary to be
believed by others; because some do attain to the knowledge of them, and a
great many more may never attain to the knowledge of them, and this not because
of any faulty omission or neglect to use their honest endeavors to understand
what Christ has made known to the World, but from something else which will
not be reckoned to them for a fault. I think a certain number of Articles
cannot be fixed on (besides this, that Jesus is the Christ) which we may
peremptorily determine must of necessity be explicitly known and believed, or
no Person can be saved. For the belief of the other Doctrines Christ has
taught, does not constitute or make a Person a True Christian.

Perhaps some may be now ready to say, that is well, for then we are safe though
we be Ignorant, and continue Ignorant of all the Doctrines Christ has taught,
besides this, that Jesus is the Christ; or if we should come to know them we
are safe, though we refuse to believe them, and make that use of them Christ
appoints; for we do believe most firmly that Jesus is the Christ, and so we are
True Christians, and therefore safe, and need not trouble our selves about
knowing or believing any thing more.

Nay, now you are out, most dangerously and wretchedly out. Believe as much as
you can, besides this Article, your belief will not make you a True Christian.
It is the right knowledge or belief of this Article, that Jesus is the Christ,
that makes a Person a True Christian. But the believing of this, does not
exclude your believing of other Articles, or discharge you from any obligation
to believe other points, or make your believing of other matters needless. But
it brings you under an indispensable obligation to endeavor to know and
believe more. Though the belief of other points is not necessary to constitute a
Person a True Christian, yet other things are necessary to be believed by him
that is a True Christian. The true Christian is obliged to use his best
endeavors to know what Christ has revealed, and to assent unto, and make a
right use of what he attains to know Christ has revealed. And if you do not do
thus, you do not approve your selves True Christians, you do not acquit your
selves as true Christians ought, and must acquit themselves. If you either
neglect to enquire after, and to use your honest endeavors to know what Christ
has revealed, or refuse to assent to and make a good use of what you know he
has revealed, you have just reason to conclude you are not True Christians,
and do not know Christ Jesus aright, whatever you affirm in your words.

There are many things Christ has taught and revealed so plainly, so clearly,
so distinctly, you cannot but know some of them, if you seriously endeavor to
know what He has revealed; and what you know he has revealed, you must assent
to and make use of, if you do rightly know and believe Him to be the only
Savior of Sinners.

If it be now asked what are those particular Points or Articles Christ has
revealed, which are necessary for Christians to endeavor to know, and which
being known to be revealed by Him they must indispensably assent to, and make
use of: I answer, that what Christ has revealed, is propounded to us in
certain words which make distinct Sentences and Propositions, and being thus
considered, they are objects of assent, and matters of Faith; though when we
consider tho nature of the Truths thus propounded, and their special
Intendment, they may be conveniently reduced to particular Heads, to which
particular Denominations may be assigned. Some of these I will name, together
with some particular Propositions Christ has taught, which properly belong to
these Heads.

As 1st. Those Propositions which describe his Person, and instruct us who he
was, whom God did send and commission to be the Savior of Sinners. As that He
is God, the Son of God, the only begotten of the Father, God over all, blessed
for ever, John 1. 1. Romans 9.5. The Son of God, and the Messiah are often used
in the New Testament, as Reciprocal Terms, not as if the strict Idea, the term
Messiah, does stand for, were the same the Son of God does stand for, but
because He who is the Son of God is the Messiah, and He who is the Messiah is
the Son of God; both these Propositions I believe, because I find that Christ
Jesus and his Apostles, by his order, did reach them. I do not think that He
was the Son of God because He was the Messiah, as the Socinians assert; nor
yet, that He was the Messiah because He was the Son of God, as some affirm in
opposition to the former, but that the Son of God was the Messiah, because the
Father did not think fit to commission any but his own Son to be the Savior of
Sinners. When a true Christian understands that Christ Jesus has taught that
He is God, He must assent unto it, and endeavor to use it for the nourishing,
strengthening, and confirming of his Faith in Him. To assure him that He is
all-sufficient to fulfill the Work He has undertaken, and to which He is
commissioned. And to direct and justify his paying Divine Honor and Worship
to Him. So also that He was made Flesh, did assume our whole Nature, and was
true Man, Joh. 1.14. Mat. 1.16. Luke 1.31. which may satisfy us, that He was
in a Condition and Fitness for that part of His Work which did consist in His
Suffering in our stead and on our behalf; and that He has a most tender and
compassionate concern for us, whose Nature He did assume, Heb. 2.14. Heb. 4.15.

2dly, Those Propositions which acquaint us with the occasion of His
undertaking this Office, and being commissioned to it. As, that by the Fall of
our first Parents, sin entered into the World. That we are all fallen short of
the Glory of God. And that we are by Nature the Children of Wrath, Romans 3.23.
Romans 5.12. Ephesians. 2.3. which may convince us more thoroughly, of our great need of
such a Savior, make us have more low and humble thoughts of our selves, and
inspire us with most admiring and elevated gratitude and thankfulness, to and
for Him.

3dly, Those Propositions which instruct us that the sending of this Savior
did proceed and spring purely from the Free Grace, Mercy, and Love of God. God
so loved the World that He gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish but have everlasting life, etc. John 3.16, 17. 1 John
4.9. Ephesians. 2.4. to the 9th. This is proper to engage our Admiration and Love.
Here is room for our exerting them in their fullest strength and force.

4thly, Those Propositions which teach us in what ways, and by what steps He
did, and does execute, and will finally accomplish the Work and Office He
Undertook. As, 1. By Revealing the Father, and making His Will known to the
World, John 1.18. Heb. 1.1, 2. John 15.15. Whereby we are furnished with the
most useful, pertinent, necessary and profitable Instructions; do know where we
are to employ our Searches and Enquiries to the best purpose: And what we may
without fluctuation, doubt, or wavering, and with the greatest confidence
entertain, and depend upon for their Truth.

2dly, By fulfilling all Righteousness, and leading the most Innocent,
unblemished, exact and holy Life, Mat. 3.15. 1 Pet. 2.21. Acts 10.38. Thus He
has set us an Example in His own Life. Has visibly commended and discovered
the amiableness of what He Commands and Enjoins. And has shown us in the most
convincing and obliging way, how we ought to demean and behave our selves. And
hereby we perceive that He was admirably fitted for another part of what
pertained to Him in His Estate of Humiliation, viz. making Himself a Sacrifice
for our sins, Heb. 7.26, etc.

3dly, By suffering very many hardships, innumerable reproaches, and
indignities, enduring the Wrath of God, and actually dying in open view as a
Malefactor on the Cross, offering up himself a Sacrifice to satisfy Divine
Justice for the sins of the World, and giving his Soul a Ransom for Sinners,
Acts 2.23. and 36. Heb. 9.26. 1 Pet. 3.18. 1 Timothy 2.6. which discovers the most
execrable nature of Sin, how extremely loathsome and hateful it is to God, and
therefore should be so to us. This manifests the Condescension and Love of
Christ to us, in the most affecting manner that can be imagined. And is the
most potent Argument to kindle and excite the truest Love in our Souls to Him,
and calls for our exerting Love to Him in its most powerful actings, 2 Cor.
5.14.15.

4thly, By rising again from the dead the third day, 1 Cor. 15.4. Romans 1.4.
Romans 4.25. Hereby the Prophecies which were before concerning Him, and His own
Predictions were most exactly verified and fulfilled. This gives a most certain
undeniable demonstration that His Sacrificing of Himself, and his Death were
accepted of God, and are prevalent for all the purposes for which they were
intended. It Is strengthens our Faith and Hope in (...) And assures us of the
certainty of our Resurrection at the end of the World, 1 Pet. 1.21. Romans 8.11.

5thly, By Ascending up into Heaven in the sight of His Disciples (after He had
given full proof of the truth of His Resurrection, and commissioned them to
Preach His Gospel to all the World) That there He may in His exalted Estate,
perform what further pertains unto Him as the Savior of Sinners, Mark 16.19.
This assures us of the efficacy and prevalence of His Intercession, and the
solid ground we have to depend upon Him for whatsoever He has warranted us to
ask in His Name, and expect from Him, Heb. 7.14, 15. John 14.1, 2, 3.

6thly, By sending and giving forth the Holy Spirit for the purposes and ends
for which He has promised Him, viz. for the making of His Word and Ordinances
effectual, for the Conversion of Sinners, and the Edification and Comfort of
true Believers, John 14.16, 17, and 26. And here by the way we may take notice,
that He has taught how we are to conceive of the Holy Spirit, certifying that
He is God, Acts 5.3, 4. 2 Cor. 3.16, 17. Now when a true Christian understands,
that Christ Jesus has given this account of the Holy Spirit, He is as much
obliged to believe it, as He is to believe that Jesus is the Christ; and when
he understands that Christ has taught that the Father, Himself, and the Holy
Ghost are God, that He says such things of them, and requires such Homage and
Worship to be paid unto them, as are peculiar unto God, and certifies that
these Three are One, (Matthew. 28.19. 1 John 5.7.) He is obliged to assent unto
and believe this Truth, as well as any thing else that Christ has taught. It
is as hard for me to reconcile a Persons denying, or not believing this, when
he knows that Christ Jesus has taught it, with his being a sincere Christian,
or having unreservedly resigned himself up to Jesus Christ, as any Man can
pretend it is to him, to tell how these three can be God, and yet there be but
one God. I believe that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are God, because I
find that Christ Jesus has taught so. And if any Man can pretend he has
ground to believe this Article to be false, or to withold his assent, when he
knows that Jesus Christ has taught it, he cannot with color, pretend he has
just reason to believe that Jesus is the Messiah, nor to believe any one point
upon his Authority. For if we question the Truth of any thing we know He
taught, we have the like reason to question the Truth of every thing He taught.
He that is upon such Terms, can hardly deserve to be accounted a true
Christian. He must be extraordinarily soft and favorable to himself, if he can
persuade himself that is one. If I were not fully persuaded that Christ Jesus
understood the Divine Nature, and knew how to speak of it, better than any mere
Man, I should not take him to be my Lord and Savior. It may be some will say,
they do believe what Christ Jesus has taught, but they cannot believe the
Doctrine of the Trinity as it is taught in certain Creeds, which are but of
Humane Composure. To such I would say, if you really know, and heartily believe
all that Christ has taught concerning this matter, it is as much as I can
desire, and as much, as you ought to believe concerning it. But though other
words are now ordinarily used in teaching of this Doctrine, than are used about
it in the Holy Scriptures; yet the Doctrine is but the same which Christ
taught. The other Words and Terms which are now used, do not add any thing to
his Doctrine; they were not originally intended to make the Doctrine more
perfect than Christ delivered it. The Doctrine continued as it was taught in
the Holy Scriptures, till some presumptuous (not to say malicious) Persons
assumed to themselves to affix such a sinister Interpretation and Construction
to the Words of Christ, as did exceedingly alter His Doctrine, very much
depreciating Christ Himself and the Holy Spirit, degrading Christ into a mere
Man (though He Himself taught that He was God) and teaching that the Holy
Spirit was but the Power or Virtue of God, and not God. When this Method was
used to corrupt the Faith of Christ, sincere Christians found it expedient to
make use of other Words, which have been successively retained. But they used
not these words, with a design to teach more than Christ had taught, only to
deliver what He had taught, with a denial of that corrupt Sense false Teachers
had stamped upon His Words. So that the Doctrine of the Trinity as it is
ordinarily taught amongst us, is no other, than that the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost are God, as Christ has taught they are, and that we do reject that Sense
and Construction, which Men of their own Heads, and without any Authority have
affixed to Christ's Doctrine. It is but the Doctrine Christ has taught, with
an opposition to, and denial of that Addition of Words, and Diminution of
Sense, which other People had introduced touching that which Christ had taught.

To say that this Doctrine is contrary to Reason, is in effect to deny that
Jesus is the Messiah, or Christ. Can the Fountain of Light and Reason, teach
any thing that is contrary to Reason? Does not the Messiah; He that was
commissioned to teach Men the Mind of God, know what is consonant to Reason,
better than we do? It is not to be expected that People should in good earnest
believe this Doctrine, till they are fully persuaded that Jesus is the Christ,
and when they heartily believe that, there can be no ground to deny their
assent to this, or any other Doctrine, they know he has taught. We have this
notice by Supernatural Revelation, that the Father is God, and that the Son is
God, and that the Holy Ghost is God, which we could not know by the mere Light
of Nature. Now if those who say this Doctrine is against and contrary to
Reason, do mean no more, than that they find Christ has revealed it, but they
cannot understand any more concerning it, than what He has revealed, they are
in the right, but they would do well, to express their meaning by decent and
proper Terms, which may signify the Sense they have of their own and Humane
weakness, and not throw Unworthy and Blasphemous Aspersions on a most certain
Divine Truth and Doctrine. He that heartily believes that Jesus is the Christ,
and takes Him unfeignedly for his Lord and Savior, will believe whatsoever he
knows Christ has taught, and will be contented to wait to know more than He
has taught concerning any Article, till He shall be pleased to make a further
discovery of it. Our knowing that the Holy Spirit who is promised, is God,
affords us great encouragement to depend upon Him for, and to expect from Him
Aids and Assistances suitable to our occasions, and such Influences as will
render our dutiful labors, and endeavors prosperous and successful.

7thly; By coming at the end of the World in unconceivable Glory, at which time
He will raise the dead, judge the World, and render to every one according to
his Works, Acts 10.42. Acts 17.32. 2 Cor. 5.10. This, if any thing, should keep
us in a continual holy Awe of Him, and have a very powerful and good Influence
upon our Conduct at all times, if we have any care for, or regard to our
indisputably greatest Interests. And therefore true Christians should concern
themselves very much to understand as particularly as they can, and make a good
use of what Christ has taught relating to what I shall hint unto you in the
next place.

5thly, Those Propositions which acquaint us with the Evil Acts and Vicious
Inclinations and Lusts, He requires us to abstain from and mortify; and the
moral Duties He commands us to perform, as also in what manner it is His
pleasure we should do them. These are either general or particular: Those that
are general, oblige us to renounce all corrupt affections, and abstain from
every Wickedness and Sin, and to exercise our selves in all the Duties we owe
to God, our Neighbors, and our selves, without descending to mention
particular instances, but engaging us to employ our enquiries about them, that
we obtain as distinct a knowledge of them as we can; such are Tit. 2.11, 12. 2
Cor. 7.1. Those which are particular, do name certain Vices, Evil Acts, and
Lusts we must carefully shun and avoid, and subdue certain Graces, Virtues, and
good Acts, we must employ ourselves in. These may be reduced to three Heads,
viz. Those which concern all Christians in common. Those which belong to them
according to the several Relations they stand in unto others. And those which
pertain to them according to the various Estates and Conditions the Providence
of God does place them in. We should endeavor to be as distinctly acquainted
with these, as we can, that our Conduct may be Regular, Orderly, and Exact, and
may beautify and adorn our Profession. These make up the greatest part of that
Revelation Jesus Christ has made of the Will of God unto the World. These are
dispersed through the whole Body of those Sacred Records which contain the
Discoveries He has made of the Father's Mind, so that we cannot attend to any
page of the same, but we shall be sure to meet with some of them. Amongst all
the things that Christ Jesus has taught, these are the least disputed, but
with profoundest Grief be it spoken, none are more neglected, and more
contradicted in the Practices and Lives of the Many.

6thly. Those Propositions which relate what Privileges do pertain to them who
do know Christ Jesus aright, which acquaint us what Benefits, Advantages, and
inestimable Blessings such Persons do partake of at present, and may further
expect with good assurance both in this Life and the next. As that they partake
of the Holy Spirit, and are made his Temples, 1 Cor. 6.19. Romans 8.9. Have all
their Sins Pardoned, are Justified and admitted into the new Covenant, are
Sanctified, and made partakers of the Divine Nature, Ephesians. 1.7. 1 Cor. 6.11. 2
Pet. 1.3, 4. Romans 3.24. are made the Children of God, John 1.12. Gal. 3.26.
Romans 8.14, 15. Have the Holy Angels to Minister, and do many good Offices to
them, Heb. 1.14. That all occurences, even the most afflicting that shall be
ordered forth unto them, shall be overruled to their best advantage, Romans
8.28. That their Bodies shall at the end of the World be raised Glorious
Bodies, Phil. 3.21. And that they shall inherit Eternal Life and Happiness in
the next World, and have their Glorious Recompenses advanced in proportion to
what they Suffer for the sake of Christ, and the improvement they make in their
Obedience unto Him at present, 2 These. 1.10. Matthew. 25.21, 34. These things,
and every thing else which Christ has taught of the like Nature, are very
proper and powerful Arguments to quicken us to, and animate us in the work and
business He does assign us, whilst we continue in this World, and to support
and comfort us under all the Calamities and Sufferings that may befall us here.

7thly. Those Propositions which inform us what Ordinances He has Instituted,
and in what manner they are to be observed: As Baptism, the Ministry of the
Word, and his Supper, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Ephesians. 4.11, etc. Matthew. 26.27, 28. 1
Cor. 11.23, etc. These are appointed to be used as Pledges and Assurances of
the Gracius Respect God has to those who heartily believe in Christ, as
Testimonies of our Submission and Love unto our Lord; and as means by which we
are to receive greater measures of the Graces and Influences of the Holy Spirit.

Christ Jesus has taught many Propositions relating to every one of these
Heads, the knowing and undering of which, will contribute much toward our
arriving at as clear, distinct, and full knowledge of these matters as is
expedient for us. And He has taught very many Propositions which may be
reduced more pertinently to other Heads to which proper Titles may be assigned.
Yet,

4thly, Though there is not any thing Jesus Christ has taught, but it is most
certainly true, and has its proper use; there are some things of more common
and eminent Importance; the knowledge of which, has a most plain, direct, and
immediate tendency, to nourish and strengthen our Faith in Him, to excite and
maintain in us, Devout, Pious, and Divine Affections, and to assist and help us
in forming our Conversations so, that they shall not only be Innocent, and
without Offense, but Exemplary, and worthy of imitation. And these are the
matters a True Christian should in the first place, and principally endeavor
to be acquainted with, though he is not absolutely to confine himself to them,
but must labor to obtain the knowledge of more, if he can, and to be
continually growing in True Faith and Godliness of living. Therefore,

5thly, A good Collection of those Propositions, which are of the greatest
moment to True Christians to have a good knowledge of, and which Christ and his
Apostles did most of all insist on, and peculiarly commend to Peoples special
notice, will be of great use to True Christians, in order to their attaining a
more easy and speedy Information in matters which will be of notable use to
them. Though we may not say to true Believers with reference to any certain
number of Articles, as God Almighty does to the Waves of the Sea, Thus far
shall ye go, and no farther, nor positively determine that such a number of
Articles must of necessity be explicitly understood and believed by every True
Christian; yet their being provided with such a Collection of Articles well
attested by the Holy Scriptures, would be very serviceable, and yield them much
advantage, if they have not a distinct notional knowledge of them, before they
are effectually brought to believe or know (in the manner before related) that
Jesus is the Person God appointed and commissioned to be the only Savior of
Sinners. For,

6thly, This advantage does accrue to People by their being early instructed in
the Doctrines Christ Jesus has taught, and obtaining a true notional knowledge
of the main matters delivered in the New Testament, that when they come to know
Christ Jesus savingly they do immediately believe those Articles in another
manner, and make a better use of them than they did before. And thus they will
be excused from a great deal of Pains, they must otherwise take, to get the
knowledge of these points, before they can apply themselves, to make a farther
Progress. Besides, the notional knowledge of such Articles if attended to, with
any tolerable Application, will conduce very much to Peoples Conviction, and
dispose them to submit themselves to Jesus, as the Christ and resign up
themselves entirely to his Conduct.

7thly, It is so far from being a Blemish and Disadvantage to the Christian
Religion, that Christ Jesus has taught so many Articles, it is its inestimable
excellency. It is a singular Benefit, for which every good Christian ought to
be very thankful. Indeed if no Man could be a True Christian, till he has an
explicit knowledge and belief of every thing Christ has taught, then none but
Men of extraordinary parts and pains could be True Christians, if any could be
so. But the matter is so ordered, that nothing is made necessary to constitute
a Person a Christian, but what the meanest of Mankind is capable of; and yet
there is no Indulgence to Sloth and Idleness, nor excuse for wilful Ignorance
in any, because there is nothing necessary to make a Person a True Christian,
but his knowing that Jesus is the Person God has sent, and commissioned to be
the only Savior of Sinners, so as to take Him unfeignedly to be his Lord. And
this does indispensably oblige him to use his best endeavors to know, and make
a right use of what Christ has Revealed. And He has provided so abundantly
for the improving and bettering of our Minds and Practices, that how long
soever we live, we may be growing and increasing in the knowledge of those
matters, which will exceedingly improve and beautify our Intellectuals,
advantage and adorn our Conversations and Lives.

Therefore let us remember what the Wise Man says, Wisdom is the principal
thing, therefore get Wisdom, and with all thy getting get Understanding, Prove.
4.7. Let us labor to understand aright the Doctrine of Christ Jesus, and get
the knowledge of Him as our Lord, and endeavor continually to grow up more and
more in the knowledge of Him, and of what He has revealed. Then we shall know
by Experience, that the excellency of this knowledge is such, that all that
words can express concerning it, falls abundantly short of discovering the
whole Truth. The pleasure that arises from the most accurate discourse
concerning Christ Jesus, is as much short of what a Person perceives in
himself, upon his knowing Christ Jesus savingly, as the satisfaction which
springs from the most Philosophical description of Honey, is short of that
pleasure Jonathan felt in himself when his Eyes were opened, and all his
faculties revived upon his tasting it. The excellency of Food is unexpressibly
better perceived by an hungry Person, when he finds himself refreshed and
strengthened upon his eating and digesting it, than by any words that can be
used to set forth its Nature and Properties. When you come to know Christ Jesus
so, as to yield up your selves entirely to Him, you will be fully of St. Paul's
mind, and account all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus your Lord.

Books lately Printed for Awnsham and John Churchil.
TAlent's Chronological Tables, fol. Cambden's Britannia, fol. Mr. Boyl's
General History of the Air, 40. Machiavil's Works. Sir Roger L'Strange's
Aesop's Fables, fol. Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle continued. Mr. Lock of Human
Understanding, fol. -- of Education. -- of Money, Interest and Trade. Tanner's
Notitia Monastica. Bishop Wilkins of Prayer and Preaching, enlarged by Dr. Moor
Bishop of Norwich and Dr. Williams. Dr. Hody of the Resurrection. Sir W.
Temple's Miscellania complete. Dr. Patrick's New Version of the Psalms.
Gentleman's Religion, twelves. Le Clarc's Logica, twelves. Dr. Leighton Arch-Bp
of Glascow, his Sermons: Royal Grammar, etc. octavo. Prince Arthur by Dr.
Blackmore, fol. Three several Letters for Toleration. Bishop Hopkins's 4 Vol.
of Sermons and other pieces. Selden's Table Talk, octavo. A Discourse
concerning the Love of God, twelves. Meriton's Guide for Surveyors of
Highways, octavo. An Abridgement of Mr. Lock's Esaias of Human Understanding, by
Mr. Wynn, octavo.

