OBSERVATIONS ON THE Animadversions ( Lately Printed at OXFORD) ON A Late BOOK,
ENTITLED, THE Reasonableness of Christianity, As delivered in the SCRIPTURES.

By S. BOLD, Rector of Steeple, Dorset.

Not for that we have Dominion over your Faith* But are Helpers of your Joy,
for by Faith ye stand, 2 Cor. 1. 24.

LONDON: Printed for A. and I. Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row* School.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
I Am not concerned to enquire why other Persons have given such accounts as
they have, of the main Proposition laid down in the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. of the Design that Author had in publishing his Treatise,
and of the Reason why he observed the Method he has taken to clear and prove
the great Point treated of there. It may suffice to declare why I apprehend
that his Proposition, his Design, and the Reason of his Method are very
different from what they have represented them; which in short is, because I
cannot help it. The Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. being
perfect Master of his own Notions, has expressed them in such perspicuous and
proper Terms, I must offer Violence to my own Understanding and Reason, to put
that Construction on them, which some have assigned them.

The worthy Author of the Animadversions, etc. having very particularly related
what he took to be the Design, etc. of the Author of the Reasonableness, etc.
occasioned my setting down all along as I read his Account, what I conceived
was the Design, etc. of the aforesaid Author; and my making some Observations
on what he offered in answer to those Passages he quoted out of the
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. which are now published to prompt others
to peruse attentively that excellent Treatise, and to make themselves Masters
of the Truths there delivered; and because I am persuaded that neither the
Doctrines delivered in the New Testament, nor Christians, can have their full
Right done them, till People do understand and entertain the great Point
insisted on in the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. and do preserve
themselves under the Influence and Conduct of it. It is a Notion, that tends
not so much to gratify some People's Ambition, and serve their secular
Interest, as another may; But it is more adapted to the Advantage of pure and
undefiled Religion, and will contribute more to Christians Growth in Scripture
Knowledge, and all Godliness of living, and to their rational Comfort and good
Assurance, than any other Notion I am acquainted with.

One thing which has occasioned many to entertain a Prejudice against the
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. I conceive is a wrong Notion they have
imbibed concerning those Composures we call Creeds, viz. Their fancying that
all the Articles contained in all, or some of the Creeds, are absolutely
necessary to be explicitly believed to make Men Christians. Concerning which,
I shall observe.

1. That not one of the Authors we have, who wr^te in the first Century after
Christ, does make any menti^n of a Creed in their Days. So that we cannot have
a^y certainty that there was any such thing, during the Fir^^ Hundred Years
after Christ, though we are very sure the^^ were Christians during that space.

2. Creeds were not originally designed to relate wha^ Articles were absolutely
necessary to be explicitly believe^ to make Men Christians (though some did
afterward^ turn them to that purpose) but to direct the Clergy, an^ those who
were to instruct Christians in the Matters of Re^ligion, what Heads, Points, or
Articles and Doctrines of Faith they were to take particular Care to discourse
of* and insist on in order to their building up Believers in their most Holy
Faith. Of this very good Evidence might be produced from Antiquity, if there
were occasion.

3. We have no certainty concerning the precise Number of the Articles which
did make up the First Creeds. We are certain that some of the Articles that now
constitute the oldest Creeds we have any Knowledge of, were not at first in
them, but were afterward added on particular occasions.

4. A Doctrine's being placed in a Creed, is so far from making the explicit
Belief of it, absolutely necessary to make Men Christians, that it does not
make it an Object of Christian Faith. No Doctrine is an Object of Christian
Faith, but what Jesus Christ or his Apostles have taught. And a Christian's
Faith must be grounded on Evidence that he or his Apostles have taught it. Now
the placing of a Doctrine in a Creed, does not make it a Doctrine that Christ,
etc. have taught, nor does it sufficiently evidence that they have taught it. A
Christian as such, is not to believe any Doctrine because it is in a Creed;
though when he is convinced that Christ, or his Apostles have taught such or
such a Doctrine, which is placed in a Creed, he is to believe it. He that
should say that Faction first occasioned Men's composing of Creeds, and that
the Abuse of Creeds has contributed no small Assistance to the maintaining and
keeping up of Factions, would not be wholly disbelieved. Creeds are of great
use, if they be used aright. We may say of a Creed as the Apostle does of the
Law, 1 Timothy 1. 8. We know that it is good, if a Man use it lawfully.

I hear that some who (having a Mind to talk of what they do not understand)
apply themselves to rail against the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. in
that Phrase, with which the worst of Men made such a Noise under the late
Reigns, affirming confidently upon their own Word, that it is contrary to the
Church of England. If these People are capable of thinking, would they exercise
that Faculty to any good purpose, they might easily perceive that when Jesus
Christ and his Apostles have determined a point, it is the most scandalous and
wicked Aspersion that can be devised, to pretend to introduce the Church of
England in opposition to them. Had these People that respect for, and would
they pay to the Church of England that Deference which is due to her, they
would not prostitute her venerable Name at every turn, in Imitation of those
bad Persons who neither believing in our Blessed Savior, nor in the Living
God, do constantly profane their Sacred Names, when ever they have a mind to
give vent to some unreasonable Passion.

There is one thing which should particularly recommend the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. to good Christians, and for which they can hardly set too
great a value on it, viz. That it fully resolves some Difficulties in our
Savior's Conduct (which I think) were never thoroughly cleared to the World,
till it was published.

Some time after the following Observations were sent to the Press, I met with
some Papers writ by Mr. Edwards, against the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. and against my self; but to pass them over without saying
any thing of them, is the greatest Civility that can be expressed to that
Writer, by

Your Faithful Servant, S. BOLD.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE Reasonableness of Christianity, etc.
Observations on the Preface.
IT cannot be denied but that a wrong Construction may be put upon a very good
and useful Book: And that what it discourses of may be represented quite
contrary to what the Author designed, and has delivered in most intelligible,
apposite, and plain Expressions. Now if a Person who pretending to write
against a Book, he does not rightly understand, or mis-represents, does propose
any thing that is pertenent in opposition to that Book, it is very rational to
suppose his doing so is rather to be attributed to Chance, than to the
Exactness of his Judgment, and his certain Intention. For it is hardly to be
conceived that a Rational Person will deliberately and advisedly write any
thing but what he conceives has a clear Connection with what he directly and
immediately proposes to be the Subject of his Discourse. And though at some
distance he aims at the Book he talks of, yet he mainly designs to confirm the
Propositions he lays down (as he conceives) directly contrary to those
delivered in that Book. But if the Propositions on both sides are in Truth very
well consistent, though he does not apprehend so, he can hardly offer any
Considerations to weaken the Force, or expose the Truth of the Propositions
advanced by the Author he professes to oppose, but those very Considerations
will as certainly wound his own Propositions, and reflect as unluckily on them
as they can on the other: which it will not be allowed to suppose a wise and
prudent Writer could design. Whilst he mistakes the Author he in Words
opposes, let him confirm and establish his own Assertions ever so strongly, he
does not at all distress what that Author has indeed Published. One Man
affirms, that all the Doctrines which are absolutely necessary to be believed
to make Men Christians, or to Salvation, are laid down in the Gospels and Acts
of the Apostles. Another professes to oppose this, and therefore lays down,
and elaborately endeavors to prove this Proposition, That the Epistles are
part of the Rule of Saving Faith. Now both these Propositions are very true,
and consistent; and whatever Arguments can be produced to prove the latter,
comport very well with the Truth of the former, and cannot at all invalidate,
but may very much confirm it. But if he who undertakes to prove the latter, do
let fall Passages which reflect on the former Proposition, those Passages have
really the same ill Aspect with relation to his own Proposition, they have to
the other. The whole amounts to no more, than if one should declare that all
that is absolutely necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, or to
Salvation, is delivered in the Epistles. And another out of a sort of Zeal for
the Gospels and the Acts should professedly oppose that Proposition, and
publish a Book to prove that the Gospels and Acts are part of the Rule of
Saving Faith. But when the Question is this, seeing the Doctrines absolutely
necessary to be believed to make Men Christians, are laid down both in the
Gospels and Acts, and in the Epistles, In what parts of the New Testament may
it be best discerned which be the Doctrines that are absolutely necessary to be
believed to make Men Christians? Then certain Reasons may be assigned why they
may be better discerned by consulting the Gospels and Acts, than the Epistles.

Peoples misrepresenting a good Book may be derived from various Originals, as
Wilfulness, Inadvertence, Weakness, Prepossession, etc. I will not suspect that
the Author of the Animadversions (lately Printed at Oxford) on the
Reasonableness of Christianity as delivered in the Scriputers, has
misrepresented that excellent Treatise, through an Indulgence to any thing for
which he may be justly blamed, because he writes for the most part with so much
Temper, and has made a Profession in the Close of his Preface so every way
becoming a worthy and good Christian. But if I understand the true Meaning of
the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. as expressed in that
Treatise, it is mightily misrepresented in those Animadversions, how innocent
and harmless soever the Author may be in what he has done.

That I may do both these Authors all the Right I am able, I will observe all
along, wherein they do agree, and give as true, impartial, and distinct an
Account of the Sense of the Reasonableness of Christianity as I can, in those
Points treated of, especially in the First and Third Parts of these
Animadversions; and take some notice of what this Author has offered, against
what he has alleged out of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. And that
I may proceed the more orderly, I will begin my Observations where the Author
of the Animadversions begins his; viz. P. 1. of his Preface: Where he declares
his Agreement with the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. That
the most Rational Means of silencing all Religious Controversies, is to take
the Scriptures for the only Rule of Faith. This I apprehend is a true Account
of the Judgment of the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, concerning
this Matter: And I conceive he agrees with the Author of the Animadversions, in
the main of that Reason which he has annexed to that Proposition. Though to
express what I apprehend, a more clear and full Account of the Sense of the
Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. I will take the Liberty to
word it in some Places, otherwise than this Author has done, and to add one
Passage or Clause he has not inserted. For there might be some probable
Grounds to hope for a happy Conclusion of all Disputes in Religion, if all
Parties would join issue in this, that no Christian ought to be required to
believe any thing but what is enjoined by the clear and express Declarations of
Scripture, nor any thing so enjoined, till it be made appear to him, that it is
so enjoined; and that no Christian may reject, or withold his assent from any
Article which appears to him to be plainly delivered in the Holy Scriptures.
The Clause I shall add is this, That nothing ought to be required to be
believed as absolutely necessary to make Men Christians, but what is enjoined
by the clear and express Declaration of Scripture to be believed for that
purpose. And I add this Clause for this Reason amongst others, because whoever
imposes on People certain Doctrines (though the Doctrines are really Christ's
Doctrines) as absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men Christians, which
Christ and his Apostles have not declared to be absolutely necessary to be
believed to make Men Christians, does as really advance a Foreign Authority,
and set it up equally with Christ's, as he does who imposes any thing as a
necessary part of the Christian Religion, which Christ and his Apostles never
made a part of it. For notwithstanding the Doctrines which are affirmed to be
absolutely necessary to be believed to make men Christians, be Doctrines which
Christ has taught; yet if he has not taught that the Belief of them is
absolutely necessary to make Men Christians, but only requires them to be
believed for other Purposes, the requiring the Belief of them as absolutely
necessary to make Men Christians, must be built upon a Foundation and Authority
distinct from Christ's and his Apostles; which therefore at best can be but
Humane Authority. Till this Clause is agreed to, the former Clauses in the
Reason, will not avail much, to put a happy Conclusion to Religious
Controversies. Besides, I cannot understand why the assumed Authority of the
several Parties may not be yielded to, for the deciding of particular
Controversies in Religious Matters, as well as for the determining and
assigning what Points are to be be believed in order to any Peoples being
Christians. I leave it to others to enquire how much, Men's assuming Authority
to impose certain of Christ's Doctrines, without his Warrant, as absolutely
necessary to be believed, to make Men Christians, has contributed to their
Stretching the like Authority further, even to make some things Parts of the
Christian Religion, which Christ and his Apostles have not authorized, which is
infamously done in the Church of Rome, and perhaps in some degree, in most of
the Parties truly termed Protestant. It may be easy to prove to those who are
Christians, that they are to believe such or such Doctrines, by showing them
plainly that Christ Jesus, whom they have received to be their Lord, has
taught them. But when we require those who are not Christians to believe them,
as absolutely necessary to make them Christians, we must undertake to prove to
them, the Truth of those Doctrines by some other Medium than Christ's
Authority. For it cannot rationally be expected that People who do not believe
Jesus to be the Messiah, or the Christ, will assent to, believe, and receive
Doctrines, merely because he, they do not believe to be the Christ, has taught
them. And when they are brought to believe that Jesus is the Messiah, so as to
take him for their Lord and King, if that do not constitute them Christians, it
will not suffice to make them Christians, to prove to them that Christ has
taught such or such Doctrines, which therefore they must believe, but it must
be proved to them, that that same Jesus has taught that these same Doctrines
are absolutely necessary to be believed to make them Christians, unless their
believing this Branch upon some other Authority will serve the turn: And if
that will do the Business, why may they not be required to believe that Jesus
is the Messiah upon the same Authority? and consequently all the other
Doctrines the said Authority shall be pleased to avouch? The Difference is not
much in rational Discourse, whether a Person believes a certain Doctrine to be
Christ's, which he never taught, upon the Testimony of such a Person, or
Church; or whether he believes a Doctrine Christ has certainly taught, to be
absolutely necessary to a certain Purpose, which Christ never declared to be
absolutely necessary to that purpose, upon the same Testimony or Authority. For
the Ground, Foundation, and Reason of the Belief in both Cases is the very
same, and is an Authority distinct from Christ's.

In the next place, the Author of the Animadversions relates, what he thought
was the main Design of the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc.
in these Words: The main Design which the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. seems to have had, is, to lay down such a Scheme of Faith
only, as he finds delivered in Scripture, and not to rest satisfied with those
Collections of Articles, which are to be met with in the common Systems,
without any sufficient warrant from Scripture.I will keep as near as I can to
this Author's Words, in relating what I conceive to be the Truth touching this
Matter. The main Design of the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity,
etc. seems to have had, as to one main part of his Book, was to lay down such a
Scheme of those matters of Faith only, that are absolutely necessary to be
believed to make a Man a Christistian, as he found delivered in the Scripture;
but not to lay down such a Scheme of those Matters of Faith, as he found in
Scripture, which any Man after he is a Christian, may be necessarily obliged to
Believe. The Reason why the Author of the Reasonableness did not rest satisfied
with those Collections of Articles which are to be met with in the common
Systems does not appear to be, because all or most, or perhaps any of the
Articles in some of those Systems were without any sufficient Warrant from
Scripture: Though it may be, the Composers of those Systems might assert
something concerning several of those Articles, for which there might not be
any sufficient Warrant from Scripture. There might be sufficient Warrant from
Scripture for the Articles themselves; and not the like Warrant for every thing
those Authors might deliver concerning them. But the Reasons why he was not
satisfied with those Collections seem to me to be, 1. Because those Collections
did not agree; some of them consisting of more, some of fewer Articles, and
those which had the greatest number, left out some of the Articles which were
insisted on, or inserted in another. 2. Because it was pretended by the
Composers of those Systems, of their Followers, or both, that all the Articles
collected into those Systems were necessarily to be believed to make Men
Christians. Now according to that Notion, what certainly could there be, who
were Christians, or to be admitted and owned as such? whilst there was so great
a Disagreement concerning the Articles which were absolutely necessary to be
believed to make Men Christians? For those who were Christians according to the
Composers and followers of one System, were not Christians according to the
Followers of another, because they wanted something in their Judgment,
absolutely necessary to make them Christians. The Design of those who write
Systems of Christian Divinity (I apprehend) should be to collect those Articles
which are mainly insisted on in the New Testament, and to which most or all
that is delivered in those Sacred Writings may be pertinently and conveniently
reduced, together with an account of the principal things there taught,
concerning those Articles. And if the Composers of Systems did carefully
distinguish the Articles those Sacred Writings teach, are absolutely necessary
to be believed to make men Christians, from those which are of great Moment to
be known and believed by them who are already Christians, I am of Opinion, the
Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity would not think their doing so,
any Blemish to their Systems, and that he would not be dissatisfied with any of
those Articles of which their Systems should consist, nor with any thing they
should say concerning those Articles, which had sufficient warrant from
Scripture.

And to this end (says the Author of the Animadversions) he has run through
the Gospels and Acts to discover upon what Terms our blessed Savior, who first
founded, and his Apostles, who afterward built up Christianity, admitted Men
into that Religion.

Answ. The Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity finding so great a
Disagreement amongst the Writers of Systems, concerning the Articles which must
necessarily be believed to make Men Christians, did betake himself to the sole
reading of the Scriptures, to discover upon what Terms our blessed Savior, and
his Apostles did admit Men for Disciples or Christians, or did own them to be
Christians: And upon his having made an attentive and unbiassed Search
throughout the Scriptures, upon what Terms they admitted Men into the Christian
Religion; he found that what those Terms were, were best to be discerned in the
Gospels and Acts of the Apopostles; and for that Reason, confined himself in
his giving an account of those Terms, to the frequent and exact Relations which
are given of them in those parts of the New Testament.

And (says the Author of the Animadversions) having declared at large all that
he can find required by them to make a Man a Christian, which he tells us was
only the believing Jesus to be the Messiah; he concludes, that nothing ought to
be made necessary to be believed now, which was not so then; nor any Articles
imposed upon us, which were not enjoined in order to Salvation, in those parts
of Scripture which he has considered; which alone, according to him, declare
the Conditions upon which Men are denominated Believers or Christians.

Answ. The Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity having shown at large,
that Jesus Christ and his Apostles did not require any thing to be believed as
absolutely necessary to make a Man who believed in the only True and Living
God, a Christian, but only this, that Jesus was the Messiah: He concluded that
nothing ought now to be imposed on Men, as absolutely necessary to be believed
to make Men Christians, which is not enjoined as absolutely necessary to be
believed in order to Salvation, in the Gospels and Acts, in which parts of
Scripture, the Conditions upon which Men are denominated Believers or
Christians, are best to be discerned. But I do not remember that he does any
where say, that the Gospels and Acts are the Parts of Scripture, which alone
declare the Conditions upon which Men are denominated Believers or Christians.
He does expressly declare, that the Articles necessarily to be believed to make
Men Christians, are to be found in the Epistles. Reasonab. of Christianity,
etc. p. 295.

This way of examining our Faith by the Scripture (says the Author of the
Animadversions) had been an unexceptionable method for fixing the measure of
it, if he had omitted no Articles which are there made as necessary to be
believed by all Christians, as what is observed in his Treatise.

Answ. The Method then observed by the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. was unexceptionable for the fixing the Measure of Faith, so
far as he was inquiring after it; viz. what Artiticles are absolutely necessary
to be believed to make a Man a Christian (not what Articles may be necessary to
be believed by all, or any who are already Christians) provided he did not omit
any Articles which the Scripture makes absolutely necessary to be believed to
make a Man a Christian. And if he has omitted any such Article, that may be a
good Exception against his Collection, but not against his Method. But had he
collected a certain Number of Articles delivered in the Scripture, proper to be
believed by them who are Christians, and then affirmed that every one who is,
or ever shall be a Christian, must necessarily, explicitly believe every one
of them, and no Christian must believe any more; I think there would have been
very just Ground to have excepted against his Collection, how unexceptionable
soever his way of examining our Faith had been; unless he could have proved
that every Christian shall have both Capacity to understand every one of them,
and Space enough to be convinced that every one of them is delivered in
Scripture. Many more Articles may be necessary to be believed by some
Christians than may be necessary to be believed by other Christians; because
some may attain to the Knowledge of more Articles, and that they are delivered
in Scripture, than many other very good Christians can. The Author of the
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. appears to be a Person, whose
Understanding and Charity are of a different Size from theirs, who are for
Persons swallowing Articles of Faith, as some People do Pills, a precise Number
(because said to be taken out of such a Box, or of such a Persons prescribing)
to make their Operation certain, without understanding either what they are
made of, or for what particular Reasons they are to be administered.

For that there are others required even to make a Man a Christian in these
parts of Sacred Writ, from whence he has extracted his Article of Faith, is
(says the Author of the Animadversions) what I purpose to make appear in the
following Observations.

Answ. Prove from any part of the New Testament that there are other Articles
distinct from those the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity does
insist on, which are taught by Christ and his Apostles to be absolutely
necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christians, you do your business as
effectually, as if you prove it from the Gospels and Acts. But this Author
intends to prove more than this, not only that there are more Doctrines in the
Gospels and Acts absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men Christians,
than the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity has set down in his
Treatise; but that there are Doctrines in the Epistles, which are not in the
Gospels and the Acts; which yet are absolutely necessary to be explicitly
believed to make Men Christians; as appears from these following Words:

As also to show that there are some distinct Articles from what are set down
in the Gospels and Acts, delivered in the Epistles, that are absolutely
necessary to be believed to Salvation.

Answ. Here this Author undertakes to show, not that there are Articles in the
Epistles distinct from all which are set down in the Gospels and Acts, which
may be necessary to be believed to Salvation; for both these Authors agree as
to that: But that these distinct Articles are absolutely necessary to be
explicitly believed to make Men Christians, or to Salvation. So that should a
Person upon found Conviction, heartily yield up himself without any
Reservation, unto Jesus Christ, as the Messiah; and unfeignedly receive him for
his Lord, to be absolutely governed by him; year, should sincerely follow his
Conduct as long as he lives, and having attained the Knowledge of all the
Articles taught in the Gospels and Acts, does firmly assent to, and believe
every one of them, and makes such use of them as Christ requires, in short,
though he repents truly of his Sins, turns to the Lord heartily, and cleaves
unto him with purpose of Heart all his Days, yet happening to die before he
does explicitly know and believe these distinct Articles delivered in the
Epistles, he is no Christian, nor can possibly be saved, notwithstanding his
being ignorant of them cannot justly be imputed to him as his Fault. This is a
Notion which must be very clearly proved from Scripture, before I can submit
to, and embrace it. This Point, the Author of the Animadversions undertakes to
prove. He tell us:

In answer to that Assertion of our Author, that it is not in the Epistles that
we are to learn what are the Fundamental Articles of Faith, with some others of
the like Nature.

Answ. The author of the Reasonableness of Christianity does not say the
Fundamental Articles of Faith, viz. those Articles which are absolutely
necessary to be believed to make Men Christians, are not in the Epistles, but
he says they are there; yet what they are may be best discerned in the Gospels
and Acts: First Vindication of the Reasonableness, etc. p. 14. This Point is so
fully cleared, and strongly discoursed in his Second Vindication, p. 132, 133,
134. the Reason of Mankind I think can raise no colorable Objection against
it; I shall refer the Reader thither for a thorough understanding of the
Matter, and perfect Satisfaction concerning it; unless what this Author has
undertaken in his Animadversions can be proved, viz. That there are certain
Articles in the Epistles which are not in the Gospels and Acts, which are
absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men Christian. If this can be
proved, then it will be plain, that it is in the Epistles that we must
necessarily look for some of those Articles, which are necessarily to be
believed to make Men Christians, for then they are not all to be found in the
Gospels, and in the Acts, and it will be in vain to look for them all there,
where they are not all to be found.

Which is the Reason (says the Author of the Animadversions) that I give the
Title of a Vindication of the Epistles to the former part of these Papers.

Answ. The former Part of these Animadversions being designed to answer the
Reason why the Title, A Vindication of the Epistles, is given to it, we are not
to look for Proofs of their Divine Authority, that being acknowledged on both
sides, or if we find any thing of that Nature there, how useful soever the said
Considerations may be, with Relation to that Matter, it is all besides the
present purpose, which is to prove that the Epistles were writ for this very
purpose, viz. to acquaint People with other Articles than what are set down in
the Gospels and Acts, which are absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men
Christians; or at least, that there are such Doctrines delivered in the
Epistles. If there be any thing then in this First part of the Animadversions
which belongs not to one of these Points, it is so far foreign to the present
Debate.

This Author seems to suggest in the Third Page of his Preface, by placing my
Name in the Margin, that I have given such an Account of the design the Author
of the Reasonableness, etc. had in publishing his Treatise, as is not
consistent with that Account the Author himself has given of the Design he had
therein, in the Sixth Page of his First Vindication, where he says he chiefly
designed it for those who were not thoroughly and firmly Christians. Of which,
says this Author, I find no Intimation in the Treatise it self. But a Person
may find it in the Title, especially after the Author has minded him in the
same Place, that he is to learn from the Title, for whom he chiefly intended
it; and has in his Second Vindication manifested how proper the Title was to
furnish the Reader with a true and just Account of the Persons for whom his
Treatise was chiefly designed. The Account I gave of his Design, it is true, was
different from that the Author has given of his Design in the Place quoted;
but it is very consistent with his: For he gives an account of the Persons for
whom he chiefly designed his Treatise: I gave an Account of the principal Point
he designed to prove and clear in that Treatise. But I do not remember that I
any where said, that That was his only Design, what way soever this Author had
to know that I believe that to be his only Design, nor that I have declared
that I had considered his Treatise with very great Care and Application; though
this Author is pleased to lay those Words to my Charge.

This Author also observes, That I am of Opinion, that there is nothing more
required to make a Man a Christian, than the believing Jesus to be the Messiah.

Answ. I acknowledge I have expressed my self to this purpose, That nothing is
required as absolutely necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian but
this, that Jesus is the Messiah; and that a due believing that Jesus is the
Messiah, is the Faith which does constitute or make a Man a Christian. And the
Reason why I expressed my Opinion in that manner was, because Mr. Edwards did
suppose the Belief of the True and Living God, and had expressly excluded the
Consideration of that Article out of the Discourse; though whether he had
reason to do so, with Relation to the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, may be fully seen in that Author's Second Vindication of his
Treatise.

But had he (adds this Author) given himself a little more leisure to consider
into what Faith he himself was baptized, and into what he baptizes others, he
must have acknowledged that the explicit believing in Father and Holy Ghost,
is as much required of every one initiated into Christianity, as believing
Jesus to be the Messiah: For the Faith in the Holy Trinity has always been
required in order to Baptism.

Answ. Whether this Author, or I, have given our selves most leisure to
consider into what Faith we were baptized, or others are to be baptized, I
cannot tell, but I suspect my Apprehensions concerning Baptism, are not in
every respect the same with his: which of us has considered the Matter with
most exactness is not to be determined by me: nor can the Reader make a just
Decision of the Point, whilst I reserve my own Thoughts to my self; which I
continue to do, that no Addition may be made to the Points now in dispute. But
though I acknowledge the Faith in the Trinity, or the explicit Belief of the
Doctrine of the Holy Trinity is as much required of every one who is initiated
into Christianity, when they understand that Jesus Christ has taught it, as
the explicit Belief of any other Doctrine they know he has taught, is, or can
be; and that the Person who is to administer Baptism to others, ought
explicitly to believe the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity; yet I am very far from
being certain that every one who is to be initiated into Christianity, must
necessarily explicitly believe the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity. I am not yet
convinced that Jesus Christ or his Apostles did ever require the explicit
Belief of the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, as absolutely necessary in every
Person who was to be Baptized. It may be my Opinion, that a Person cannot be a
Christian, without partaking of the gracious Influences of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost (wherein I may perhaps differ from some worthy, learned and good
Men, as much as I may from this worthy Author about the Point of Baptism). But
I do not perceive any Ground to conclude that a Person's pertaking of their
gracious Influences, does necessarily depend on his explicit knowing and
believing all that Jesus Christ has revealed and taught, concerning the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Indeed (says this Author) at the first, Men might be denominated Christians
upon the bare believing Jesus to be the Messiah; yet when there was more
revealed concerning him, and consequently a larger Faith required, they could
no more have continued Christians, if they had not believed this also, than if
they had still been altogether Unbelievers.

Answ. The Question here will be, whether Men might at first be truly and
justly denominated Christians, upon the bare believing Jesus to be the Messiah?
I think the bare believing Jesus to be the Messiah, was not at any time enough
to denominate Men truly Christians: but tht believing him to be the Messiah, so
as to take him for their Lord, King, and Ruler, was at first absolutely
necessary to make, and so denominate them truly Christians. And such a
believing him to be the Messiah, I think, will make Men Christians to the end
of the World. But to speak strictly and properly, it is the due believing of
Jesus to be the Messiah (which consists in Men's believing him to be the
Messiah, so as to take him for their absolute Lord and King) which makes or
constitutes Men Christians. And it is their professing of this Faith, that
denominates them Christians. When more Articles of Faith were revealed, and
those who professed themselves to be Christians, did know they were revealed,
and it was known, that they did understand that Jesus Christ had revealed or
taught them, they could not justly retain the Denomination of Christians, if
they did not own and acknowledge their Belief of them; not because the Belief
of these Doctrines was absolutely necessary to continue them Christians, but
because their refusing to acknowledge them, when it was known they understood
that that Jesus they professed to have received for their Lord, had taught
them, was a Demonstration that they did not sincerely take him for their Lord,
and so had not that Faith which was absolutely necessary to make them
Christians. It was not their believing these new Articles, which did continue
them Christians, but that did further Evidence they were Christians, or did
really believe what was absolutely necessary to be believed to make them
Christians. The continuance of tht Faith which makes a Man a Christian,
continues him a Christian; not his obtaining a new sort of Faith, or acting and
exerting the aforesaid Faith regularly, with relation to new Objects, as they
come to be proposed to, and understood by him.

This Author makes one Observation more on what I have writ, which is to this
Effect, That I have been a little too hasty in expressing my Opinion of the
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. in the Words set down in the Two and
Fiftieth Page of my Animadversions. The Reason he assigns for this Observation,
is delivered in these Words, Pref. p. 4. Since, I suppose, he will hardly deny
that Mr. Hobs writ within that space, who maintained the very same Assertion.

Answ. I do not deny that Mr. Hobs writ within these Sixteen Hundred Years; but
that he maintained the very same Point maintained in the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. is more than I can affirm. I received so early, such a
Character of Mr. Hobs's Writings from my aged Tutor, the Learned Mr. Lawson, as
created in me such an Aversion to that Author's Books, I do not remember that
ever I read half a Score Pages of any thing Mr. Hobs has published. But I dare
say, if Mr. Hobs has maintained this very same Assertion that is maintained in
the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. viz. that the believing that Jesus is
the Messiah, so as to take him heartily for our Lord and King, is all that
Jesus and his Apostles required as absolutely necessary to make Men Christians,
who did believe in the True and Living God, he maintained a very great and
important Truth: And if he never published any Notion less true, and less
useful than that, he could not justly fall under the Censure of any of those
who have employed their Pens against him. But if Mr. Hobs, or any other Person
had writ on this, or any other Subject, a Book that was absolutely the best
that has been published this Sixteen Hundred Years, the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. may for all that, be justly reputed one of the best Books
which has been published within that Space; and this, for the Reasons I laid
down in the Close of my Animadversions, which I conceive are of that Nature,
they cannot be invalidated by the bare mentioning of Mr. Hob's Name. And if I
am not mistaken, the latter Reason this Author gives why he needed not to
reflect any further upon any thing I had propounded, viz. because there does
not seem to be any thing very material, which was not before observed in the
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. or the Author's Vindication of it, does in
some measure justify the Character I gave of that excellent Treatise. For
certainly it cannot be a Blemish to a Treatise, that it discourses its Subject
so clearly and so fully, that very material Answers may be brought from the
Treatise it self, to whatsoever is produced by way of Objection against it.
Some Authors write after such a rate, their own Books may be pertinently made
use of to confute their Notions. But the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. (whoever he is) seems to have this peculiar Excellency and
Advantage, that he treats the Points he discourses of in such a manner, he
fully answers his Adversaries, before they can make their Objections public. I
write not to justify my self or any one else in Errors or Mistakes, but to
vindicate, and clear (if I can) disguised Truth, and wronged Innocence, and let
those who are contrary minded, know, I cannot be of their Judgment till they
produce other kind of Arguments against the Book they profess they oppose, than
are fully answered in that Author's Writings, which they knew were public,
before theirs were offered to common view. And though there is nothing very
material in these Papers, which has not been observed before in the Writings of
the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. I shall not account that
a just Prejudice against them: For if the Answers here propounded be very
material to what is alleged against the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc.
it cannot reasonably be supposed that the Objections insisted on, should be of
any great weight with me. And my deriving the Answers from that Authors
Writings, I hope may pass with Persons of Candor, Reason and Discernment, for
some justification of the Value I set on the Reasonableness of Christianity,
etc.

Observations on the Vindication of the Epistles.
THIS Author begins his Animadversions with that Part to which he gives this
Title, A Vindication of the Epistles: And he enters on this Part with assigning
Two Reasons why the Reasonableness of Christianity does not (as he says) give
such Satisfaction to an inquisitive Mind, as might prevent all Exception
against it, whether it was designed for the Benefit of those who were not
thoroughly and firmly Christians, or to be a general Rule of Faith to all sorts
of Men?

Answ. That Author's Design was to give a clear and distinct Account of what
Articles or Doctrines are absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men
Christians: And the Treatise gives me full Satisfaction concerning this Matter;
because it lays down all that Jesus Christ and his Apostles have declared to be
thus necessary, and nothing but what they have declared to be so. And his
giving so full and large Proof, that Christ and his Apostles did require the
Belief of the Articles he has laid down, and did not require the Belief of any
other Article, as absolutely necessary to make Men Christians, redered his
Treatise very proper to be published for the Benefit of those who were not
thoroughly and firmly Christians. For nothing can tend more to the Benenefit of
such Persons, than a clear, distinct, full and true Information of what is
absolutely necessary to be believed by them, in order to their being
Christians. What this Author understands by a General Rule of Faith to all
sorts of Men, I do not know. The whole New Testament is the General Rule of
Faith to all Christians, as the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity,
etc. has declared. And the Doctrines he has insisted on, are the Doctrines
absolutely necessary to be believed by those who are not Christians, to make
them Christians.

The First Reason this Author gives why the Reasonableness of Christianity,
etc. does not seem to give Satisfaction to an inquisitive Mind is, because it
introduces a new Scheme of Belief, in Opposition to the anciently received
Doctrine of the Church.

Answ. Here I must observe, it is not opposite to the most anciently received
Doctrine of the Church: Because it is the very same Scheme Jesus Christ
introduced, and his Apostles constantly kept to, in admitting of Unbelievers
into the Church.

His Second Reason is, Because it does not answer the full Sense and Intent of
Revelation, which is the only Reason and Measure of our Faith.

Answ. Here I must observe, it does answer the full Sense and Intent of
Revelation, as to what the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity was
inquiring after: Because it delivers all that Revelation requires to be
believed as absolutely necessary to make Men Christians; and we are not to
insist on any thing as absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men
Christians, but what Revelation, the only Reason and Measure of our Faith, in
this Case, does declare is absolutely necessary to be believed to that end.
Whoever affirms any Doctrine (though the Doctrine it self is revealed) is
absolutely necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, which Revelation
does not declare to be so, affirms it without Reason (according to this Authors
own Arguing) because Revelation is the only Reason why we are to affirm any
Doctrine is absolutely necessary to be believed to this purpose; and so he goes
beyond the only Measure of our Faith in this Matter. The Reason why we are to
insist on such or such Doctrines as absolutely necessary to be believed to make
Men Christians, is, because Revelation requires the Belief of them as
absolutely necessary to make Men Christians, not barely because the Doctrines
are revealed; for then every Doctrine which is revealed must be absolutely
necessary to be explicitly believed to make a Man a Christian, because the
Reason assigned for the Particulars we are minded to insist on, extends to
every particular which is revealed, and obliges as much to every one, as to any
one. For make your Catalogue as large as you will, if you leave out any one
Doctrine, or any Branch of it, that is revealed, your Catalogue cannot possibly
answer the full Sense and Intent of Revelation, unless a defective, partial
Scheme of Faith, can answer the full Sense and Intent of Revelation; or some
parts of Revelation have no Sense, and were revealed for no purpose or Intent:
Both which are equally incapable of Proof, and altogether unreasonable to
suppose.

This Author declares, p. 4. what it is he undertakes to prove in this First
part of his Book. His Words are these: It shall be my business in the First
Place, to prove that there are Doctrines in the Epistles, distinct from those
delivered in the Gospels or Acts, which are as absolutely necessary to be
believed, and to be made Fundamental Articles of Faith, as any other Parts of
Revelation. That is, in short, that there are Doctrines in the Epistles
distinct from any delivered in the Gospels and Acts, which are absolutely
necessary to be explicitly believed to make Men Christians. The Argument he
makes use of to prove what he has undertaken, is this, (to word it so, as that
it may reach the Point he has undertaken to prove) Some of the Doctrines set
down in the Epistles which are distinct from any delivered in the Gospels and
Acts, have been confessed ( viz. by the Church) from the very First Ages of
Christianity, to be altogether as necessary to be actually (or explicitly)
believed unto Salvation, as any whatsoever.

Here I shall observe, that before this Argument can do the Business for which
it is brought, the Author must 1. Relate what he means or understands by the
Term Church. 2. He must prove clearly, that whatsoever the Church (in the Sense
in which he understands that Term) has from the first Ages of Christianity,
confessed to be absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men Christians, is
so, and that the Confession or Testimony of that Church, is the sole, or
ultimate Rule, by which the Question concerning what is absolutely necessary to
be believed to make Men Christians, or to Salvation, is to be resolved and
determined. That is, That we are not to be determined in this Matter by the
Testimony of Christ and his Apostles, but by the Churches Testimony; at least
that it is thus, as to the Doctrines which are divinely revealed and set down
in the New Testament. 3. He is then to set down the particular Doctrines he
has a regard to, in this place. And 4. He must prove that from the very First
Ages of Christianity, the Church has confessed that every one of those Doctrines
is absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed to make Men Christians, or
to Salvation. It is not the bare saying that the Church has such an Authority;
nor the bare affirming such a Matter of Fact concerning the Church, that will
prove the Business in Hand. The explaining and full proving the Particulars
already named, will require some time and Consideration. And when they are
fully cleared, and substantially confirmed, there will not be any need to
inquire whether, or how the Church was imposed on? In the mean time I shall lay
down a few Considerations which I conceive are true, and consonant with the
Judgment of the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. 1. That
which makes a Doctrine of supernatural Revelation, absolutely necessary to be
believed to make a Man a Christian, is not its being placed in one part of the
New Testament or in another, but the Divine Determination that it must be
necessarily believed for that purpose. 2. That our knowing that such a Doctrine
is absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men Christians, depends upon
God's declaring that the Belief of it is absolutely necessary to make Men
Christians, let this Declaration lie in what part of the New Testament soever.
3. That what is revealed to be absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men
Christians, may be better discerned in the Gospels and Acts, than in the
Epistles, though the same Doctrines are likewise to be found in them. And this
for the Reasons the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. has
assigned. 4. The New Testament comprehends the entire Revelation the Lord Jesus
Christ has made of the Mind of God. In which Sacred Writings, our Blessed
Savior declares what Articles are absolutely necessary to be believed to make
Men his Disciples and Subjects, or Christians; and in these Holy Scriptures he
has also delivered, or declared all the Laws of his Kingdom, by which those he
admits for his Subjects must be governed; so that they are not to admit or
receive any thing for a Part of their Religion, as Christian, but what he has
taught and delivered in some part of these Holy Writings. 5. The enquiry is not
how many are the Laws of Christ's Kingdom, or how many Articles he has taught
and delivered, which those who are his Subjects are obliged to endeavor to
understand, believe and observe, but what are those Articles he does require to
be believed, as absolutely necessary to make Men his Subjects or Christians? 6.
All the Doctrines delivered in the New Testament, are equally Divine
Revelations, and are therefore to be received with equal Degrees of Assent, by
all those Christians who do understand them, and know that they are revealed or
delivered in those Sacred Writings. But these Doctrines are not absolutely
necessary to be believed to make Men Christians. Indeed there are several
Doctrines which I know are delivered in the New Testament, which have not the
like Effect and Influence on me at present, in proportion to their Nature, that
other Doctrines have, which I know are taught there: But this Difference
arises not from the Nature of the former Doctrines, which is always the same
and unalterable; nor from my not receiving them with equal Degrees of Assent,
for I do receive them with equal Degrees of Assent, being as firmly persuaded
they are Divine Revelations, as the other; but this Difference spoken of now,
arises from something else, viz. my present State and Circumstances, or the
like.

Now (says this Author) if several of the Doctrines contained in those parts
of Revelation, ( viz. the Epistles) have all along down from the Apostles
Times, been reputed necessary to be believed to Salvation, then certainly they
ought not to be denied to be absolutely subservient to that end, without the
Proof of one, or all these things (which are Five in Number).

Answ. 1. It is not particular Persons or Churches reputing things to be
absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation, that makes them absolutely
necessary to be believed to Salvation. In the very early times of Christianity,
even long before the Apostles decease, there were People professing themselves
Christians, and who set up for Teachers in the the Church, who affirmed certain
things were absolutely necessary to Salvation, which were not so; as is
undeniably evident from Act. 15. 1. 2. When this Author shall be pleased to set
down plainly, the Doctrines his Words seem to have a Secret Relation to, a
Judgment may be made, whether they were justly reputed absolutely necessary to
be believed explicitly to make Men Christians, or not, by considering whether
Christ and his Apostles reputed them absolutely necessary or not. 3. If the
Church did originally repute any Doctrines to be absolutely necessary to be
explicitly believed to Salvation without warrant, the successive continuance
of that Reputation, cannot make those Doctrines to be absolutely necessary.
Length of Time, and reiterated Applause, cannot advance an original Mistake
into Truth. The Second Concoction will not in this case, rectify the Error of
the First. 4. A Person who does suppose, yea, acknowledge that several
Doctrines delivered in the Epistles, which are distinct from any taught in the
Gospels and Acts, have been justly reputed necessary to be believed to
Salvation, may regularly, and with good Warrant deny that they are absolutely
necessary (for that I suppose) this Author means (for otherwise the Consequence
he draws is not to his Purpose) though he uses the Word Subservient) to be
believed to Salvation, without being obliged to prove either one, or Five
Negatives. For many Doctrines may be very justly reputed necessary to
Salvation, which are not absolutely necessary to Salvation. And therefore when
it is inferred that such and such Doctrines are absolutely necessary to be
explicitly believed to Salvation, if they have all along been reputed
necessary to be believed to Salvation, the Consequence may be regularly denied,
and no necessity follow thereupon, that the Person denying it, must be obliged
to prove: 1. That the Authors of the Epistles were not divinely inspired. 2.
etc. And for that Reason I suppose it is that this Author applies himself, in
the Remainder of this part of his Animadversions, to prove these Five Points:
1. That the Authors of the Epistles were Divinely Inspired. 2. That the
Apostles had Authority or Commission to deliver some things for necessary
Articles of Faith. 3. That some of their Doctrines were writ with a Design that
all Christians should be necessarily required to believe them to Salvation. 4.
That there is no Contradiction in the Epistles to the other parts of Scripture.
5. That some of those Doctrines are of equal Necessity to be explicitly known
to make a Man a Christian, with this, that Jesus is the Messiah. But First of
all, the fullest Proof imaginable, of every one of these Points, will not in
the least confirm the Proposition or Argument they are immediately designed to
confirm, viz. That all those Doctrines delivered in the Epistles, which are
distinct from any that are taught in the Gospels and Acts, which the Church
from the first Ages of Christianity, has confessed to be absolutely necessary to
be explicitly believed to make Men Christians, are absolutely necessary to be
explicitly believed to make Men Christians. For there is not any Connection
between the Truth of any, or all of these Five Points, and the Churches
Authority, by her continual Confession to make any Doctrines which are only to
be found in the Epistles, absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men
Christians. If it shall be said that it is not pretended that the Churches
Confession makes them absolutely necessary to be believed, but discovers and
proves that they are absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men
Christians. I answer 1. The Proof of the forementioned Points, is no Proof at
all of the Churches Confession, but must be supposed, and is Antecedent to the
Churches Confession. 2. That the Churches Confession does not discover or prove
that those Doctrines are absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men
Christians: it discovers or proves no more, but that the Church did think those
Doctrines were absolutely necessary to be believed explicitly to make Men
Christians. Now when the Question is whether the Church has thought right
concerning this Matter? that Question must be determined (if she have not
Authority to make (at least) revealed Doctrines absolutely necessary to be
believed to make Men Christians) by ascending higher, and seeing what Jesus
Christ and his Apostles have declared is absolutely necessary to be believed to
make Men Christians: which is the way the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. took, to discover what Doctrines are absolutely necessary to
be believed to the aforesaid purpose, without making any Hubbub concerning the
Church in the matter. The Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc.
has not writ one Word, that I can find, that has any Tendency to the
Disadvantage of the Christian Church; but very much that would contribute
greatly to her Honor and Interest, were People generally of the Mind to attend
her greatest Concernments heartily, without suffering themselves to be swayed
by their own petty Interests, and peevish Humors, which they sacrilegiously
dignify with her Name. She might enjoy a profound Rest, and become daily more
and more truly Glorious, would other People let her be quiet, and not disturb
her Repose, by a rude abusing her Name, to justify their espousing and talking
for Matters, both Scripture and Reason do disclaim. Secondly, The exactest
Proof of the Four First Points, will not afford any Proof of what this Author
declares shall be his Business to prove in this First Part of his Book; viz.
That there are Doctrines in the Epistles distinct from those which are
delivered in the Gospels and Acts, which are absolutely necessary to be
believed to make Men Christians.The Truth of the Four First Points is agreed
on, on both Sides, especially some allowance being made for that Latitude of
Expression in which the third is laid down: So that it is only the Fifth and
Last Point on which the Controversy does depend. It will therefore be needless
to make any Observations on what this Author offers for the Proof of his Four
First Points, unless he happens to mistake any thing in the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. which he brings in under these Heads, or misapplies what he
has to say on these Points, to that Treatise, or some Passages in it.

This Author bestows his Seventh Page in setting down an Objection that has
some Relation to his Two First Points. I think the Objection is not accurately
expressed, but that I shall pass over, and only take notice of his speaking of
Doctrines proposed to be believed upon the Absolute Promise of Salvation. This
is a Passage I confess, I do not well understand. I know there are at this time
many amongst us, who make a great Noise in affirming That Salvation is
absolutely promised to some Persons, and the Stir they have made about or with
that Notion, I apprehend, was an occasion of the Author of the Reasonableness
of Christianity, etc. applying himself to search with particular exactness into
the Holy Scriptures, to find out in what Manner Salvation is there promised:
But I do not conceive that this Author of the Animadversions is one of that
Party. Now, I think there is not an absolute Promise of Salvation in all the
Scripture: And that if there were such a Promise, there could not be any thing
absolutely necessary to be believed unto Salvation.

For an Answer to this ( viz. Objection spoken of before) it will (says this
Author) be material to examine First, whether nothing is absolutely necessary
to be believed to salvation, but what is declared to be so, or whether any
Doctrine, upon which Salvation is proposed, is singly of it self sufficient for
it? P. 8. He immediately adds, This seems to be a Query of no small Importance.

Here I will 1. Propound some Reasons why it may be justly affirmed that a due
believing Jesus to be the Christ or Messiah, does constitute and make Men
Christians. 2. I will consider what this Author propounds to be examined. 3. I
will take Notice of what this Author has here writ upon this Point.

First, I will lay down some Reasons why it may be justly affirmed that a due
believing that Jesus is the Messiah or Christ, does constitute and make a Man a
Christian. As 1. Because Jesus Christ and his Apostles did admit Persons to be
his Disciples, and owned them for Christians, upon their believing this
Doctrine, without requiring the Belief of any other Doctrine to this purpose,
provided they did believe in the True and Living God: as every where appears in
the Accounts given of their admitting Disciples. 2. Because they have promised
salvatition to the due Belief of this Doctrine, without requiring the explicit
Belief of any other Gospel-Doctrines together with this, as absolutely
necessary to Salvation. 3. Because Salvation is not promised to the Belief of
any one, or Number of Doctrines separately from this Doctrine. 4. Because no
other Doctrine Christ or his Apostles have taught, can be believed aright, but
by virtue of the Persons believing this Doctrine. Let a Man believe all the
Doctrines delivered in the New Testament upon Considerations purely distinct
from this, that they are Doctrines taught by Jesus Christ, whom he has
received for his Lord, he does not believe them as a Christian ought to believe
them, nor will his Belief of them on those Accounts, at all avail him as to
Salvation, by virtue of any Promise in the Gospel. He that believes any of
these Doctrines with the Faith of a Christian, or as a Christian is to believe
them, does but repeat or re-act his Belief that Jesus is the Christ, with a
precise Determination of that Belief to those Doctrines as known and considered
to be taught by Christ. Now if a Man cannot believe any of these Doctrines as
they ought to be believed, or for that Reason for which they are to be
believed, till he is a Christian, with what consistency can it be pretended,
that the Belief of any of these Doctrines is absolutely necessary to make a Man
a Christian? Upon what Evidence upon what Authority must a Man believe any of
these Doctrines to make him a Christian? They are not parts of natural
Religion. Will a Man's believing them in Submission to humane Authority make
him a Christian? If it be said he must believe them upon Christ's Authority who
has revealed them, then he must first of all believe that Jesus is the Messiah
or Christ, and so as to take him for his Lord. If it shall be said that is
granted, and therefore it is affirmed that that Belief is the first Act of
Faith, and the first Step to Christian Faith; but, that Faith does not
constitute or make a Man a Christian, till it be completed and grown up to a
certain Size, by additional Acts of Faith, believing a precise Number of
Articles more. It may then be asked, what we are to call, or what we must
understand by that Faith, of which believing Jesus to be the Christ, is the
first Act? It Is said, It is not Christian Faith, and if it be properly said to
be an Act of Faith, what Name soever shall be given to it, it must be
Antecedent to what is but the Act of it. But how it can be an Act of Christian
Faith, and yet but a Step to Christian Faith, has some more Difficulty in it.
But further, it may be enquired, if the due believing Jesus to be the Christ,
do not constitute a Man a Christian, how can the limited exercising of this
Faith, with respect to a certain Number of Doctrines, constitute him a
Christian, when all, or the main Excellency of his believing those Doctrines,
is derived from his believing jesus to be Christ? Does a Creature's being
endued with Reason make him a Rational Creature, or his exerting and exercising
his Reason to certain degrees about a precise Number of Objects? Again, it may
be queried not only what are those additional Articles, but upon whose
Authority, or for what Reason must they be believed, to be absolutely necessary
to be believed to make Men Christians? 5. Because it is only the due Belief
that Jesus is the Christ, which does or can constitute a Person a true Disciple
or Subject of Christ. The Belief of all the other Doctrines in the Bible, taken
separately from this, will not make a Man a Christian: For if it would, a Man
might be a Christian though he did not believe Jesus to be the Christ. And so
believing Jesus to be the Christ, could neither be the first Act (as is said)
of Christian Faith, nor an absolutely necessary Step to Christian Faith. Add
the Belief of all other Doctrines in the Bible to the Belief that Jesus is the
Christ, they cannot make the Man a Christian. The Additional Belief is but
Evidence and Proof that he does believe that Jesus is the Messiah, so as to
take him for his Lord: And if a due belief that Jesus is the Christ, does not
constitute a Man a Christian, all other Belief is so far from constituting him
a Christian, it will not amount to a Proof that he is a Christian. A due
Believing that Jesus is the Messiah or Christ, is the grand Principle of a
Christian's Belief and Practice, as to all the particular Doctrines of Faith,
and Rules of Good living laid down by Christ in the whole Scripture. This
brings the Person under an indispensable Obligation to endeavor seriously to
know what Christ has delivered both as to the one and the other. This obliges
him to believe whatsoever Doctrines he shall attain to know Christ has taught,
and to perform and practice whatsoever he shall attain to know Christ has made
his Duty. It is this that preserves to all the Doctrines of Faith and Rules of
Practice delivered to us in the Holy Scriptures, their full Force and
Obligation. Hereby we perceive them to be the Doctrines and Laws of him we have
received for our Lord, whom we are on that account to believe, and obey in
every thing we understand is his declared Will.

Secondly, I will now consider what this Author propounds to be examined; viz.
whether nothing is absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation, but what
is declared to be so, or whether any Doctrine upon which Salvation is proposed,
is singly of it self sufficient for it?

Here are Two Questions, proposed as if they were but one, differently worded:
I will say something in general touching this Matter, and then speak more
particularly to it. In general I shall observe, that there is a great
difference between these Three Things. 1. A Doctrine's being declared to be
absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation. 2. Salvation being promised
to what is absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation. 3. Salvation being
promised to the Belief of something, but not under this precise Consideration,
as absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation. To believe in the only
True God, is declared to be absolutely necessary to Salvation, and it is
impossible that a Man should believe a right, that Jesus is the Messiah,
without believing in the only True God. For a Man cannot believe that Jesus was
sent by the True God, and is constituted King by him, except he believe in that
God who did send him, etc. Now, notwithstanding this Belief is absolutely
necessary to make a Man a Christian, or to Salvation, yet it does not make him
a Christian, nor is Salvation promised to it. Salvation is promised to that
Faith which does make a Man a Christian, which is believing Jesus to be the
Christ or Messiah, so as to take him for our Lord. But Salvation was not
proposed to any upon their believing Jesus to be the Christ, but only those who
first of all acknowledged their Belief in the True and Living God: And
therefore those who did not believe in the only True God, were always
instructed concerning the True God, and called on to believe in him, before
Salvation was promised to them, upon their believing Jesus to be the Messiah.
If Salvation is promised upon the believing of other Points, or to any Matters
of Practice, it is not promised to those Matters, as absolutely necessary to be
believed, etc. unto Salvation; but the Promise is made (with respect to those
Matters) to them who do already believe Jesus to be the Messiah. Some things
are absolutely necessary to Salvation, to which no Promise of Salvation is
made. And Salvation may be promised to some things which are not absolutely
necessary to Salvation.

More particularly, here are Three distinct Questions to be considered. 1.
Whether nothing is absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation, but what
God has declared to be so? To this I answer Affirmatively: For God only has a
right to determine and fix the Terms on which he will bestow Salvation: And
what his Determination is, cannot be known till it is declared: Nor can any
declare his Determination but himself. The Church has not a Right or Authority
to declare any thing in this Matter, but what God has declared concerning it.
And every particular Person has Right to examine whether the Church does, or
has declared as she ought. For that Revelation which is the Rule by which the
Church is to govern her self in her Declaration about this Matter, is the Rule
by which every particular Person is to examine and judge for himself, whether
the Church has declared right, and delivers truly what God has declared in
his Determination concerning this Matter.

2. Whether Salvation is promised to every particular that is required as
absolutely necessary to Salvation? To this I answer Negatively. If God has
made the Belief of more than one Article absolutely necessary to Salvation, the
Promise of Salvation is not made to any of them apart, but to them all in
Conjunction. Therefore the Belief of the only true God, and that Jesus is the
Messiah, must go together, and Salvation is not promised to one alone, for
though the believing Jesus to be the Messiah cannot be without the former, yet
the former may be without the latter. Moreover there is something absolutely
necessary to make a Man a Christian, which no Man nor Church can particularly
determine what it is. For a Man cannot rationally believe that Jesus is the
Messiah, but he must first have or understand some Evidence and Proof that he
is the Messiah; but Men cannot determine upon what Proof a Man must necessarily
believe it, because God has provided Men with great Store of eminent Proofs,
proper to convince them that Jesus is the Messiah, and has not bound up
himself that he will not give forth his effectual Influence and Blessing with
any, but one Instance amongst that great variety of Argument, with which he
has furnished Men in order to their Conviction. Now Salvation is not directly
promised to the Belief of the Argument proving, but the Article proved; though
sometimes the one is put for the other, and the Belief of the Article proved,
is expressed by believing the Argument which proves it.

3. Whether any Doctrine, upon the believing of which Salvation is promised, is
singly of it self sufficient for Salvation? I answer, Salvation is not promised
to the Belief of any one Doctrine considered singly in it self; yet Salvation
might have been promised to those who sincerely believe Jesus to be the Christ,
upon their believing certain other Doctrines, and the Belief of those Doctrines
not be absolutely necessary to Salvation. As a Person may believe a Doctrine
which is absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation, and yet have no true
Title to Salvation, because Salvation was never promised to the Belief of that
Doctrine alone. So Salvation might have been promised to the Belief of certain
Doctrines, and yet a Person might be saved though he did never attain
explicitly to know and believe those Doctrines, because the explicit Belief
of them is not made absolutely necessary to Salvation. The main, if not the
whole Excellency and Dignity of a Person's believing the particular Doctrines
delivered or taught in the New Testament, to be believed by Christians,
consists in this, that that Faith is an Act of Submission or Obedience to that
Jesus, they have received to be their Lord. As a Man may believe in the True
God, and yet not believe in Jesus Christ, and so may miss of Salvation because
he does not believe all that is absolutely necessary to be believed to
Salvation, so a Man may believe several Doctrines taught in the New Testament,
and not believe that Jesus is the Messiah, and so may miss of Salvation,
because he does not believe all that is absolutely necessary to be believed to
Salvation, though the promise of Salvation had been annexed to the Belief of
those Doctrines, in them who do unfeignedly believe that Jesus is the Christ,
and who believe them in obedience to him. But Salvation is not promised to the
Belief of any Doctrine which does not suppose Jesus to be the Messiah.

Thirdly, I will now take some Notice of what this Author does say to these
Matters: If this (says he) be made the only Rule whereby to judge of
Fundamentals, viz. a Doctrine's being expressly declared to be necessary to be
actually believed to Salvation; we should I fear by this means raise several
Exceptions against a great part of Religion. p. 8.

Answ. The Question here is, by what Rule we are to judge what Articles are
absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men Christians, or to Salvation?
The Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. says, the Rule we must
judge of this Matter by, is the Declaration God has made of his Determination
concerning this Matter, by Jesus Christ and his Apostles. No, says this
Author, and his Reason is, he fears then Men will raise several Exceptions
against a great part of Religion. I do not know what Men will do, but the
Question will be, whether they will then raise just Exceptions against a great
part of Religion? Our Fears must not rob God of his Right. But I am certain, by
keeping closely to God's Declaration, no just Exception can be raised against
any one Part of the Christian Religion. What this Author says after,
concerning Matters of Faith, and of Practice, I think is fully answered in the
Second Vindication of the Reasonableness, etc. p. 83, 84. and thither I refer
the Reader for Satisfaction, if he needs any. I shall only observe that
Salvation is not promised in the New Testament, to any Matter of Faith or
Practice, but but with respect to the Belief of this Article, That Jesus is the
Messiah. Let any Man produce a Promise of Salvation to an Unbeliever, (if he
can) upon his believing any other Doctrine, or performing any Matter of
Practice, considered separately from his believing Jesus to be the Messiah.
Salvatition is not promised to any, but those who believe that Jesus is the
Messiah; and when it is promised to such, with relation to other Matters, the
Promise then has a respect to that Article, to which it was primarily
promised, and respects those other Matters as Fruits, Effects and Evidences of
their sincere believing in Jesus Christ; except where the Promise respects not
Salvation in General, but Degrees of Happiness or Glory.

If in Matters of Faith (says this Author) nothing is to be required for a
Fundamental, but what is so proposed, and to which Salvation is expressly
annexed and promised, it would very probably make way for a very unintelligible
Faith, in which Christians could not possibly agree.

Answ. Here the Author seems to speak concerning the Doctrines which those who
are Christians must endeavor to understand and believe; and if so, it is
besides the Question. But that Peoples keeping close to God's Declaration,
either as to Doctrines absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men
Christians, or as to Doctrines they are to believe afterward, has a probable
tendency to make way for a very unintelligible Faith, is very strange to me. Is
the surest way to have the most intelligible Faith, for People to go as far as
they can from God's express Declarations? There will be some Difference indeed
amongst Christians as to the particular Doctrines they believe, some believing
more Articles, some fewer, and this must needs be, till they be all equal in
their Knowledge. Yet in the way excepted against, they will every one be
obliged to believe and practice according to the extent of their Knowledge, and
to agree in Faith and Practice, so far as they do in Knowledge. And let People
advance what Notions they please, concerning what Articles are necessary to
make Men Christians, they cannot rationally agree any further than they will
this way; unless they must all be staked down to believe just one set of
Doctrines, without extending their Endeavors after Knowledge any further. And
if this be a way to prevent Peoples raising Exceptions against a great part of
Religion, I cannot excuse it from doing unsufferable Wrong to a great part of
Religion. In believing Jesus to be the Messiah, so as to take him for our Lord
and King, we yield up our selves entirely to him, to believe and practice
whatsoever we shall know he has taught and commanded: And therefore we must
not suffer our selves to be coupt up, and confined to a precise Number of
Doctrines and Laws, but must every one employ our best Endeavors to be
continually increasing and improving in Knowledge, Faith and Holiness. This
believing Jesus to be the Messiah, does not imply our explicit believing a
certain Number of Doctrines he has taught, but it is a submitting our Faith
implicitly to him, believing that all he has taught is true, with a
Disposition and purpose to search after, and endeavor to know what Doctrines
he has particularly taught, and to believe on his Authority, whatsoever we
shall understand he has taught.

For (says this Author) if nothing more is to be believed as (it should be,
absolutely) necessary to Salvation, than what is so proposed, then it will
follow, that no more than the bare Proposition which is declared to be of that
great importance, is to be assented to. As suppose in that Proposition -- He
that believes that Jesus is the Messiah, has Eternal Life; if what is there
required to be believed is singly of it self sufficient to Salvation, then it
must be so as it is there proposed, without any farther Explication of it:
because there is no Explication proposed to be believed to the like Promise.

Answ. This Author by assenting to a bare Proposition, seems to mean a Person's
assenting to, or believing that certain Words he never heard before, nor
understands any thing of the Sense or Meaning of any of them (that is an
insignificant Sound) comprehend and express a real Truth, which is absolutely
impossible; for though the Words may be a Proposition to him who utters them,
and to those who understand them, they are no Proposition to him, who never
heard, nor knows any thing of them; and therefore cannot be assented to by him.
By Explication of it, this Author here seems to mean, proper Interpretation;
viz. declaring in another Language what the Terms in the said Proposition did
ordinarily signify, amongst them who were accustomed to the Language, in which
the Proposition was first of all delivered; or declaring by other Words in the
same Language, the several simple Ideas, of which those complex Ideas were made
up, for the expressing of which those Terms were used. Yet in the next Page he
seems to understand by Explication, All those Doctrines which are delivered in
the Holy Scriptures, that either relate the Grounds and Reasons (why we are to
believe the Proposition he speaks of) of such a Faith, which is required to
Salvation. And that explain the Nature and Extent of it. If this Author be of
Opinion, that the explicit Belief of all the Grounds and Reasons that are
delivered in the Holy Scriptures, why, or upon which, People ought to believe
that Jesus is the Messiah, and of every particular that is said in Scripture
concerning Jesus Christ, and every Branch of his Office is as absolutely
necessary to make a Man a Christian, or to Salvation, as the belief that Jesus
is the Messiah, is, I think it will require a considerable time to prove
clearly the Truth of that Opinion, and if we may introduce an account of our
Fears in Discourses of this Nature I may take Liberty to declare, I am afraid
this Notion, if it prevail, will unavoidably fill the World with endless
Wranglings and Distractions. For I suspect all People will not presently agree
how many the Texts be, and which they are, which relate all the things before
spoken of, not to say any thing of the improbability of their sudden Consent to
understand every one of the Texts in the same Sense. Or if they should fall
immediately into an Accord about all these Matters, I suspect the Ground of
their Consent will not be very intelligible.

It was never pretended (that I know of) that Eternal Life is promised to those
who shall believe that this Proposition, Jesus is the Messiah, is true, without
understanding the Sense of the Terms of which it does consist. To believe a
Proposition, is not for a Person to believe he hears a Sound, but to be
satisfied of the Truth of what is affirmed* or denied in the Proposition; which
a Man cannot be, unless he understands the Sense of every part of the
Proposition. For a Man cannot possibly give his Assent to any Affirmation or
Negation, unless be understand the Terms as they are joined in that
Proposition, and has a Conception of the Thing affirmed, or denied, as they are
there put together. But let the Proposition be what it will, there is no more
to be understood than is expressed in the Terms of that Proposition. Second
Vindic. of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. p. 99. This Proposition,
Jesus is the Messiah, was first of all delivered to the Jews, and consists of
Terms which were very common and familiar amongst them, which had a determined
settled signification amongst them. The one was the Proper Name of a Person, the
other ordinarily stood for the Description of a Person they lived in
expectation of, according to the Account Moses had given them of him a long
time before. See Deuteronomy. 18. 15* to the 20. and Act. 3* 22, etc. They did not
need any Interpretation of the Proposition. And People of another Language
needed no other Interpretation of it, than what was necessary to furnish them
with the Knowledge of the Sense in which those People to whom the Proposition
was first delivered, understood those Terms. Whosoever does duly believe that
Proposition, does oblige himself to hearken to, that is, to believe and obey
whatsoever this Jesus has delivered, so far as he shall obtain the Knowledge
thereof, and to endeavor seriously to know what his Mind and Will is: Which
Faith makes a Man a Christian, and has the Promise of Eternal Life made to it.
The Proposition does not comprehend in it an explicit Account of all the
Matters of Faith which a Christian is to endeavor to know and believe, nor is
the explicit Knowledge of them necessary to a Man's believing that
Proposition: But his believing of it, brings him under an Obligation to
endeavor to know them all, and to believe explicitly whatsoever he shall
attain to know Jesus has taught; which is to be the great Work and Business of
the Remainder of his Life, when he is a Christian. Those Jews, and Lewd Fellows
of the baser sort, at Thessalonica, who set themselves against Paul and Silas,
understood that their preaching that Jesus was the Christ (for that was the
great Point they opened and alleged in the Synagogue there) amounted to this,
that he was the Person they persuaded the People to receive for their Lord and
King. For how malicious soever their intent was, in accusing them before the
Ruler, it is most plain from their Accusation, that they clearly apprehended
that Paul by preaching that Jesus was the Christ, did mean that they were to
take him for their King; saying that there is another King, one Jesus, Act. 17.
7. Vid. Second Vindic. of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. p. 108, 109.

For besides (says this Author) if every Text of Scripture must be looked upon
as sufficient to Salvation, upon the Belief of which, eternal Life is promised,
even the very Scripture will hardly be found reconcilable to it self. For
though in some Places Salvation is promised to those who believe Jesus to be
the Messiah; yet in others it is declared to be Life Eternal to know the only
true God, as well as Jesus Christ whom he has sent. Both of which Places, if
they must be understood in their limited Sense, will be almost found
contradictory to each other: Because the one proposes a larger Faith to
Salvation, than is required by the other. p. 9.

Answ. The Propositions here spoken of, as they are delivered in the Scripture,
are in effect the same. For it is not possible for a Man to believe that Jesus
is the Messiah, without believing antecedently in the only True God. The Word
of Salvation by Christ is not sent to any but those who fear God, Act. 13. 26.
But I deny that it is any where in Scripture declared to be Eternal Life to
know the only True God, as well as Jesus Christ whom he has sent: That is,
either of them separately. The Text of Scripture which comes nearest to these
Words is Ioh. 17. 3. where the Knowledge of the only True God, taken apart from
the Knowledge of Jesus Christ as sent by him, is not declared to be Eternal
Life. But the Knowledge of both is declared to be Eternal Life. I wave a
particular considering what this Author says, p. 9, 10. concerning the true
Notion of believing in Christ, when alone required to make a Man a Christian:
Because the plain Truth of the Matter we are discoursing of consists in this;
viz. That the sincere Belief of all those Doctrines Christ has declared, are
absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation, is of it self sufficient to
Salvation. But this is so far from excluding, that it does include a necessity
of believing other Doctrines, if the Person is allowed space to obtain the
Knowledge of more Doctrines which Christ has revealed, and that he has
revealed them. Yet if the Person who sincerely believes the aforesaid
Doctrines, should dye before he could obtain the Knowledge of any other
Doctrine Christ has taught, he will receive the Salvation promised to the
Belief of those Doctrines he does believe; Christ knows his Sincerity, and will
not fail to perform the Promise he has made to him. There are many, even very
many Articles Christ has revealed, which those who are Christians are
necessarily obliged to endeavor to know, and then explicitly believe; and as
many of these Doctrines as they do attain to understand, whether they be
delivered in the Gospels, or Acts, or Epistles, are Fundamental to them. But
the Explicit Belief of these Doctrines is not absolutely necessary to make Men
Christians, or to Salvation. Our Faith is true and saving, when it is such as
God by the new Covenant requires it to be: But it is not entire and consummate
till we explicitly believe all the Truths contained in the Word of God. For
the whole Revelation of Truth in the Scripture, being the proper and entire
Object of Faith; our Faith cannot be entire and consummate, till it be adequate
to its proper Object, which is the whole Divine Revelation contained in the
Scripture. Second Vindic. of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. p. 310.

This Author p. 11. distinguishes betwixt Truths which are only to be believed
upon the general Ground of Faith, which is the Veracity of God; and those of a
higher Nature, which have an immediate Tendency to the Salvation of Mankind,
and the Method by which our Savior has obtained it for us: And these latter
sort of Truths (he says) are to be explicitly believed by all, in order to
their Salvation: And the Reason he gives for this, is, because the only End for
which he has revealed these Truths, is the Eternal Benefit and Happiness of
Mankind.

Answ. This seems to be a Distinction without a Difference; for seeing they are
all Divine Revelations, the Ground and Reason of our believing them is the very
same, and every Way equal, viz. because God has revealed them. If it be
revealed that some of these Doctrines are absolutely necessary to be believed
to make Men Christians, or to Salvation; we must believe them to be so, and
that the Ground or Reason of that Belief is Divine Revelation. But if Men will
believe them to be absolutely necessary to be explicitly known, etc. in order
to Salvation, and God has not revealed any such thing concerning them, their
Faith in that case will want a just Foundation or Reason. But it is said, These
Truths of a higher Nature have an immediate Tendency to the Salvation of
Mankind.

Answ. Christ's observing the Methods appointed him by the Father, in order to
his obtaining Salvation for Mankind, had undoubtedly their appointed Tendency
to his obtaining Salvation for Mankind. But the Doctrines which relate what
those Methods were, have not the same Tendency to the Salvation of Mankind; nor
can a Person's believing those Doctrines which declare that Christ has
observed these Methods, and thereby obtained Salvation for Mankind, be properly
said to have an immediate Tendency to the Salvation of Mankind. But that which
should be proved is this, that Christ or his Apostles have revealed that the
explicit Belief of all those Doctrines which declare what was necessary on
Christ's part, in order to his obtaining Salvation for Mankind, is absolutely
necessary to make a Man a Christian, or to a Person's being entitled to, and
partaking of the Salvation which was so obtained.

But it is said, These respect the End for which he has revealed any thing to
us, and that is only the Eternal Benefit and Happiness of Mankind.

Answ. If this be only the End for which God has revealed any thing to us, and
therefore these are absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation, this will
bring in all the other Truths to be absolutely necessary to be believed to
Salvation; and so the general Direction here laid down to distinguish
fundamental Truths, will be of no use. For those Truths, being things God has
revealed to us, and the Eternal Benefit and Happiness of Mankind being the only
End for which he has revealed any thing unto us, they must equally respect the
same End, and consequently be equally necessary to be explicitly believed in
order to that End. But I fancy the Author's Meaning was thus; That the only End
for which God revealed those Truths of a higher Nature, is the Eternal Benefit
and Happiness of Mankind. That is (to bring it home to the present purpose) the
only End why God revealed those Truths, was to make the explicit Belief of
them absolutely necessary to Salvation. And if this were proved, the
Controversy would be at an End. But I think the great Reason and End why God
has revealed those Doctrines which declare the way and Method how our Savior
did obtain Salvation for Mankind, was, that Christians might know and believe
the way, how the Lord Jesus Christ did procure and purchase Salvation for
Sinners, and that they might make such use and improvement of these Truths, as
he particularly directs, or their own Natures are proper to suggest. Some
Doctrines may be of greater consequence to be explicitly known and believed by
those who are Christians, than many others may which are revealed. But the
Point in discourse is not concerning weighty, or important Truths, with respect
to those who are Christians; but concerning Doctrines absolutely necessary to
be explicitly believed to make Men Christians. See Second Vindic. of the
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. p. 87, 88. and 172, etc. That the
Salvation of Mankind was obtained by Christ's observing such and such Methods,
we know only by Divine Revelation. But notwithstanding our Salvation was
obtained in such ways, and we are certain of the same from the Testimony of
Christ, we are not to affirm that the explicit Belief of the Doctrines which
declare these Truths, is absolutely necessary to make Men Christians, or to
Salvation, without Christ's Warrant. The ways and Methods related in these
Doctrines, were necessary to be observed by Christ, in order to his obtaining
the Salvation of Mankind, and so might several others, for ought we know, which
are not revealed. But it will not thence follow that the explicit Belief of
every thing which necessarily pertained to Christ in order to his obtaining
Salvation for Mankind, or of every thing of that Nature which is revealed, is
absolutely necessary to be believed, in order to our receiving from him, the
Salvation which he has purchased. There is no more absolutely necessary to be
believed in order to Men's partaking of that Salvation, than what Christ
absolutely requires to be believed, in order to his dispensing it unto Men. Our
believing explicitly the several Steps Jesus was to take for the obtaining of
Salvation for Mankind, has not the same Relation, to our receiving that
Salvation from him, on the account of what he has done and suffered, as his
doing and suffering those things had, to his obtaining Salvation for Mankind.
He has by certain Methods obtained to himself a Right to dispense Salvation to
those who shall unfeignedly take him for their Lord and King. But his Right to
bestow Salvation on Persons, does not depend on, nor is limited to their
explicit believing every Doctrine which relates any of the Steps, he was
indispensably obliged to take and observe, in order to his obtaining and being
invested with that Right.

In Matters of revealed Religion, Revelation is the Ground or Reason of our
Faith, let the Matter revealed be what it will; of greater or less importance.
And where the Reason of our Assent is the same, the Act must be the same.

I agree with this Author, p. 13. That the Design of Miracles was not
immediately to give Authority to particular Doctrines, but to testify in
general that those who wrought them had such a Commission from God as they
professed. And in my Judgment, this is no contemptible Argument to prove, that
the due believing Jesus to be Christ does make Men Christians. His Miracles did
not immediately and directly, but only consequentially prove the particular
Doctrines he taught. But they did most eminently prove he was the Messiah; and
they were wrought for this purpose to induce People to become his Disciples, or
Christians, or to own and acknowledge him to be the Messiah. If those Persons
whose Faith did answer the Intendment of the Miracles, were Christians, I think
it cannot handsomely be denied, that the Faith which made them Christians, was a
Belief that Jesus was the Messiah.

Yet if it shall be clearly proved that the Explicit Belief of any one Article
distinct from this, That Jesus is the Messiah, is required in any part of the
New Testament, as absolutely necessary to make a Man, who acknowledges and
believes in the True and Living God, a Christian, I will acknowledge that
something absolutely necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, is
omitted in the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. and I have Reason from that
Author's Books to believe that he will do the same. But as that Doctrine must
be known, before it can be proved to be absolutely necessary to be believed to
make a Man a Christian; so I must know what it is, before I can be satisfied
that it is such a Doctrine. And it may very reasonably be desired of them, who
affirm that there are more Doctrines absolutely necessary to be believed to
make Men Christians, that they would draw out a just Scheme of them. No, says
this Author, It will be sufficient to our present purpose, if we can produce
any Doctrines, that are absolutely enjoined to be believed by all Christians,
etc. p. 16.

Answ. This is quite from the present purpose; for the enquiry is not what
Doctrines are enjoyed absolutely to be believed by all Christians? but what
Doctrines are declared by Christ and his Apostles to be absolutely necessary to
be believed to make Men Christians? Yet I do not think it an easy Task to prove
a certain Number of Articles absolutely necessary to be believed by all
Christians. But if that could be done, it would signify little to the present
purpose. It is acknowledged that there are very many Doctrines which those who
are Christians are obliged to use their best Endeavors to understand
explicitly, and then believe; and that some of these Doctrines are not
expressly delivered in the Gospels, and also that some of those Doctrines which
are taught in the Gospels and Acts are more fully expressed and explained in
the Epistles. But the Proof is yet wanting, that the explicit Belief of every
one of these Doctrines, and the fullest Explanations of them is absolutely
necessary to make Men Christians. And before they can all be proved to be
Doctrines which are absolutely necessary to be believed for this purpose, their
Number must be precisely determined, and a particular Account must be given of
every one of them: For can any thing be more absurd, than to pretend to prove
that People must necessarily believe, and believe explicitly no one knows
what, to make them Christians?

But supposing some Person will undertake to draw out a full and just Scheme of
the Doctrines he will affirm, are absolutely necessary to be explicitly
believed to make Men Christians, without waiting for his Proof, that the Belief
of every one of them is absolutely necessary, and that there is not one more
absolutely necessary to be believed for that purpose (for I doubt either his
Collection or his Proof will not immediately satisfy all Parties) I will
propose Two or Three Questions to be considered, which I think not altogether
impertinent to the present purpose. When a Man is convinced that Jesus is the
Christ, and that it is both his Duty and his Interest to receive him for his
Lord, to believe and do whatsoever he shall attain to know he has taught and
commanded, must he delay and forbear to receive him for his Lord, till he has
sought out, and learned a certain Number of his Doctrines? If he must not so
delay, but immediately take him for his Lord, and openly avow and prosess that
he does believe Jesus to be the Messiah, and owns him for his Lord, what
Denomination belongs properly to him, upon his making this Profession? The
Denomination which belonged to him formerly, does not (I suppose) properly
belong to him, now he has renounced publicly his former Masters, and declares
he is peremptorily resolved to cleave to and follow Jesus Christ, without any
Reservation. If it shall be said, he must defer his Resigning up himself to
Christ, till he has learned a certain Number, or (perhaps with equal Reason)
all the Doctrines Christ has taught, not only in the Gospels and Acts, but in
the Epistles too; I would humbly ask, for what Reason must he so long defer the
Resignation of himself to Christ? I suppose, not because he has Assurance he
shall live long enough to do that, after he has taken some or all of his
Doctrines to task, and has had them under his Examination. Must he first of
all fit in Judgment upon Christ's Doctrines, and see whether they are
reasonable, and fit, and convenient for him to assent to? and that he shall act
wisely and prudently to take the Author of them for his Lord? If so, how shall
it be made appear that such a Person receives him for his Lord, as Christ
orders? and consequently that he is a Christian in the Gospel Sense? Is his
believing those Doctrines before he takes Christ for his Lord, a believing them
as a Christian should and must believe them, purely for his sake, or because he
has taught them? seeing he must first know and believe them, before he
adventure to receive him for his Lord, and trust him with his Faith? In this
case his believing these Doctrines, seems rather the Reason of his taking
Christ for his Lord, than Christ's Authority the Reason of his believing those
Doctrines. Our blessed Savior tells us plainly with what Disposition we must
receive him for our Lord, so as if any thing he shall require us to believe or
obey, cannot be acknowledged or performed, without exposing us to the greatest
temporal Inconveniences and Hazards, we must sustain and encounter them, and
deny our selves to the laying down of our Lives, rather than relinquish our
Fidelity to him. But I do not find that he any where requires we would go to
work with his Doctrines, and then, if we like them, come and submit to him, and
take him for our Lord. Besides, how Men can be said to believe these Doctrines
as taught by him who is the Messiah, or Christ, before they believe him to be
the Christ, and have yielded up themselves to him to believe what he has
taught, is not very intelligible to me; nor how a Man's believing any thing
Christ has taught, purely because he has taught it, can make him Christ's
Disciple: It may discover that he is Christ's Disciple, but it cannot
constitute him Christ's Disciple.

If this demand of a just Scheme of all the Articles that are absolutely
necessary to be believed to make Men Christians (if more than are set down in
the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. are absolutely necessary) be not
satisfied, prove what you please of the necessity of believing more Articles,
you get no more by it, than to overthrow the Notion you oppose, without
advancing one more useful; and you leave People under an utter uncertainty,
whether they are, or ever shall be Christians, how many Articles soever they
do, or may explicitly believe; and what Persons are to be admitted and owned
for Christians, yea, whether there were ever any Christians in the World, at
least since the Apostles Days. People may make what Noise they please with the
Word CHURCH, but this Notion, if stuck to, will serve the Church, as those did
her Lord, who clothed him in Purple, and cried Hail to him in Derision. If a
Hundred Articles are absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed to make
Men Christians, and you can name but Ninty Nine of them, he that shall believe
those Ninty Nine, and not explicitly know and believe the other one, will fall
as really short of being a Christian, as another who believes but one of the
whole Number. And if this should be the Case of her, that is called the Church,
she is perfectly unchurch'd, and not one of her Members is a Christian, nor can
ever obtain a just Title to those Characters, till they have recovered that one
Article from which they have strayed. It is very easy, according to the Notions
offered by them, who oppose the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. to prove
that they are not Christians. But that which I cannot comprehend is this, For
what Reason they take so much Pains to prevail with others to believe, that
they are not what they profess themselves to be. For my part, I do hope, and
will believe they are Christians, in spite of all their Arguments to the
contrary; unless I had as sure Evidence that they are not sincere in their
Profession, as they give of the Mistake of their Judgment in the present Point.

This Author certifies he will endeavor hereafter to show there are Some
Doctrines in the Epistles distinct from those contained in the Gospels or Acts,
which are of that Nature, without the Belief of which, though we may grant Men
might be saved before they were known, yet when they were divulged, they could
no more be styled true Christians without the Belief of them, than if they had
not at all believed, p. 17.

Answ. When our belief of a Doctrine is grounded purely upon the Nature of the
Doctrine, we believe it only as we are rational Creatures, and do employ our
Reason about the Doctrine it self, considering it is Nature, and not as
Christians, for the only Ground of our Belief, as Christians, is Divine
supernatural Revelation. And let the Nature of the Doctrine be what it will,
Revelation is the Ground and Reason of our believing it. If you will therefore
produce Doctrines absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men Christians,
because of the Nature of them, you must fetch them from Natural Religion, and
they are to be judged of as to their Nature, and the Reason of our believing
them, by Natural Reason, without any regard to Revelation; which is a Notion
that will do Christianity, I doubt, but little Service. Hitherto it has done
no inconsiderable Hurt.

The divulging of more Doctrines to be believed by Christians, as they should
attain the Knowledge of them, did not make more Doctrines absolutely necessary
to be believed to make Men Christians, than were asolutely necessary to that
purpose before they were divulged: For if it did, every new Doctrine, when it
was divulged, became a new Condition, to be explicitly consented to, in order
to any Man's admission into the Covenant of Grace; and consequently there were
so many New Covenants. Yet these other Doctrines, when they were divulged, were
necessarily to be believed by those particular Christians, who did understand
and know them, and so they are now; not to make them Christians, but by Virtue
or Reason of that Obligation they are under by being Christians, to believe
whatsoever they shall know their Lord has revealed. The Difference between
those who were Christians before these Doctrines were divulged, and those who
become Christians since, is this: They were obliged by their being Christians,
or believing Jesus to be Messiah, to believe whatsoever he had or should
reveal, when they should know the same, now his Revelation is completed, those
who believe him heartily to be the Messiah, are thereby obliged to believe
whatsoever he has Revealed, as they attain the Knowledge thereof. For a more
clear and full understanding of these things, see Second Vindicat. of the
Reasonableness, etc. p. 82, 83, 252, etc. 337, etc. 343, 344.

Whereas this Author says, p. 17. It will be necessary to consider an
Objection, or rather an Evasion of the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. since it intimates that he believes as much of the Epistles,
and in as true a Sense as any Man whatsoever. And then relating some Passages
in p. 299. of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. afterward says, They
do not seem altogether unexceptionable, p. 18. I shall observe that the Author
of the Reasonableness, etc. does in p. 298. begin his Answer to an Objection
concerning the Epistles, or to this Question: Whether the Truths delivered in
the Epistles may be believed or disbelieved by a Christian without any Danger?
To which he answers, That the Law of Faith being a Covenant of Free Grace, God
alone can appoint what shall be necessarily believed by every one whom he will
justify; what is the Faith which he will accept, and account for Righteousness,
depends wholly on his good Pleasure. For it is of Grace and not Right that this
Faith is accepted; and therefore he alone can set the Measures of it. Where we
have the most Rational Evidence for that Point, that (I think) Words can
express. Afterward, in p. 299. he answers directly to the Question, affirming
that the other Parts of Divine Revelation, are Objects of Faith, and are so to
be received; they are Truths, whereof none that is once known to be such, may
or ought to be disbelieved, etc. Yet notwithstanding, he affirms the Doctrines
in the Epistles, are Divine Truths, very weighty to us now, and which no
Christians who know them, may disbelieve; This Author Says, these Passages are
not altogether unexceptionable.

For though these allow the Truths contained in the Epistles, to be Objects of
our Faith; yet they do not suppose them, or any Parts of them, to be more so,
than any other Places of Scripture, which have no Relation to the Salvation of
Mankind, and which we are only bound to believe to be true, upon the Veracity
of God that revealed them. p. 18.

Answ. The Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. teaches, That
the Truths contained in the Epistles, are Objects of our Faith; because they
are Divine Revelations, or Divine Truths. And this Author, p. 11. teaches,
That the only End for which God has revealed any thing to us, is the Eternal
Benefit and Happiness of Mankind. The Author of the Reasonableness, etc. does
not detract from the Honor due to any part of Divine Revelation: But asserts,
That as they are all equally Divine Revelations, so they are all equally
Objects of our Faith, when known, and have all a Relation to the Salvation of
Mankind. But how this Author will reconcile his teaching, That the only End for
which God has revealed any thing to us, is the Eternal Benefit and Happiness
of Mankind; with his saying, That some Places of Scripture have no Relation to
the Salvation of Mankind; I cannot tell, without a very singular Account of
what is meant by Doctrines having a Relation to the Salvation of Mankind. Some
Doctrines acquaint us with the Gracious Purpose of God toward Sinners; and
with the Ways and Methods how Jesus Christ obtained Salvation for Mankind,
which may be said to have an Historical Relation to the Salvation of Mankind.
Some Doctrines are absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed to make and
constitute Men Christians, and entitle them to that Salvation: Which Doctrines
may be said to have a Conditional Relation to our Salvation. There are
Doctrines which those who are Christians must endeavor to understand, and
explicitly believe, as they attain to know them. Such are those which belong
to the First Head, and a great many more delivered in the New Testament. These
have not an Immediate Relation to our Salvation: But they may be said to have a
Consequential, and Obediential Relation to our Salvation. The Doctrines we are
now discoursing of, are those which pertain to the Second Head. And if any Man
think there are Doctrines in the Epistles distinct from those laid down by the
Author of the Reasonableness, etc. that are absolutely necessary to be
explicitly believed to make Men Christians, and entitle them to Salvation,
when he shall set down a List of them, and produce his Proof that every one of
them, is absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed to make Men
Christians, etc. a Judgment may be made of them: But till this is done, the
distinction of Revealed Truths, to be believed upon God's Veracity; and Truths
of a higher Nature, will be of little or no use unto me.

I shall here further observe, That 1. It is certain the Doctrines which relate
what Christ has done, and suffered, have not the same Relation to the
Salvation of Mankind, the Obedience and Sufferings of Christ had. The Doctrine
which instructs us what was paid to obtain Salvation for Mankind, is not the
Price it self, with which that Salvation was purchased.

2. The Belief of these Doctrines has no Relation to the Salvation of Mankind:
The most that can be pretended with any Color, is only that the Belief of
these Doctrines has a Relation to the Salvation of the Person who does believe
them, or to whom they are delivered and made known.

3. The Relation the Belief of these Doctrines has to his Salvation, who does
know and believe them, is the very same, which the Belief of any other
Doctrines delivered in the New Testament, has to his Salvation who does know
and believe them; which consists in this, That it is an Act of Submission and
Obedience to Jesus, whom he has taken to be his Lord. Whatever those Matters
be, which notwithstanding they are revealed in the New Testament, some are
pleased to Term Indifferent Matters, a sincere Christian is as much obliged to
believe them, when he knows they are revealed there, as he is to believe any
other Matters which are revealed there.

For 4. The Reason of my believing any Doctrine as I am a Christian, is, Divine
Revelation, and not the Nature of the Doctrine, that is, of the Matter taught:
And therefore my believing one Doctrine, has the same Relation to my
Salvation, that my believing another Doctrine Christ has taught, has to my
Salvation: they being equally Acts of Obedience to Christ, and the Ground and
Reason of each Belief being the very same. Yet I will acknowledge, that if our
Belief of these Doctrines (this Author has a respect to) had the same Relation
to our partaking of Salvation, the Obedience and Sufferings of Christ (which
were the real Price, and a proper purchasing of Salvation for Mankind) had to
the purchasing of Salvation for Mankind, the Belief of them would be absolutely
necessary to Salvation. But then I must add, we should hereby as properly
purchase our own Salvation, as Jesus Christ did Salvation for Mankind, which is
a Notion I cannot easily be reconciled to.

5. If a Judgment is to be made from the Nature of Doctrines, what Doctrines
are absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men Christians, or to
Salvation, then this Necessity of believing them to this Purpose, must be
obvious to the Natural Reason of Mankind; and every Man must judge for himself
(by considering the Nature of these Doctrines) which and how many are
absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation: which is a Notion, that as it
lays aside Christ's and his Apostles Authority to determine the Matter; so it
will not do the Church any great Service, without pretending that one certain
Man, or a Number of Men, is to make this Judgment from the Nature of the
Doctrines Christ and his Apostles have taught, and all others must rest
satisfied with, and depend wholly on his or their Determination. This indeed
may have a Tendency to raise humane Authority to a great height, in the most
important Business of Religion, but then it will be no Advantage to the Nature
of Doctrines: for hereby People will be determined to take them for Doctrines
absolutely necessary to be believed, not from their perceiving that such a
necessity arises from their Nature, but from bare humane Authority. Nor can
they be certain that he or those who have judged them to be absolutely
necessary to be believed to Salvation, have been determined in their Judgment,
by the Nature of their Doctrines, and not by their own arbitrary Pleasure, till
they have resolved the Matter themselves, by exercising their own Reason about
the Nature of the particular Doctrines, which shall be recommended to, rather
imposed on them.

It plainly appears by what the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity,
etc. has writ, that though he does not think the Epistles the most proper
parts of the New Testament to be consulted, in order to our discerning which be
the Doctrines Christ and his Apostles did require to be believed as absolutely
necessary to make Men Christians, or to Salvation, yet that he thinks the
Doctrines contained in the Epistles, are Fundamental Articles, to be actually
believed by Christians now, as they obtain the Knowledge of them. And that they
are to make such use of them, as they shall understand they ought to make of
them, either by considering their Nature, or what they find the Scripture does
instruct concerning the same. See Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. p. 300.
Second Vindic. of it, p. 201. and 319.

But, says this Author, These Doctrines which have a Relation to the Salvation
of Mankind, are to be believed upon another Ground, besides that of mere
Revelation. p. 19.

Answ. Upon what Ground are they to be believed, besides the Veracity of God
who revealed them? Is that Ground better or worse? does it lay a greater or
less Obligation on People to believe them, than Divine Revelation does? I
expect not to meet with a better Reason, why I am to believe any of Christ's
Doctrines, than this, that he taught them. Those who will not acquiesce here,
may wander where they please for Satisfaction, provided they will not go about
to compel others to rove with them. Moreover, are not those places of
Scripture, where these Doctrines lie, Historical? declaring the Way and Method
how Jesus obtained Salvation for Mankind. And is there any way for People to
know, that what is declared in those Doctrines, had a Relation to the Salvation
of Mankind, but Revelation? It had no natural Relation to the Salvation of
Mankind. How is it possible then to know from its Nature, that it was
graciously appointed to have a Relation to that End? We cannot know any thing
more from the Nature of a thing, than the Nature of the thing is fitted to
discover. If it be said, that the Discourse is not concerning the Nature of the
Thing treated of in the Doctrine, but concerning the Nature of the Doctrine it
self. I answer, we can learn no more from the Nature of the Doctrine than the
Doctrine does deliver: Therefore if the Doctrine do not declare that the Belief
of it is absolutely necessary to Salvation, we cannot learn any such thing from
the Nature of the Doctrine, because the Nature of the Doctrine does not deliver
any such thing. Besides, the Doctrine it self being a Divine Revelation, Divine
Revelation is the only Reason and Ground of our believing it: And the Nature of
that Doctrine consist in this, that it is a Divine Revelation.

In the next Place, this Author considers the Authority of our Savior
entrusted in his Apostles which is expressed in their Commission, Mat. 28. 19,
20, 21. Which Commission as it invests them with as full a Power of teaching
whatsoever was necessary to Salvation, so it lays as great a Necessity upon
others of believing them, as if Christ himself had taught in his own Person. p.
19, 20.

Answ. Very true: But all that Jesus Christ himself did teach, was not, nor is
not absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed, to make Men Christians, or
to Salvation; only so much of it as he required to be believed, as absolutely
necessary thereunto. And the same is to be said as to the Apostles. Our Savior
entrusted his Apostles with Authority to Disciple People to him, and upon their
avouching him for their Lord, to Baptize and externally admit them into his
Church, and then to teach them the other Doctrines he had authorized them to
divulge, as the Laws of his Kingdom, and Matters they were to learn, and having
learned, must necessarily believe. But he did not entrust them with an
Authority to make a New Covenant with People, and to require the Belief of more
Articles as absolutely necessary to make them Christians, or to Salvation, than
he himself had required as absolutely necessary to be believed for that
purpose. The Epistles are part of that Revelation Christ has given to be the
Rule of all Christians Faith. But no other Doctrines are absolutely necessary
to be explicitly believed to make Men Christians, or to Salvation, than those,
on the believing and owning of which, Christ and his Apostles did admit those
Unbelievers, to whom they preached, into the Church and Kingdom of Christ; if
our Savior himself did understand the Covenant of Grace, and the Terms on
which People were to be admitted into it; or if the Apostles did understand
their Commission. For they neither required the explicit Belief of those
Distinct Doctrines they have delivered in their Epistles, as absolutely
necessary to make Men Christians, in their Preaching to Unbelievers; if we may
credit the Relation given of the Method and Tenor of their Ministry, in the
Acts of the Apostles; Nor do they in their Epistles any where require the
explicit Belief of these Doctrines as absolutely necessary to be explicitly
believed to make Men Christians. They have in their Epistles delivered many
Doctrines which Believers or Christians are to be pressed to endeavor to
understand, and explicitly believe on hazard of their Salvation; which (I
conceive) they had pressed on those who were converted, before they writ their
Epistles, as well as they did then, and afterward. But they do not any where
in their Epistles teach that these Doctrines are absolutely necessary to be
believed explicitly to make Men Christians, or to Salvation. See Second
Vindic. of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. p. 76, 83, etc.

In p. 23. this Author says something concerning the Covenant of the Gospel,
but gives not a clear and distinct Account (in my Judgment) of that Covenant,
and the Conditions thereby made absolutely necessary for our obtaining
Happiness, though he truly says, This is fully done in the Covenant of the
Gospel.

The Covenant of the Gospel, in short, (I think) is this: That all those shall
have Eternal Life, who do so heartily believe Jesus to be the Messiah, or
Christ, as to receive him for their Lord, with invincible Purpose and
Resolution to be absolutely governed by him, so far as they shall obtain the
Knowledge of his Pleasure, let what Inconveniences, Difficulties, or Hardships
soever happen to be in their way, and that they will seriously apply themselves
to know his Pleasure. Eternal Life is the Benefit or Blessing here Promised by
Christ. The Condition he appoints to be complied with, or performed on our
Part, in order to our being entitled to receive that Benefit from him, is not
an explicit believing a certain Number of particular Doctrines, he, or his
Apostles should teach, but only a believing him to be the Messiah, or Christ,
so as to take him absolutely for our Lord and King.

And as the Conditions are necessary to be known (says this Author) before we
can perform them (which is very true, and undeniably certain,) so God has taken
sufficient care to give us a full Revelation of them; first in a large History
of the Method that Christ made use of, for the purchasing of our Redemption,
and the Miracles which he wrought for the Confirmation of his Mission and
Doctrine. p. 23.

Answ. 1. God has given us a large History of the Method Christ took by his
Order, to purchase our Redemption, that is, to purchase to himself a Right to
publish the aforesaid Covenant, and to perform what is there promised, to them
who shall comply with, and perform the Conditions there expressed. But neither
the Method, nor the explicit believing of it, is made the Condition on our
part, of the Covenant. The actual observing of that Method, was Christ's part,
in order to his obtaining or purchasing to himself the Right before mentioned.
And seeing he has revealed that he did take this Method for this End, it is an
Article, a Fundamental Article, to be believed by every one who has received
him for his Lord, and is thereby entered into Covenant with him, or with God
through him, when he knows that he has revealed it. 2. The History of the
Miracles Christ wrought, is a mighty, proper, and powerful Inducement to us, to
believe that he is the Messiah, and a very good Introduction to our taking him
for our Lord.

And Secondly, In a more full and clear Manifestation, by the coming of the
Holy Ghost, of all those things, which were required of us to be believed.

Answ. The Holy Ghost was sent, or poured forth on the Apostles, to enable them
to work Miracles to prove their Mission by, or from Christ, to publish the same
gracious Declaration Jesus Christ had made before, and to admit those who
should receive Jesus for their Lord, into his Kingdom, upon their professing
the same, and acknowledge them for his Subjects, and to instruct and teach
them, and leave to the Church, a particular, complete Account, and Body of all
the Laws of Christ's Kingdom, which must be studied, believed and observed by
his Subjects, as long as they live. These are not the Conditions which are
absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed, or consented to, to make Men
Christians, but they are the Laws of Christ's Kingdom, which those who receive
him for their Lord and King, are to endeavor to learn, and as they attain to
know them, explicitly believe and observe; which is a good, and full
Employment for them, as long as they live, after they are Christians, let their
Lives be lengthened to ever so great an Extent. But the Holy Ghost was not
given to the Apostles, to empower them to make a New Covenant with People, by
making more Articles absolutely necessary to be believed to Make Men
Christians, than Christ himself had made so; though they were to produce more
Proof and Evidence of what he had made absolutely necessary to be believed,
than was given before; and were to furnish Christians with a more complete Body
of the Laws of that Kingdom they were Members of, than was before published.
See Second Vindic. of the Reasonab. p. 89, 90, 325, 330. It may therefore with
great Truth, and I think, for that Reason, without any absurdity be affirmed,
that all things which are absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed to
Salvation, are fully and clearly contained in the Gospels. See Second Vindic.
of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. p. 73.

In p. 30. This Author discourses concerning the Apostles Creed; and says,
That The Articles of that Creed are not to be looked on as the only
Fundamentals, unless we also firmly believe the natural Consequences and
Conclusions from them, and the frequent Explanations of them which are set down
in the other Parts of Revelation. That is, those Explanations of them which are
set in the Epistles distinct from what is said of them in the Gospels and Acts.

Answ. I will wave taking Notice of several things which might be observed
here, from the Generality and Extensiveness of the Expressions here used: And
shall only put this Author in mind, that the Question he should peremptorily
answer to, is this; Whether all that is absolutely necessary to be explicitly
believed by Christ's and his Apostles Appointment, to make Men Christians, be
contained in that Creed? If those who answer this Question Negatively, be in
the Right, let them talk what they please of the great Esteem and Veneration
they have for this Creed, and the Church of England, there is no help for it,
but both the one and the other must unavoidably fall under a very ugly
Reflection; for the more full clearing of which, and answer to what this Author
has further writ on this Subject, I shall refer to the Second Vindic. of the
Reasonab. p. 74, etc. 77, 163, 169, etc.

In p. 31, and 32. This Author offers considerations in answer to a Passage he
quotes out of p. 297. of the Reasonab. of Christianity, etc. I shall here only
observe, First, That these Considerations are grounded upon Two great Mistakes:
1. A Supposition that the Force of the Argument he opposes, depends upon the
time when the Gospels and Acts, and when the Epistles were writ; viz. which
were writ first. Whereas the Force of the Argument lies in this: That those
Truths delivered in the Epistles cannot be absolutely necessary to be
explicitly believed to make Men Christians, which were not revealed till after
the Decease of many who were Christians. By the Epistles we understand what
Doctrines the Apostles were entrusted to instruct Christians in; but supposing
the Acts, and every one of the Gospels had been writ after all the Epistles,
they acquaint us most clearly and distinctly what were the Doctrines which
Christ and his Apostles proposed as absolutely necessary to be explicitly
believed by Unbelievers to make them Christians. 2. A Supposition that the
Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. rejects the Epistles from
being part of that Rule of Faith, that Christ has given to Christians; for
which I cannot perceive the least Ground.

Secondly, that this Passage this Author pretends to answer, has the full
Evidence of Demonstration, with respect to the Words immediately before it.
Having declared that the Authors of the Epistles were inspired from above, and
writ nothing but Truth, and in most Places very weighty Truths to us, etc. He
adds, But yet every Sentence of theirs must not be taken up and looked on as a
Fundamental Article necessary to Salvation, without an explicit Belief
whereof, no Body could be a Member of Christ's Church here, nor be admitted
into his Eternal Kingdom hereafter. Where we see what he means by Fundamental
Articles, in the very next Sentence, which is the Passage reflected on by this
Author, and delivered in these Words; If all, or most of the Truths declared in
the Epistles were to be received and believed as Fundamental Articles, what
then became of those Christians who were fallen asleep (as St. Paul witnesses
in his First to the Corinthians, many were) before these things in the Epistles
were revealed to them?

To this Passage in the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. p. 294. The
Epistles being all written to those who were Believers and Christians, the
Occasion and End of writing them, could not be to instruct them in that which
was necessary to make them Christians. This Author replies in these Words:

This seems rather to strengthen than lessen the Force of the Argument, That
the Apostles had taught those same Doctrines for Fundamentals before, which
they afterward communicated as sacred Depositums of their Faith, p. 33.

Answ. Supposing they had taught the very same Doctrines before, to the
Christians or Churches they afterward writ to, and so they were Fundamentals
to those Christians who had been instructed in them; yet there is no force in
the Argument that these Doctrines are absolutely necessary to be explicitly
believed to make Men Christians; or were so to them, till it be proved, that
they had propounded these Doctrines to be explicitly believed to make them
Christians.

In answer to another Passage quoted out of the same Page of the Reasonableness
of Christianity, etc. this Author propounds this Question; How can it be
proved, that all those the Epistles were written to, understood all the
Fundamentals of Religion?

Answ. The Question is, whether they were Christians, though they did not
understand all those Doctrines you call Fundamentals here? If they were
Christians, then those you call Fundamentals, were not absolutely necessary to
be explicitly believed to make them Christians. If any shall say, they were
not Christians, to whom the Apostles writ their Epistles, they may, if they
please, excuse my want of Complaisance, in declaring I shall choose to believe
the Apostles rather than them.

Again, says this Author, May there not be supposed to be some less knowing
amongst them?

In answer to which, I ask, Were those less knowing Persons, Christians? if
not, how came they to be concerned in the Epistle? or how came they to be
Members of the Church to which the Epistle was writ? The latter part of the
Question, And some who would not thoroughly believe several Doctrines of
Christianity, without such an Authority the Apostles had, etc. seems not to
bear a propitious Aspect to what this Author formerly advanced, as the way to
distinguish Fundamental Truths from other Parts of Divine Revelation. What this
Author further says on this Subject, is no more than what I think is
sufficiently answered in my Animadversions, p. 26, 27. But I do not perceive
how it will follow from what this Author has said, that it cannot be better
discerned by consulting the Gospels and Acts, what are the Articles Christ and
his Apostles propounded as absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed to
make Men Christians, than the Epistles: And if that do not follow from his
Discourse, nothing follows from it, that is to the purpose against the
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. Nor will it follow The Apostles were
unfaithful to their Trust, or that they clog Men's Faith with unnecessary Points
of Belief, because they have taught several Doctrines which are not absolutely
necessary to be explicitly believed to make Men Christians, but which
Christians must labor to understand, and which will then be necessary to be
explicitly believed by them. The Apostles Fidelity to their Trust, is not to
be judged of by Men's prejudicated Fancies, and therefore Persons had need take
heed of determining that The Apostles ought certainly to be blamed for Writing
such Doctrines in their Epistles, as are not absolutely necessary to be
explicitly believed to make Men Christians. It is no Argument of an unwary
Christian, but the Duty of a good Christian, to embrace the Doctrines delivered
in the Epistles, when he knows them, and that they are delivered there, as
firmly as any other Doctrines whatsoever.

But (says this Author) if it can be proved that the great and principal End
of the Writing of their Epistles, was to deliver several Doctrines that should
be necessarily believed to Salvation by all who were converted to the Faith, we
are obliged to believe them as such, p. 35.

Answ. Very true: But then 1. If what you suggest here, was the great and
principal End of writing their Epistles, the Cause is clearly given up to the
Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. For then the great and
principal End of the writing of their Epistles, was not to deliver several
Doctrines absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed to make Men
Christians, or Converts to the Faith. 2. It will not be easy to prove that all
that are Christians, must necessarily explicitly believe every Doctrine
delivered in the Epistles, though the Doctrines are necessarily to be believed
by all Christians who do understand them. This Author then proceeds to prove,
what he has declared, to be the great and principal End of writing the
Epistles, was really so, by producing many Places out of them: All which I may
pass over without any Observation, because it is not pretended that they prove
any thing more, than that that those who are Christians must necessarily
believe them. But because this Author sometimes infers, That the explicit
Belief of them is absolutely necessary to Salvation; I will briefly intimate
what I conceive to be the proper import of those Places of Scripture he quotes:
1 Cor. 14. 37. speaks not barely of Christians, but Persons who pretended (at
least) to be inspired. But take it of Christians, all who did know what he had
writ, or that he had writ things, were to believe explicitly or implicitly,
that the things he writ were the Commandments of God, because they knew he had
given full Proof of his Apostleship; and in the same manner are Christians now
to acknowledge the same. 1 Cor. 15. 1. etc. Is a very plain Account how he had
preached to them, that Jesus was the Messiah, and what sorts of Proofs he had
propounded for their Conviction, and that they had believed this Gospel, ^s
also that this was the Faith by which they were saved and made Christians,
without the believing of which, whatever else they believed would not avail
them to Salvation. Vid. Second Vindic. of the Reasonableness of Christianity,
etc. p. 269. The Apostle in his Third Chapter of this Epistle had declared,
that Jesus Christ is the Foundation, without borrowing other Articles to
underprop it, (some proof of which he here minds them of) and that all the
other Articles of the Christian Religion, are Superstructures erected on that
Foundation. Romans 10. 9. has been formerly considered. Vid. Second Vindic. of
the Reasonab. etc. p. 303, etc. 1 Timothy 3. 16. Is a Motive to Timothy to take
care to behave himself in the Church of God, as he ought. 1 Th. 4. 1. Is a
Direction to Christians to take heed of entertaining the Doctrines which false
Teachers would obtrude on them; certifying they might justly conclude those to
be false Teachers, who did deny Jesus Christ to be real Man. The 14th and 15th
Verses are express, that believing Jesus to be the Son of God, or the Messiah,
does make a Man a Christian. Whether believing him to be the Son of God, be a
distinct Act here from the believing him to be the Messiah, may be considered
when we come to the place where it is to be showed. 2 Cor. 1. 13. Does not,
considered strictly, declare any thing more than that they did know and own the
Truth of what he had writ in the former Verse concerning his Conversation. 2
These. 2. 15. shows that Believers or Christians must take care to hold fast
whatever Doctrines they have been instructed in, and fully assured are Christ's
Doctrines. Not one of these Places of Scripture considered by it self, nor all
of them considered together, do prove that the Apostles enjoined the explicit
Belief of all that they writ in their Epistles as absolutely necessary to
Salvation. These and innumerable other Places of Scripture, are of great use to
those who are of the same Judgment with the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. to show them that are Christians, that they ought to set a
very great value on the Writings of the Apostles, that they ought to be very
diligent in endeavoring to acquire as distinct a Knowledge as they can, of the
Doctrines they have delivered in their Epistles, that they ought to take great
care to retain and hold fast what Doctrines they have learned from their
Writings, and that they must not entertain any Doctrines for Articles of their
Faith, but what Christ and his Apostles have taught.

And (says this Author)* it would be absurd to imagine that the Apostles should
fill their Writings with any of the Doctrines of Christianity, if they did not
impose a necessity upon Men of believing them, p. 37.

Answ. True, if Christians when they know they have writ them, should be at
liberty not to believe them. But would it be absurd to imagine they should fill
their Epistles to Believers or Christians, with Doctrines of Christianity, if
they did not impose an absolute necessity on Unbelievers to believe them all
explicitly to make them Christians? Is every particular Doctrine that is to be
be believed, to be explicitly known and believed by Unbelievers to make them
Christians? so that when once they are Christians, there is nothing more for
them to endeavor to know and believe?

And here (adds this Author) it is not material whether the Epistles were
written to those who were already Christians, and whether designed to teach
them any Doctrines, to instruct them in what was necessary to make them
Believers; but it is sufficient that they could not continue true Christians or
Believers, without acknowledging the Doctrines there delivered for fundamental
Articles of Faith, and necessary to be believed by all Christians.

Answ. I am not certain that I comprehend what this Author means by Material
here, and in some other Places. But I think the Apostles would have thought it
very impertinent for them to attempt, and utterly impossible to teach those who
were Christians, any Doctrines they were ignorant of, which were absolutely
necessary to be explicitly believed to make them Christians, or Believers. And
according to the Sense which I put on the Word Material, on such occasions as
this, I conceive it very material, whether the Persons the Epistles were writ
to, were Christians, before they did explicitly know and believe the Doctrines
the Epistles were designed to instruct them in, for if they were, the explicit
Belief of those Doctrines, could not be absolutely necessary to make them
Christians. How Christians were under a necessity of believing them, when they
understood them, has been formerly showed. But they might continue good
Christians without acknowledging they were necessary to be believed by all
Christians. It was sufficient to acknowledge that all Christians ought to
endeavor to know them, and that they are necessary to be believed by all
Christians, when they understand them to be Doctrines taught by the Apostles.

To what this Author has further writ in this Page, I will only say these Two
things; 1. That those to whom the Apostles writ their Epistles, did profess to
believe all that was absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men
Christians, otherwise they would not have writ to them under the Name of
Christians. 2. That there are very few, if any Christians, who have a perfect
Knowledge of all the Articles of Faith delivered in the New Testament, and yet
other People may be very good Christians, and take the Epistles for a part of
the Rule of their, and other Christians Faith.

In p. 38. This Author appears not willing to admit That the Epistles to the
Corinthians, Galatians, Thessalonians and Philippians, were writ upon
particular Occasions, because they were designed for whole Provinces, and
obliged a great Number equally with those Churches they were sent to.

Answ. That which made the Epistles oblige Christians who were out of the
Provinces, made them oblige all the Christians in the Provinces; therefore
passing over Metropolitical Controversies, I will take Notice of these few
things: 1. All the Epistles were designed for the use of the whole Church of
God, in that and all succeeding Ages; yet they might be writ upon particular
Occasions, and for that Reason be directed immediately to those particular
Churches or Persons, who were more especially concerned in those parts of them,
which have a respect to the particular Occasions of their being written. 2. It
will be very hard to give a rational and satisfactory Account of many Passages
in the Epistles to the Corinthians, etc. if there was no particular occasion of
writing them to those Churches. Some may be apt to suspect they have Ground to
think the Apostles were not well advised (which is a Jealousy, those who
believe they were inspired, should not be forward to suggest) in writing
several things which are to be found in these Epistles, if there was no
particular Occasion of writing them to those Churches to which they were sent,
and particularly addressed. 3. That which makes the Epistles oblige all
Christians, is this, that they are Divine Revelations; and therefore all who
acknowledge they were writ by inspired Persons, and are of Divine Authority,
must be obliged by them: for their being writ on particular Occasions does not
lessen or impair their Authority. 4. What is precisely limited in these
Epistles to the particular occasions on which they were writ, did not then
oblige any directly and immediately, whose Circumstances were not the same, and
they will oblige all whose Occasions are the same, to the End of the World.

This Author further takes notice, That The First Epistle of St. John, is
directed to all Christians, etc. p. 39.

Answ. From that, I think we may rationally argue, that it can directly concern
none but those who are Christians; and that its main design could not be to
instruct them in the Doctrines absolutely necessary to be believed by them, in
order to their becoming Christians.

This Author in p. 44. does acknowledge, That The general Design of the
Epistles was to settle and strengthen Men in the Faith, etc.

And if so, must they not be in the Faith, that is, Christians, before they
could be settled and strengthened, etc. in the Faith? And is not the Design of
them the same still? viz. not to teach Articles absolutely necessary to be
explicitly believed to make Men Christians, but to settle and strengthen those
who are Christians, in the Faith.

But (says this Author) it cannot be denied that the Epistle to the Hebrews
does contain some Doctrines absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation by
all Christians, if this may be granted, that the same Faith was required after
Conversion, both from Jew and Gentile, p. 39.

Answ. This is wholly foreign to the present Purpose: For the Enquiry is not
about what is* or may be necessary for Christians, or Persons after they are
converted, to believe? But what Doctrines are absolutely necessary to be
explicitly believed to make Men Christians? Yet because this Author frequently
speaks of some Doctrines being absolutely necessary to be believed to
Salvation, by all Christians, some of which Doctrines are not to be found any
where but in the Epistles; I will propose Two or Three short Questions to be
considered by the Reader: 1. Must every Christian explicitly believe these
Doctrines? 2. Can any Christian explicitly believe a Doctrine he knows nothing
of? 3. If he ^ust know the Doctrines proposed to be believed, and must know
that Jesus Christ has taught them, before he can be obliged to believe them;
how can any Doctrine be absolutely necessary to be believed by Christians to
Salvation, when there are Conditions necessary to his being obliged to believe
them? There are Doctrines absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men
Christians, because without believing them they cannot be Christians. But there
cannot be any other Doctrines absolutely necessary to be believed by one who is
a Christian; for by being a Christian, he is obliged not to believe any
Doctrine, but upon certain Conditions. He must explicitly know the Doctrine,
before he believes it, and he must know that it is a Doctrine which Jesus, whom
he has taken for his Lord has taught. A Christian is not to believe Doctrines
at all adventure, nor upon every ones Word, who has a mind to thrust Doctrines
upon him. His believing a Doctrine must be an intelligent, rational Act of
Submission and Obedience to his Lord. All the Doctrines any Christians (whether
before Jews or Gentiles) can be obliged to believe, are laid down in the New
Testament. They are not limited to one particular part of those Sacred
Writings. And all Christians must endeavor to know as many of them as they
can, and then believe them. But there is not a precise Number of Doctrines set
down in any one Part of Scripture, as absolutely necessary to be believed by
any Christian, or beyond which a Christian is not to endeavor to extend his
Belief.

In p. 47. This Author by way of Reply to what he has quoted out of the First
Vindication of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. p. 14. where that
Author declares the Reason why he did not go through the Epistles to collect
the Fundamental Articles of Faith, etc. propounds certain Questions, whereof
the principal is this: But how are these Fundamental Points to be found in the
Gospels and Acts, better than in the Epistles?

Answ. Though I think a very solid, strong, rational and invincible Answer is
given to this and the other Questions, in those very Lines this Author has
quoted out of the First Vindic. from which he has taken occasion to propose
these Questions; yet because the same Author has expressed himself more
largely concerning this Matter, in his Second Vindication of the Reasonableness
of Christianity, etc. I shall refer the Reader to p. 141, 142. of that Book,
where I think he may find as complete Satisfaction to these Queries, as can
reasonably be desired. But since this Author does here, as well as in several
other places, speak of Truths revealed, or delivered, or taught in the New
Testament, Which he says, have no respect to Man's Salvation, and which are
things indifferent; I shall take leave to ask a few Questions. For what End
were those Truths taught in the New Testament, which have no respect to Man's
Salvation? Which be those Truths Christ has taught, which have no respect to
those Peoples Salvation, who do believe them purely because they know he-hath
taught them? Is it indifferent whether Christians believe, or do not believe
any thing which they know Jesus Christ has taught? Are they to govern
themselves in their Submission to, and believing of what Christ has taught, by
the Apprehensions they, or other Men shall be pleased to cherish, of the
Respect or no Respect his Doctrines have to Man's Salvation? Will not such a
Notion, if it take place, make shrewd Work when dexterously managed, both with
the Truths which are taught, and the Rules of Practice which are laid down in
the New Testament? As for those Truths which have a nearer, or more remote
Connection with what is absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed to make
Men Christians, the Reader may advance himself much, both in Knowledge and
Piety, by an attentive serious perusing what the Author of the Reasonableness
of Christianity, etc. has writ concerning the same, in his Second Vindic. of
the Reasonab. etc. p. 74, 75.

The Terms of Salvation (says this Author) are as plainly and clearly set down
in the Epistles, as in the Gospels, p. 47.

Answ. Those Doctrines which are absolutely necessary to be believed to
Salvation, may be as plainly and clearly set down in the Epistles, as in the
Gospels, and yet not be as clearly distinguished in the former, as in the
latter, from other Doctrines, which are not absolutely necessary to be
explicitly believed to Salvation.

This Author has (I think) in his 50th Page, overturned all that he has writ
against the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. in this First part of his
Book; especially if he will allow that the Persons he speaks of, before he
comes to the middle of that Page, were Christians, before they explicitly
believed every particular Truth they were taught, during their Lives. For if
they were, the Question will not be, how many Articles they did believe in all?
But what those Articles were, the Belief of which, made them Christians? If
they were not Christians, till they did explicitly believe the very last
Articles which were taught them during their Lives, their Belief of those
Articles, joined to those they had learned before (whatever they were) made
them Christians: And if they did not every one happen to learn and believe the
very same Article in the last place, or one that made each Man's Faith exactly
the same, the explicit Belief of one Article made one Man a Christian, and the
explicit Belief of another Article made another Man a Christian, which is
utterly impossible. For no Man can be a Christian, without that which is
absolutely necessary to make a Man a Christian.

Could I meet with a Passage in the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. which
I could justly think to have a Tendency to impair the Divine Authority of the
Epistles, or lessen Peoples Esteem for them, I hope I should as heartily
dislike it, and be as ready to caution People against it, as another Person,
notwithstanding I make so great account of the Book it self. And though I have
writ so many Pages, in order to the clearing some Mistakes (as I conceive) in
this First part part of the Animadversions on the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. yet I fully concur with the worthy Author of them, in what I
apprehend was his principal Design. There are many very excellent and useful
things in this part of his Book. He writes very well, and like a very good Man;
and had not his misapprehending the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. led
him out of his way, and somewhat bewildred him, his Discourse (according to my
Judgment) would have been without a Blemish; unless his using sometimes, a
greater Latitude in his Expressions, than is rigidly justifiable, may be
reckoned one, notwithstanding it is but a keeping Pace with the most Applauded
and Learned Writers.

Our enjoying the Epistles as well as the Gospels, and Acts, is a Mercy for
which we can never be sufficiently thankful. May we all set a just Value on
them, read them attentively, study them diligently, and make that Improvement
we ought, of our being favored with so inestimable a Blessing; then we shall
reap singular Benefit from them, and one End aimed at in the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. will be greatly advanced.

Observations on the Reason of Christ's coming into the World.
THE Title this Author has given to the Second Part of his Animadversions is,
Of the Reason of Christ's coming into the World. I will pass over this Part
very briefly, because this Author seems to find fault with some Passages in the
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. on purpose to take Occasion to discourse
of Christ's Satisfaction; whereas the Author of the Reasonableness, etc. has
laid down very good Reasons (I think) why he did not think it proper, for him
to insist on that point, in his Book.

I do not find that the Author of the Reasonableness, etc. has declared it was
his Design to discourse of the Reason of Christ's coming into the World, in the
Pages this Author has chosen to Animadvert on, in this part of his Book. The
true Reason of Christ's coming into the World (I think) was the Father's
Appointment. A very true and excellent Account is given in the Reasonableness,
etc. of the great End for which Christ came into the World, though not in the
Pages to which this Author does here confine himself. In these Pages, the
Author of the Reasonableness, etc. takes notice of the Occasion of Christ's
coming into the World, and of what Men are restored to by Jesus Christ. These
Benefits may perhaps be properly enough called collateral, or concomitant Ends
of his coming into the World, because particularly intended; but they
comprehend not the whole End of his coming into the World. It is agreed on both
sides, that Bliss and Immortality were lost by Adam 's Fall: Immortality, the
Author of the Reasonableness, etc. says, is restored by Christ to all Men, but
Eternal Bliss is not restored by Christ absolutely to any Man. (I meddle not
with the Case of those who die in their Infancy) and what is absolutely
necessary in order to any Man's obtaining by Christ, a claim of Right to
Eternal Bliss, is the Subject of a great part of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc.

The Obedience, and Sufferings of Christ, cannot, I conceive, be properly
called the Reason of his coming into the World, nor the End thereof, any
otherwise than a Means is called a Subordinate End. But though I said Christ's
restoring Immortality to Man, was agreed on both sides, yet this Author seems
to be dissatisfied with the Account the Author of the Reasonableness, etc. has
given of it, and if I apprehend him aright, because he does not include Bliss,
in his Notion of Immortality.

Now this I think is the Truth of the Case, Immortality, as lost by Adam's
Transgression, is restored to all Men by Christ, in that he will raise them all
from Death. And he has purchased Eternal Bliss for them, on the Terms the
Author of the Reasonableness, etc. has given a large and full Account of from
the Testimony of Christ and his Apostles. That is, that all who heartily take
Jesus for their Lord, and Faithfully obey and follow him, shall at the
Resurrection be everlastingly blessed. The great and famous Athanasius, who was
never reputed an Enemy (that I know of) to Christ's Satisfaction, has more
than once declared it was his Judgment, that Christ came into the World to
purchase Immortality for Mankind. I have not his Works by me, and therefore can
neither relate his Words, nor refer particularly to the Places, but I think I
may depend upon it, that my Memory does not fail me, as to his Notion. But
without laying any stress upon his Authority, I ask what can be pretended for
Men's being Immortal, any other way than by Christ, by those who acknowledge
that Sin has brought Death upon all Men? If the Resurrection be the Fruit of
Christ's Undertaking, and Performance, how could it have been possible for
guilty Man to suffer, after he was dead, if Christ had not come? The Discourse
is concerning Men, not concerning separate Spirits.

This Author, p. 57. makes the Reasons of Christ's coming into the world, and
the End of his coming to be the same, and says, It was to make Satisfaction
for the Sins of the whole World, and to restore Mankind to the Favor of God by
suffering in our stead, and being made Sin for us.

Satisfaction it self, was not the ultimate End of his coming into the World.
His Sufferings and Death were parts of the way and means, by which he was to
obtain what was the End of his coming into the World. His Death, and his
Resurrection too, had a Relation to a further End, viz. his being Lord both of
the Dead and Living, Romans 14. 9. In his Sufferings and dying, he had an Eye and
Regard to what was the great End of his Undertaking Heb. 12. 2. that his Death
had a Relation to this, is most evident from Phil. 2. 7, to the 12th. He has
purchased Immortality for Mankind absolutely. But he has not purchased Pardon
and Bliss for Men absolutely, but upon certain Conditions, viz. their believing
in the True God, and in him as sent by him; so as to take him unfeignedly for
their Lord and King. So that the true End of Christ's coming into the World,
was to obtain to himself a Kingdom, or to be a King, and to have a Right to
dispense and confer Pardon and Eternal Blessedness on those who should become
his sincere Subjects; which I think is as plain as can be, if we will take his
own Word for a Proof of it. Pilate therefore said unto him, art thou a King
then? Jesus answered, thou say that I am a King; to this End was I born, and
for this Cause came I into the World, that I should bear Witness unto the
Truth, every one that is of the Truth hears my Voice. Th. 18. 37.

In p. 60. This Author has these Words concerning Christ's satisfying for our
Sins: We do not mean that Christ suffered the same Punishment, which we should
have done, but only that the Dignity of his Person made his Sufferings
equivalent to the Eternal Punishment of a whole World of Sinners.

Answ. Christ's Satisfaction is a very great and weighty Point: But either I,
or many who have writ concerning it, are under some Mistakes, with Reference to
it. I conceive Christ did not satisfy the Law for Sinners, which they had
broken: For had he suffered the same Punishment which they should have
suffered, that would not have satisfied it, because it required Personal
Punishment alone, and did not run, that the Offender or another should suffer
it. And Equivalent Sufferings could not satisfy it, because there was no such
Proviso in the Law. Christ's Satisfaction, I conceive, did not consist in his
Sufferings being equivalent to the Eternal Punishment of a whole World of
Sinners, by reason of the Dignity of his Person: For if the Dignity of his
Person made his Sufferings equivalent to the Eternal Punishment of a whole
World of Sinners, the Degrees of his Sufferings could not signify any thing to
his making Satisfaction; the Dignity of his Person was the same, whether his
Sufferings were greater or less, and could confer the same Virtue to one, as to
many Degrees. The laying the whole Stress of Christ's Satisfaction on the
Dignity of his Person, I suppose was that, from whence some took occasion to
vent, that ungrounded dangerous Notion (which still infects too many) That one
Drop of Christ's Blood was sufficient to save many Worlds of Sinners: Which
makes the greatest parts of Christ's Sufferings utterly useless, as to
Satisfaction; and in the natural and just Consequences of it, throws most
horrid Aspersions both on God, and Christ.

I conceive the Satisfaction of Christ, consisted in his perfect fulfilling the
Law that pertained to him as Mediator here upon Earth, antecedently to his
Resurrection. All the Instances and Degrees of which Obedience and Sufferings
were appointed by his Father, with infinite Wisdom, and for most good and wise
Reasons. That his Obedience and Sufferings, had the Virtue and Efficacy of
making Satisfaction for Sinners, provided they should comply with the Terms he
should propose to them, was from the Father's appointing and accepting them for
that Purpose; as well as for several other Purposes they had by the same
Appointment a Relation to, both with respect to Christ himself, and those who
should believe in him; not to say any thing of the respect they had to all
Mankind, and the Benefits that redound therefrom to all Men.

Observations on the Third Part.
THE Title given to this Part is, What we are to believe concerning Christ.
This Author says, p. 65. That The Author of the Reasonableness, etc. and Mr.
Hobs agree so exactly concerning the necessity of believing this one Article
only, ( viz. that Jesus is the Christ) and in the Method they have taken for
the Proof of it, by citing several Texts from the Preaching of our Savior, and
his Apostles in the Acts, and no further, that they only differ so much as a
Copy does from an Original. Yet this Author is so ingenuous, he grants This can
be no good Reason for rejecting what the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. has asserted, if his Doctrine be otherwise found agreeable
to the whole Tenor of Scripture.

Answ. I desire no more but that these Words may be added, so far as it
discourses concerning what the Author of the Reasonableness, etc. was enquiring
after, viz. what Articles are absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed
by one who acknowledges the true God, to make him a Christian. A few Days ago,
I accidentally met with a Book, entitled, Hobs's Tripos; and perceiving that
one part of it was entitled De Corpore Politico, I was so curious as to read
that Part, to see whether he did there treat of Religion, and what he did say
concerning it. In the Sixth Chapter of the Second Part of it, I found him
discoursing very agreeably to what this Author quotes out of the Eighteenth
Chapter of his Book De Cive. Mr. Hobs does proceed, in this Book I speak of,
further than the Acts, citing several Texts out of the Epistles. And if I reach
his Sense and Design, Mr. Hobs's Notion is vastly different from that laid down
in the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. Mr. Hobs's Notion seems to be this;
That one who is a Christian cannot be necessarily obliged to believe any more
Articles than this, that Jesus is the Messiah. That one who is a Christian, is
necessarily obliged to believe as many Articles, as he can attain to know are
taught in the Holy Scriptures, is the Notion of the Author of the
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc.

I think Mr. Hobs's Discourse is neither consistent with it self, nor with
that, he intended it should support. His Expressions are many times so general,
they comprehend enough to overthrow all he aims at. He seems willing that
several Distinct Articles should be absolutely necessary to be explicitly
believed to Salvation; though how his bringing in the Belief of the Scriptures
amongst them, can be consistent with what he principally designed, is above my
Reach. But when he comes to prove his Fundamentals (as he calls them) he
produces no Scriptures, but what particularly teach this Doctrine, that Jesus
is the Christ, and therefore at last concludes, this is the only Fundamental
Point of Faith. But if he would have spoken exactly and truly, he should have
said, The only Point, absolutely necessary, to be explicitly believed by those
who acknowledge the only True and Living God. Though other Points (says he)
may be true, they are not so necessary to be believed, as that a Man may not be
saved, though he believe them not. As to the former Part of this Assertion, I
shall take Notice, that he only says, They may be true. But the Author of the
Reasonableness, etc. says, They are Divine Truths; and that they must be
received with steadfast Faith, etc. As to the latter part of Mr. Hobs's
Assertion, I shall observe, that the Point is not, whether a Man may not be
saved, though he believe them not; But 1. Whether the Belief of them is not
necessary to Salvation, in him who does know they are taught in the Holy
Scriptures. 2. Whether a Christian subject may without hazard of his Salvation,
do Actions in Obedience to his Sovereign, which imply a Denial of them,
notwithstanding he knows they are revealed in the Scripture? Mr. Hobs declares
for the affirmative. p. 214. Mr. Hobs says, the Belief of that Point (viz.
That Jesus is the Christ) is sufficient for the Salvation of any Man whosoever
he be, p. 208. That is, let a Man know ever so many Doctrines delivered in the
New Testament, and that they are taught there, he is not obliged to believe
them. Nothing (says he) is truly a point of Faith, but that Jesus is the
Christ, p. 110. The Author of the Reasonableness, etc. delivers the direct
contrary Truths. And these are Notions which cannot possibly consist with a
Person's believing Jesus to be the Christ, so as to take him heartily for his
Lord and King. Yet Mr. Hobs says, Christian Faith consists in acknowledging
our Savior Christ to be King of Heaven; and therefore we must endeavor to
obey his Laws, p. 211. But it seems believing what our Savior has taught, was
not (with Mr. Hobs) any part of our Obedience to him. The contradictory of
this, is what the Author of the Reasonableness, etc. has delivered most justly
for the Truth. Mr. Hobs seems to lay much stress on this, that the
Controversies of Religion (amongst Christians) are about Points unnecessary to
Salvation; by which I conceive he means, unnecessary for Christians to believe.
But a Points being controverted, does not make the Belief of it unnecessary.
Men may raise and maintain Controversies about what Points they please; but I
am obliged to believe what I do know Jesus Christ has taught, and to endeavor
to know as many more Doctrines which he has taught, as I can, and to believe
explicitly as many as I shall attain an explicit Knowledge of, let other
People dispute and make as many Controversies about them as they please.
Controversy may occasion and engage Christians to enquire more accurately,
whether Christ has said any thing concerning the Points and what he has
taught concerning it. And what a Christian understands Christ has taught
concerning it, he is necessarily to believe, let those who controvert it, say
what they will.

I find Mr. Hobs was for a Public Conscience, and for Peoples transferring
their Right of Judging in matters of Religion, to another. Which Notion agrees
well enough with that of a great many Persons in the World. He differs from
them in this, That he is for having the Right transferred to the Civil
Magistrate, p. 214, 215. Perhaps he was then, or had a mind to be in Favor
with the Civil Magistrate. Those who are willing to part with their
Consciences, and put them forth to Trust, no doubt, are desirous to place them
where they think it will be most for their own Advantage. But I think there
cannot be a Notion more contrary to what the Author of the Reasonableness, etc.
delivers, than this is. Many more Particulars might be mentioned, to discover
that what is laid down in the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. has no
Agreement with the Notions Mr. Hobs advanced, but stands at the very same
Distance from them, the Doctrines delivered by Christ and his Apostles do, but
I think these are enough to satisfy any indifferent and impartial Person.

In p. 66. This Author proposes to examine Whether the Son of God, and
Messiah, or Christ always signify the same in Scripture.

Answ. This is not the Question to be examined, with respect to what the Author
of the Reasonableness, etc. does assert. But whether the Son of God, and the
Messiah or Christ, do always signify the same, when they are used either alone,
or together, in those Places of Scripture, which declare what it is the due
believing whereof does constitute or make People Christians? or which relate
what Christ and his Apostles did propose to People acknowledging the True God,
to be believed to make them Christians, and upon their believing of which, they
did own and acknowledge them for Christians? That these Terms, when thus made
use of in Scripture, do signify the same, I think the Author of the
Reasonableness, etc. has proved very clearly and fully in that Book, and in
his Second Vindication of it, they very plainly appear to signify the same with
St. Paul on such occasions. For soon after his Conversion, it is said, he
preached Christ in the Synagogues, that he is the Son of God, Act. 9. 20. That
which he proposed to be believed was this, That Jesus Christ of Nazareth, or
that Person who was eminently known by the Name Christ, is the Son of God. Now
in v. 22. it is said, he confounded the Jews (the Persons who opposed this
Doctrine) how did he confound them? By proving this is the very Christ. Now if
the Son of God, and the Christ, or Messiah, did not here signify the same, his
proving that the Person he preached of, was very Christ, could not be a Proof,
and such a Proof as would confound the Jews, that he was the Son of God. I
acknowledge the Son of God, is an Expression that denotes our Savior's
Divinity, in very many Places of Scripture, even in all those where it is made
use of, in declaring and teaching that particular Doctrine. But the Author of
the Reasonableness, etc. was not enquiring in how many Senses, that Phrase, the
Son of God, was used in Scripture, but what its Sense and Meaning is, in such
Places of Scripture, as I before spoke of. The Reasonableness, etc. neither
treats of our Savior's Divinity, nor enquires how many things Christians must
endeavor to know, and then believe, concerning Christ. But it lays down the
Articles which Christ and his Apostles have taught, are absolutely necessary to
be explicitly believed to make Men Christians, by Virtue of their believing of
which aright, they will be necessarily obliged to employ their best Endeavors,
to attain to a sound Knowledge of what Christ has taught, and to believe our
Savior's Divinity, and the other Doctrines which are delivered in all those
Sacred Writings, which make up the entire Rule of Christian Faith, when they
know that they are taught there.

This Author urges, That The Son of God is of a larger Signification than the
Christ, or Messiah, in John 20. 31. But these things are written that ye might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, etc. Because the Design of
St. John's Gospel was to assert the Divinity of Christ, against those that
opposed it. Now if those Phrases mean only the same, then St. John himself does
not assign the true (I suppose he would say, the complete, or full, and
adequate) Reason for his writing that Gospel; for it appears that he had
certainly another End in it, than barely to prove Jesus to be the Messiah. But
if they mean differently, and Son of God does there denote Christ's Divinity,
then we have in that forementioned Passage, the whole Intention of the Apostle,
assigned for his writing that Gospel, namely, to show that Jesus was the
Christ, and that he was God, p. 68, 69.

Answ. I acknowledge St. John did design in his Gospel to assert the Divinity
of Christ, and that he has proved his Divinity at large, in his First Chapter
(as this Author most truly declares) and I think he has very clearly taught
it, in other Parts of his Gospel too. I think likewise, it is past doubt, that
St. John in writing his Gospel, did design to instruct People in several other
Doctrines, besides Christ's Divinity, as he has actually done; for I cannot be
persuaded, that those other Doctrines were dropped there by Chance; so that to
show that Jesus was the Christ, and that he was God, could not be the whole
Intention of the Apostle, in writing that Gospel. Further, I think this Author
and I are agreed, that the Miracles our Savior wrought, were not immediate
Proofs of the Doctrines he taught, but of his Mission, or that he was the
Christ. Moreover, the Son of God, denotes something besides our Savior's
Divinity, or being God, in those places of Scripture, where it is used for the
Proof of that Point; but St. John is not giving an Account in this Passage,
Chap. 20. 31. of his whole design in writing that Gospel, but of the Reasons
why he did so largely relate the Signs and Miracles which Christ did; which
Signs and Miracles did not prove any thing more, directly and immediately, than
that he was the Messiah. Thus the Christ, and the Son of God, seem here to
signify the same.

In p. 73. This Author says, That What might be sufficient to denominate a Man
a Believer, or a Christian during the actual Ministry of Christ, would not
truly entitle any one to that Character after our Savior's Assention, and for
this Reason, because we do not find from the whole History of the Gospel, that
any of those who believed on our Savior, had a just Knowledge of him, or what
was the true End of his coming into the World.

Answ. The direct contrary appears by the Acts of the Apostles, where we
constantly find the Apostles propounding just the same Articles Jesus himself
did, to be believed, in order to Peoples being Christians, or denominated
Believers. And if Christ admitted Persons during his Ministry, into the same
Covenant People are admitted into since his Assention, what was sufficient
before for that purpose, must be so after his Assention. But what this Author
means by a just Knowledge of Christ, and the true End of his coming into the
World, I must not undertake to determine; therefore I shall only ask, Whether
they had a true Knowledge of Christ, and the End of his coming, so far as was
absolutely necessary to make them Christians? If they had, their not knowing
any thing more than what was then revealed, and made known to them, in order to
their being Christians, cannot be a good Reason why what was sufficient to
warrant their being denominated Christians, should not be sufficient to warrant
Persons being denominated Christians now, unless together with the Proof that
there are more Articles revealed now, than were then, there be also as clear
Proof that all, or some of these latter Articles, are now required to be
explicitly believed for that Purpose.

But (says this Author) It is natural to infer from Act. 1. 6, 7, 8. that the
Apostles had not yet attained to that clear Knowledge of him, and the Design of
his coming, which it was necessary they should be endewed with, p. 74.

Answ. They had not all that Knowledge of Christ, and of his Design, which it
was necessary they should be endowed with, in order to their own Advantage, and
to their giving the World that entire and complete Revelation, Christ would
make of his Will by them. But it cannot be inferred that they had not all that
Knowledge which was absolutely necessary to make them Christians: were there no
Christians upon Earth, after Christ's Ascension, till after the Descent of the
Holy Ghost? or were not the Apostles Christians, till they were endeued with a
clear Knowlededge of all those things Christ would make known, for the Benefit
of his Church, and which they were gradually to instruct People in, and commit
to writing for the use of future Ages? Can no Man be a Christian, till he has
an explicit Knowledge of every Particular, in the fullest import of it, which
is delivered in the Scripture, and has a respect to Jesus, as the Messiah?
Which is the true Notion of believing Jesus to be the Messiah, absolutely
necessary to make Men Christians, that he is the Person God has sent to be our
King and Savior, whose Doctrines and Laws we are conscientiously to endeavor
to learn, and believe and observe, as we attain to know them; O, That he is the
Person sent from God, etc. who has taught these and these particular
Doctrines, neither more, nor fewer (and so as touching his Precepts) every one
of which, we do actually believe and practice? Can no Person be a Christian
now, till he has as explicit and full a Knowledge of every thing Christ has
taught and revealed, as that Apostle ever had, who was endowed with the largest
measure of Revelation? whatever he did know this way, had a respect to Jesus as
the Messiah: And the very last Information he had this way, acquainted him with
something concerning the Messiah, which he did not so clearly and fully know
before; so that he could not form a just and adequate Rule of Faith concerning
him, till he knew that.

It will not (says this Author) alter the case, by saying, That those who died
then in that Faith, were undoubtedly saved; for that would be no more an
Argument, than the proving that because a Jew was saved before Christ's coming
into the World, by Virtue of Christ's Mediation, in the Observance of the
Mosaic Law, he might be equally capable of Salvation now, in the Profession of
that Religion, p. 74.

Answ. What this Author has delivered in these Words, would afford room for
many Remarks: But I shall only observe, That believing that Jesus is the
Messiah, was not absolutely necessary to Salvation, before he came into the
World; nor was any thing more absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation,
under the Mosaic Dispensation, than God had made absolutely necessary to be
believed for that purpose, under it. But at the coming of our Savior, a New
Covenant being substituted in the Place of the Mosaic Dispensation, it was
under a New Condition, viz. the believing and taking Jesus to be the Messiah
our King, and submitting to his Law. If that Dispensation were not abrogated,
but did still continue the way of Salvation, nothing more would now be
absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation, than what was made so by that
Constitution. And if the Christian Dispensation were to be abrogated, and
another to come into its room, whereby something distinct from what is
contained in the Gospel, or Christian Dispensation, should be made absolutely
necessary to be believed to Salvation, the Belief of every thing delivered in
the New Testament, would not, when the Gospel Dispensation was at an end, be
sufficient to Salvation. But the adding of more Revelations, which are to be
studied, and explicitly believed when known, does not alter the Dispensation,
or make more absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation, or to interest a
Person in that Dispensation, than was at first absolutely necessary to that
Purpose; any more than every new Law made in a Nation, does alter the
Constitution of that Government, and make something more absolutely necessary
to be known, and explicitly assented to, to make a Person a Subject of that
Government, than was absolutely necessary to that Purpose before. Will any
serious considering Christian affirm, that Jesus Christ will reject any Person,
who by the gracious Influence of the Holy Ghost, is effectually brought to
receive him with all his Heart, to be his Lord and King, and sincerely
endeavors to fulfill that Engagement? people are generally very willing to
believe that Jesus has died for them, and satisfied for their Sins, and they
can be contented to own him for a Prophet, to furnish them with Notions; but
they are not so easily prevailed with to give Substantial Evidences, that they
do heartily take him for their King. Were they generally brought to a sound
Belief and Acknowledgment of his being their King, they would make a much
better Improvement of what he has delivered in the Holy Scripture concerning
his Priesthood, and his being a Prophet, than they commonly do, notwithstanding
the great Zeal they pretend to discover for those Offices. The Courses they
ordinarily allow themselves in, are evidently and utterly inconsistent with
their receiving Jesus unfeignedly for their King, and their preserving a Sense
of that Relation upon their Spirits, whatever way they have got to reconcile
them to the Notions they entertain concerning his other Offices.

For (says this Author) we are to direct our Faith and Practice according to
the most full and clear Revelation of God's Will, and to believe that to be
necessary to Salvation, which appears from the full extent of Revelation, to be
required in order to it, p. 74.

Answ. Those who are Christians are to direct their Faith and practice
according to the fullest Measure of the Knowledge they can attain, of what God
has revealed; that is, They must believe explicitly, and actually perform
whatsoever they can attain to know Christ has taught, and made their Duty. And
in order to their attaining to the clearest and fullest Knowledge of their
Lord's Will, they must take care they do not confine themselves to a certain
Number of Articles and Precepts of Men's collecting, but must diligently read
and study the entire and complete Revelation Christ has made of his Fathers
Pleasure in the Holy Scriptures, Yet we are not to believe any Article is
absolutely necessary to Salvation, but what he has revealed to be so; for if
we do, we transgress our Bounds, and go further than the utmost extent of
Revelation reaches, as to that Matter, and consequently do that, which we have
no warrant for in Divine Revelation. It does not follow, that because
Christians are not to believe any thing as an Article of the Christian Faith,
but what is taught in the New Testament, and must endeavor to know as many of
the Doctrines which are taught there, as they can, and believe every one as
they attain to know them, therefore every Doctrine delivered in the New
Testament, is absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men Christians.

But (says this Author) if all that was absolutely necessary to Salvation, or
to denominate Men truly Christians, was the bare believing Jesus to be the
Messiah (the believing Jesus to be the Messiah, so as to take him absolutely
for their King) why should our Savior promise the Mission of the Holy Ghost,
to instruct them ( viz. his Disciples) farther in what they ought to believe
concerning him? p. 75.

Answ. Our Savior did not promise the Holy Ghost to instruct them in what they
were to believe to make them Christians (for they were Christians when the
Promise was made to them, or how could they be his Disciples?) but in such
Matters as they must believe, when instructed in, by Virtue of their having
received him for their Lord, and as other Christians must endeavor to
understand, and then believe on the same Account. To what purpose did they
oblige themselves in taking Jesus for their Lord, to believe whatever he should
teach them, if they knew and believed before, all that they should ever be
obliged to believe?

This Author thinks he has Reason to conclude from Act. 10. 43. etc. That we
are to understand by believing Jesus to be the Messiah, in this and almost all
other Places, the full extent and meaning of those Words, as they are explained
by this, and other Apostles in all Parts of Scripture, because they were all of
them inspired by the same Holy Ghost, and therefore must all have the same
Meaning. And that therefore the believing Jesus to be the Messiah, as it is now
required for a Fundamental of our Faith, must comprehend the full Sense, that
is given of it in Scripture, p. 76, 77.

Answ. If I comprehend the Force of this Author's arguing here, it is thus: The
Apostles, by the Term Messiah, did understand all those particular Doctrines
they have delivered throughout the Holy Scriptures, concerning that Jesus of
whom they preached, so that by Peoples believing Jesus to be the Messiah, they
meant their believing explicitly every one of those Doctrines. This Notion now
is built upon this Supposition, that the Apostles when they preached Jesus to
any, they did particularly acquaint them with every one of those Doctrines, and
then promising them Pardon, etc. if they did believe Jesus to be the Messiah,
they declared to them, that by believing Jesus to be the Messiah, they meant
the explicit believing of every one of those Doctrines they had proposed to
them. The Reason given for this Supposition, is (as I apprehend) this, They
were all inspired by the same Holy Ghost, and therefore must all have the same
Meaning; that is, I suppose, they must all understand the Term Messiah in the
same Sense, viz. as signifying precisely every one of those Doctrines. Many
Remarks might be made on this Occasion. I will only observe, 1. That the
Supposition is perfectly precarious, without any warrant at all from Scripture.
Several of these Doctrines might be propounded as very proper Inducements, to
believe Jesus to be the Messiah, but that is not the Point in Discourse, but
whether the Term Messiah did with the Apostles, signify just such a set of
Doctrines. 2. The Holy Ghost was not given to the Apostles to teach them the
Meaning of the Term Messiah, for they understood it very well before; nor did
they in preaching to the Jews, use the Term Messiah, in a Sense they never
heard of before, and which would therefore need a particular Explanation; but
as a Term so common and so distinctly understood amongst them, as the Term in
any Nation is commonly understood by the Inhabitants, which expresses, and
signifies their Supreme Governor. All the Apostles understood the Term
Messiah in the same Sense, and used it in the same Sense, in which those who
heard them did commonly understand it. Their Business was not to preach and
explain New Terms, nor to tack New Meanings unto Old Terms. 3. In their
preaching to Unbelievers they insisted on such Considerations as were most
proper to convince them, that Jesus was the Messiah, according to the known and
common Meaning of the Term, and not such as did immediately prove the Truth of
a certain Number of New Doctrines, which they were Strangers to, and which must
make up a New Sense for an Ancient Word. 4. We have good Warrant from the
Scripture to believe that the Apostles were not instructed at once, but
gradually, in the Doctrines concerning Jesus, which are delivered in the
several Parts of Scripture, and therefore they could not mean every one of
these Doctrines, constantly, by the Term Messiah, for they could not acquaint
their Hearers at first, with any more of these Doctrines, than they were at
that time instructed in, and if they added more Doctrines when they were
instructed in more, as the Sense in which they understood the Term Messiah,
they used it then in a New Sense and Meaning. It may be said, but now we have a
full Account in the Scripture, of the full Meaning in which the Term Messiah is
to be used, and consequently what is to be understood by believing Jesus to be
the Messiah, taking the Term Messiah, to signify every one of the Doctrines
delivered in the Scripture concerning Jesus, and therefore these are to be
collected out of the Scripture, and Persons must now explicitly believe every
one of them, in order to their believing Jesus to be the Messiah, in the full
Sense given of it in Scripture. It Is very true, all the Doctrines we are to
believe concerning Jesus, are set down in the Scripture. But it may be asked,
seeing all these Doctrines are not set down in any one place of Scripture
together, for this End, to whom is the Office of collecting them for this
purpose committed? And what assurance shall People have, if uninspired Men may
undertake it, that their Collection is complete? For if any one Passage be
omitted, distinct from what shall be in the Collection, those who shall believe
every one of those Articles which shall be proposed to them, will not believe
that Jesus is the Messiah, in the full Sense given of that Term in Scripture,
and therefore, according to this Notion, will not be Christians. It may further
be enquired, whether those who shall believe explicitly every one of these
Doctrines, will be obliged to endeavor to know and believe any more Doctrines?
If the Answer be No, then either these are all Doctrines which are delivered in
Scripture, or there are some Doctrines taught in the Scripture, which
Christians are not obliged to endeavor to know, though they have Opportunity
to understand them, or to believe them, though they do know them. If the Answer
be, Yes, it may be asked, how that comes about? Perhaps it will be said,
because amongst the Doctrines before spoken of, this is one, That Jesus is our
King, and therefore to testify our Submission and Obedience to him, we are to
endeavor to know and believe other Doctrines. This indeed is a way whereby
they may acquire some assurance to themselves, and give Evidence and Proof to
others, that they believe Jesus to be their King, but not (according to the
Notion we are now discoursing of) that they believe him to be the Messiah, or
that they are Christians. How comes it to pass, that seeing the explicit
Belief of every one of the other Doctrines is equally necessary to make them
Christians, with the Belief of this, only a part of that Faith which makes them
Christians, must oblige and govern them after they are Christians? Whence is
it, that some Doctrines delivered in Scripture, must be believed in Obedience
to Jesus, and others not, whilst he is equally the Teacher of them all.

This Author says, That Though no more is set down, Act. 8* 37. but that the
Eunuch believed that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, yet no doubt there is more
implied: For Philip instructed him in the Christian Religion, from that Chapter
of Isatah, (viz. which the Eunuch was reading) which Doctrines were, no doubt,
required as absolutely necessary to be believed. Besides, since Philip baptized
him, no doubt but he did it in that Form which Christ himself enjoined, in the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and then it will follow that the
Belief and Confession of the Three Persons was required, p. 77, 78.

Answ. It is not at all doubted, but there is something absolutely necessary to
be believed by an Unbeliever, in order to his becoming a Christian, besides
that, the due believing whereof, does constitute him a Christian. For a Man
cannot believe a Proposition to be true, without some Proof and Evidence that
it is true. Now the enquiry is not what Arguments and Proofs are absolutely
necessary to be believed to bring a Man to the due Belief of what is absolutely
necessary to be believed to make him a Christian. That is a Question no Man can
possibly determine, by assigning one in particular, or a precise Number. For
the Arguments, Proofs, and Evidences are many and various; and God has not
limited himself to make only one of them effectual, nor obliged himself that he
will not give forth his Blessing, but with a certain Number of them in
conjunction. He that does duly believe all that is absolutely necessary to be
believed to make Men Christians, is a Christian, whether he was brought to this
Belief, by the Belief of more or fewer Arguments. There are Truths to be
believed antecedently to a Man's believing what is absolutely necessary to be
believed to make him a Christian, and there are Truths to be believed by him
after he is a Christian, the due believing of which, are Proofs and Evidences
that he does believe what is absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men
Christians. But it is not the Belief of the one sort, or the other sort of
these Truths, nor of both together, which is the Faith that constitutes Men
Christians; but only the Belief of that, to which the Belief of those other
Truths, has an Antecedent, or Consequential Relation. How many Doctrines the
Eunuch was instructed in, or what those Doctrines were in particular, we cannot
tell, because they are not revealed to us; but what it was, upon the believing
of which, he was owned for a Christian, and Baptized, is expressly declared, and
we have Reason to believe, that if the explicit Belief of more Articles had
been required of him, as absolutely necessary to make him a Christian, they
would have been set down and expressed in his Confession. I think also, it is
more than probable that the Eunuch was baptized in the Name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, unless it can be proved, that that Form was in those Days
confined, or appropriated to the Apostles, who were entrusted with conferring
the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost. Whatever Articles the Eunuch did
explicitly believe at present, he was by believing Jesus to be the Messiah,
obliged to endeavor to know explicitly and believe as many more as he could,
both concerning the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, even all that was, or
should be revealed concerning them, which I think reaches the whole extent of
the New Testament.

In p. 78, etc. This Author undertakes To show that the Gospels and Acts are
directly opposite to our Author's Scheme of Doctrine, and this he will do by
showing, they do require much more to be believed concerning our Savior, than
barely that he was the Messiah.

Here this Author proves very well, and learnedly the Divinity of our Blessed
Savior, and on that Account we cannot set too high a value on his Book. He
also mentions some other Doctrines, very clearly delivered in the Gospels and
Acts. But the Reason why he offers these things in Opposition to the
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. I suppose, was his mistaking the Design of
that Treatise. The Author of the Reasonableness, etc. did not propose to
enquire how many Doctrines are delivered in the Gospels and Acts, concerning
our Savior, but what Christ and his Apostles did require, as absolutely
necessary to be explicitly believed to make Men Christians. Reckon up
therefore as many Articles as you please, which are clearly and expressly taught
in the Gospels and Acts, yea, in all the New Testament, this will not affect,
or make any thing against the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. unless
withal you prove that Jesus or his Apostles, required the explicit Belief of
all, or some of them, which are distinct from this, that he is the Messiah whom
we are to take for our Lord and King, to make Men Christians.

Whereas this Author says, That the most Learned amongst the Jews did
appropriate the Title (...), to their expected Messiah, and also believed he
should be God. So that this may be a very good Reason for our Savior, and his
Apostles requiring no more to be believed in their preachings amongst the Jews,
than that Jesus was the Messiah, since if they once firmly believed that they
must necessarily believe him to be God, p. 78, 79.

I shall only observe, 1. That the Sense of the Term Messiah is here
acknowledged to be very different, from what this Author has before declared
the Apostles meant by it.

2. That here is no Supposition that the People did not know what was meant by
Messiah, and therefore must have it either interpreted or explained to them,
but an Acknowledgment that our Savior and his Apostles did use the Term,
according to the familiar and commonly known meaning of it amongst the Jews.

3. That supposing the Jews did generally believe the Messiah should be God,
yet they must believe that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah, before they could
believe him to be God. And it being this only, that he was the Messiah, which
was propounded to be believed to make them Christians, it must be a right
believing of this, that did make them Christians; how near a Connection soever
their believing any thing else, which they knew and believed concerning him who
should be the Messiah, might have with their believing Jesus to be the Messiah.
Supposing they did generally believe that their expected Messiah should be God,
yet those who believed other Persons to be the Messiah, and consequently
believed them to be God too, were not Christians. So that it was not the
believing a Person to be the Messiah, nor a believing that Person to be God,
that made People Christians, but a believing him to be the Messiah, who really
was the Messiah.

But as we are obliged to know who was the Author of our Being, so also must it
be equally a Crime not to know clearly, who, and what he was, that could be the
Author of our Salvation, p. 87.

In answer to this, I shall only say, That we are obliged to endeavor to know
as much as we can, of that God, who is the Author of our Being. This holds true
as to all Men, and so Christians are obliged to endeavor to know as much as
they can of him, who is the Author of their Salvation. It is a Crime to be
wilfully Ignorant of any thing, that is revealed of him who is the Author of
our Salvation.

There could be no Reason (says this Author) for the defending his Divinity (
viz. our Savior's) with so much Care and Concern (as St. John did defend it)
if it was not absolutely necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, or
if there was no Danger in believing him to be only Man, p. 87.

Answ. 1. The Reason we have to defend Divine Truths, when opposed and denied
by Persons, is not to be taken barely from the End for which they are to be
believed, but also from their Nature, viz. because they are Divine Truths, and
therefore Truths to be believed, and which may by no means be denied.

2. He that believes Jesus to be the Messiah, does not therein believe him to
be only Man; he believes him to be Man, but not only Man; for that is not
proposed to his Belief, when it is proposed to him, to believe that Jesus is
the Messiah. And by believing him to be the Messiah, he obliges himself to
believe whatsoever he shall attain to know is revealed concerning him.

Believing in Christ (says this Author) if it mean any thing, must be
interpreted of every thing that Scripture has required to be believed
concerning him. So that this we may be certain is a Fundamental, that as Christ
is the Author of our Salvation; So that Revelation is the just Measure of our
belief in him, and that we must not believe either more or less of him, than we
are warranted by Scripture, p. 92.

Answ. Revelation is the just Measure of what we are to believe concerning
Christ. So that a Christian, let his Advances in Knowledge be ever so great,
must no believe any thing concerning him, but what he is warranted, or at least
apprehends upon mature Consideration, he is warranted by Scripture. But that a
Man cannot be a Christian till he does explicitly believe every thing the
Scripture does warrant People to believe concerning Christ, is a Notion the
Scripture does not any where warrant. Were this Notion true, no Man can be a
Christian, whose Knowledge of every thing relating to Christ, is not every way
equal to that, of the most learned, sagacious, and understanding Person, in the
whole Christian World, or that ever was, or ever will be in the World. Nay,
according to this Notion, it may be justly questioned, whether ever there was a
Christian since the Apostles Days. For there may be Ground to question, whether
any uninspired Man did, or will attain to a just and adequate Knowledge of
every thing the Scripture does reveal concerning Christ.

But it will probably be objected (says this Author) to all this, that though
it is granted, that there are several Articles to be believed by those who are
thoroughly Christians, yet there was no more required by our Savior himself, or
his Apostles, to make a Man a Christian, or in order to his Admission into
Christianity, than the believing Jesus to be the Messiah, and that this is all
which the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. contends for.

The Objection is not proposed in its full weight, but that I need not insist
on, for if the Answer reach it, as it is here laid down, it will serve the turn.

In answer to this (says this Author) it may be observed, First, That the
forementioned Articles, as well as others that might be named, are of the same
Nature with that one Article of believing Jesus to be the Messiah, and are a
Repetition of it in all its Branches, p. 92, 93.

Answ. This Answer is not at all satisfactory, because it is wholly concerning
another matter, than that treated of in the Objection. The Objection is
concerning what our Savior and his Apostles have required to be believed to
make Men Christians. The Answer is concerning the Nature of Articles. Moreover,
it is not easy to understand what is meant here, by several distinct Articles
being of the same Nature with this, That Jesus is the Messiah. This Author has
formerly distinguished betwixt the Nature of several Doctrines, and their being
Divine Revelations. Now, consider several particular Doctrines singly in
themselves, and abstractedly from their being Divine Revelations, they are not
of the same Nature one with another, how can they then be every one of the same
Nature with this, that Jesus is the Messiah? I agree with this Author, that a
Person's believing explicitly certain particular Doctrines Jesus has taught,
for this Reason, because he knows, that Jesus who is the Messiah, has taught
them, is a Repetition of his Belief of that Article, the Ground and Reason of
his believing every one of the other Doctrines. But if his believing certain
particular Doctrines, be but a Repetition of his believing that Jesus is the
Messiah, how can the repeated, or rather limited exercise of that Belief, as to
particular Branches or Doctrines, make Men Christians, if the due believing
Jesus to be the Messiah, do not constitute Men Christians? Besides, the Reason
of our believing Jesus to be the Messiah, is quite different from the Reason
why we believe these particular Articles.

But Secondly, there was more required even to make a Man a Christian, than the
Belief of Jesus being the Messiah; for our Savior himself required the
believing in the whole Trinity: For this was the Commandment which our Savior
gave his Disciples, That they should teach all Nations, baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. i. e. They should
first instruct them in whom they were to believe, and then baptize them into
that Faith, p. 93.

Answ. The command was to Disciple all Nations, that is, not first instruct
them in the particular Doctrines those who believe Jesus to be the Messiah,
must believe upon his Authority, when they know he has taught them, but by
propounding such Considerations and Arguments as are most proper to convince
and satisfy them that Jesus is the Messiah, bring them to own him to be
Messiah, so as to take him for their King and Ruler, by engaging themselves
without any Reservation to learn of, and obey him. And then they were to
baptize them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, after which, they
were to teach them the Particulars they were to believe and do, by Virtue of
their having taken him to be their Lord, which Particulars comprehend the whole
Revelation Christ has made, concerning the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. That
is, the whole Doctrine delivered in the New Testament.

In p. 95. This Author says, He will Examine the Reasonableness of that
Article of Faith, the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. has
insisted on, and set down in the largest Terms, p. 301.

What this Author means by the Reasonableness of that Article, is not very
plain. I suppose he does not mean, that he will examine whether it is
reasonable a Man should believe that Article. If he means the Reason why that
Author has declared, That this is the only Article absolutely necessary to be
explicitly believed, by those who believe in the True God, to make them
Christians, that Reason is clearly this, because our Savior and his Apostles
have not required the explicit Belief of any other Article but this, for that
purpose. Yet because the Author of the Reasonableness, etc. observed, That the
Almerciful God seems herein to have consulted the Poor of the World, and the
Bulk of Mankind.

This Author, For a clearer Examination of this, proposes certain things to be
considered. First, supposing God either had, or should reveal any thing to
Mankind, and make the Belief of it a Condition of Salvation, which the Reason
of Man could not comprehend, and we had all the Evidence the thing was capable
of, that the Revelation proceeded from God, would this Incomprehensibleness of
it, be a sufficient Plea for our rejecting it?

Answ. No: But 1. There is a great difference betwixt an Article's being
absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed to Salvation, and an Article's
being absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed, when known, by Reason of
a Person's believing what is absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed to
Salvation. The Difference is as great as betwixt an absolute Necessity, and a
conditional Necessity. There are Articles which the Reason of Man cannot
comprehend, the Belief of which is necessary to those who know Christ has
taught them, yet the explicit Belief of them is not made absolutely necessary
to Salvation. Nor can the explicit Belief of any Number of particular
Doctrines taught in the New Testament, be properly said to be the Condition of
Salvation; for if it could, he who should explicitly believe them all, could
not be obliged to believe one more. The Condition of Salvation, Now, is
believing Jesus to be the Messiah, so as to take him without Exception or
Limitation to be our Lord and King. And hereby we are obliged to believe as
many Doctrines as we can attain to know he has taught. So that a true
Christian never believes so many Doctrines, but he is still under the same
Obligation to believe more, when he attains to know more, and that Christ has
taught them. It is in Matters of Faith as in Matters of Practice, let a Man do
ever so many things which Christ commands, if he obstinately allow himself in
the wilful Violation of any one Command he knows Christ has enjoined him, he
is not a sincere Christian. So let a Man believe ever so many Articles, if he
obstinately refuse to assent to any one Article, he knows Christ has taught,
he is not a true Christian. His obstinate, wilful Refusal to believe that one
Article, is a plain Demonstration he has not that Faith, which is the
Condition of Salvation; and that the Assent he gives to those other Doctrines,
has some other Original. A sincere Christian's believing particular Doctrines
when known, is the genuine and necessary Fruit and Effect of that Faith, which
is the Condition of Salvation. These Acts of Faith, are but a partial, limited
exerting of that Faith which made him a Christian, and is the Condition of
Salvation, in such Proportion as his explicit Knowledge does reach, attended
with a promptness and readiness to extend it further, as he shall attain to
know more of his Lord's Mind. This true and sincere believing Jesus to be the
Christ, so as to take him for our Lord and King, is the Faith which is the
Condition of Salvation. And hence it is, that this Faith does avail, and is
effectual to the Salvation of them, who are Honest, and Cordial,
notwithstanding they happen to be ever so much beneath others in natural and
acquired Accomplishments.

2. Should God now reveal any more Articles as absolutely necessary to be
explicitly believed to Salvation, than what Christ and his Apostles delivered
as absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed to Salvation, whether the
Reason of Man could comprehend them or not, they would alter, and make a New
Covenant.

3. If the Author of the Reasonableness, etc. had of his own Head declared that
no Article is necessary to be explicitly believed to make Men Christians, but
this, That Jesus is the Messiah, and for this Reason, because God could not
reasonably require the Belief of any Article, as absolutely necessary to
Salvation, but what illiterate and laboring Men can comprehend, there would
have been just Ground to examine and contradict what he had said. For this had
been an intruding on God's Right and Prerogative, and a presumptuous
prescribing to him.

But 4. The Author of the Reasonableness, etc. does expressly declare, that what
is the Faith God will accept, depends wholly on his good Pleasure, p. 298. So
that he might have made the Belief of Articles, which the Reason of Man cannot
comprehend, absolutely necessary to Salvation.

5. The Author of the Reasonableness, etc. did search the Scriptures, to find
what are the Articles, the Belief of which God has made absolutely necessary
to Salvation, and he has given a full Account of what he found there
concerning this Matter.

6. It is an eminent Demonstration of the Condescension and Goodness of God
toward Man, that whereas he might have made the explicit Belief of
incomprehensible Articles, absolutely necessary to Salvation, he has not made
the explicit Belief of any, but that plain and intelligible Proposition, the
Author of the Reasonableness, etc. has set down as absolutely necessary to
Salvation. This Discovery of the Divine Condescension and Goodness, ought to be
taken Notice of, by those who have a Sense of it; and the Reflection the Author
of the Reasonableness, etc. has made on this Occasion, is so pertinent and so
pious, I do a little wonder that Pious and Good Men, can prevail with
themselves, to make invidious Animadversions upon it.

But Secondly, Why all this Concern for the Illiterate, and Men of weak
Capacities, as though it would be so very prejudicial to them, to be obliged to
believe what they cannot comprehend? p. 96.

Answ. If God is pleased to show his Concern for the illiterate, and Men of
weak Capacities, it is very fit that Writers and Good Men should take Notice of
it. And though we are obliged to believe explicitly whatsoever we shall attain
to know God has revealed, be matters discoursed of ever so much above our
Comprehension; yet it may be very prejudicial to the illiterate Men, and some
Offense against Jesus Christ, to require of them the Belief of Articles they
cannot comprehend, as absolutely necessary to their Salvation, when Jesus
Christ does not require the explicit Belief of any such Articles, as
absolutely necessary to that Purpose; and more particularly because it is a
Subjecting their Faith to some other Authority than his, who is their only Lord.

For the Mysteries of Religion, which are incomprehensible, are equally so to
all, p. 96.

Very true; But some learned Men can say a great many things, whether they
understand what they say, or not, concerning the Mysteries of Religion, which
illiterate Men cannot comprehend. And their Authority may as well oblige them
to believe their incomprehensible Speeches, as absolutely necessary to
Salvation, as Mysteries, which Jesus Christ has not made absolutely necessary
to that purpose.

But lastly, since our Author is of Opinion, that it would be very advantageous
to Mankind in general, to have only such a Religion as is very easy to be
understood by all sorts of Men, we ought to consider how very intelligible his
Rule of Faith is, if compared with that of our Church, and how agreeable his
one Article is, to the Comprehension of Vulgar Capacities, p. 98.

Answ. To this, the Author of the Reasonableness, etc. has given a very full
Reply (I think) in these Words: He should have remembered that I speak not of
all the Doctrines of Christianity, nor all that is published to the World in
it; but of those Truths only which are absolutely required to be believed to
make any one a Christian, etc. First Vindication of the Reasonableness, etc. p.
30.

Here I expected some Discovery, that our Church had taught somewhat contrary,
or exceedingly different, touching this Matter, from what is delivered in the
Reasonableness, etc. concerning it. But that Comparison is not pursued. I shall
therefore say no more, but that our Church does require the explicit Belief of
all that Christ and his Apostles have made absolutely necessary to be believed
to make Men Christians, and presses to a serious, dilligent care, and endeavor
to understand as much as may be, of what Christ and his Apostles have taught,
without limiting People to a precise Number of Articles, beyond which they must
not dare to stir; and if she had not done so, I should not have that high
Esteem for her, I most justly have.

This Author bestows his 99th Page, and most of the Two following Pages in
showing that this Proposition, Jesus is the Messiah, is not easy to be
understood.

I will not undertake to declare what his Design is, in this, I suppose he does
not make a Question, whether the Belief of that Proposition, is absolutely
necessary to make Men Christians, and therefore that it must be understood. For
he contends, That there are many more Propositions, together with this, equally
necessary to be explicitly known and believed to make Men Christians. So that
he does not exclude, but acknowledge that the Belief of this Proposition is
absolutely necessary. Now this Proposition is like easy to be understood,
whether the due believing of it, does make a Man a Christian, or the explicit
believing of a great many more Propositions together with it, be absolutely
necessary to make a Man a Christian. For I suppose it will not be denied, that
it is as easy to understand this one Proposition, standing alone, as to
understand this same Proposition when it is joined with a great many others
which are also to be believed. The making the explicit Belief of more
Propositions distinct from this, that Jesus is the Messiah, absolutely
necessary, together with the explicit Belief of it, to make Men Christians,
does not make that Proposition more easy to be understood, than it would be, if
the explicit Belief of those other Propositions were not made absolutely
necessary to make Men Christians.

The Way this Author takes to show that this Proposition is not easy to be
understood, is by supposing, an inquisitive, laboring, illitera'e Man, who
knows many things which are delivered in the New Testament, and who understands
what it is for Books to be Divinely inspired, but is ignorant what is meant by
a Savior, asking several Questions concerning this Proposition; and another
much more Ignorant than him, answering to every one of these Questions. I
neither like the Questions, nor the Answers, as they are set down in these
Pages, therefore I shall only observe

1. That whoever will reply directly to an impertinent Question, must
unavoidably give an impertinent Answer. Wherefore when Questions are not
rightly propounded, he that puts them, must be made sensible of his Mistakes,
and assisted to form them aright.

2. That if a Person is Inquisitive concerning the Sense of this Proposition,
That Jesus is the Christ, or only Savior of Sinners, and does acknowledge the
true God, make him but thoroughly sensible of his own Sin and Guilt, and he will
then easily understand what is meant by a Savior. Then his Inquiries will be,
how he may be satisfied that the Person discoursed of, is by God's Appointment,
the only Savior of Sinners? and on what Terms he may with good warrant expect
Salvation from him? To which Questions there are very proper, clear, and plain
Answers to be given.

3. Most of the Questions proposed in this Author's Pages, when rightly formed,
must have such Answers made to them, as Christ does authorize us in the
Scriptures, to give to them. But what Entertainment can you expect his Answers
will have with them, who are not truly convinced, and therefore do not really
believe he is the Messiah* Convince your Querist, though roughly, of that, viz.
That Jesus is the Christ or Messiah, so that he does truly receive him to be
his Lord and King, and then you will find him in a fair way, and very well
disposed to receive Satisfaction, when you make him perceive that your Answers
to his Questions, are the very same which Christ himself has given to them, or
such as he does warrant you to offer for Peoples Satisfaction in those Cases.

This Author concludes his Book with observing, That those Parts of the
Reasonablenes of Christianity, etc. which treat of the Necessity of Revelation,
the Conditions of Repentance, Good Works, etc. seem to carry an Air of Piety
along with them, and to be writ with such Strength of Judgment, as may be
supposed that the Author had thought more upon them, than upon any other parts
of that Treatise.

As I think those parts of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. here
approved by this Author, have a very pious Relish, and are writ with a
Strength, Vivacity, and Fineness, very much above what is common; so I fully
concur with this Worthy Anthor, in all, or most of the Points he has treated
of in his Book, which I have not made some Remark on, in these Papers. I will
conclude with taking Notice, that as we are very apt to Imagine a Person has
thought well on a Point, when he treat it to our liking; so we are very prone
to fancy he is defective, or in an Error, when his Discourse upon a Subject, is
not such as we would have it to be. Yet the Mistake may really be in our
selves, and may arise from our having not exactly enough considered the Matter,
when we impute Neglect* or Remisness in Study to him whose Sentiments are
opposite to ours. In such a Case, People are not to be concluded by the
Opinions of those who are for the one side, or the other, but ought to descend
into, and impartially weigh the Merits of the Cause.

FINIS.

