THE HISTORY OF THE DESERTION.

LICENSED

April 10. 1689. James Fraser.

THE HISTORY OF THE DESERTION, OR An Account of all the Public Affairs IN
ENGLAND, From the beginning of September 1688. to the Twelfth of February
following.

WITH AN ANSWER To a Piece called The DESERTION Discussed: In a LETTER to a
Country Gentleman.

By a Person of Quality.

Provida severitate cavisti, ne fundata legibus Civit as, eversa legibus
videretur. C. Plin. Pan. Trajan. Cap. XXXIV. London, Printed for Ric Chiswell
at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

TO THE READER.
I Am persuaded, that those of the Church of England, who now seem discontented
at the Present State of Affairs in England, are mistaken in the matter of Fact;
and that they do imagine the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this Nation might
have been secured to us, and our Posterity, by other, and those more legal
Methods.

Now if this Conceit of theirs were true, their Dissatisfaction would not be
wholly unreasonable; but to me, who have considered every Step of this Great
Revolution with the utmost Attention of Mind, it seems altogether false and
groundless.

But whether they or I are mistaken, it is absolutely necessary that the matter
of Fact should be truly and fairly stated; which cannot be done, but by
representing in one View all the Papers which passed on both sides, with the
Actions which happened, the present State of Affairs at home and abroad, when the
Revolution began, and the temper of Men's Minds in all the Occurrences as they
happened: And this I have endeavored to do with all the Brevity, Perspicuity,
and Fidelity which was possible.

As I am the first that have attempted it, so it is not impossible there may be
some Mistakes, Omissions, or Errors; but there is not one wilful Error, and I
will rectify any involuntary Stumble I may have made, upon the first Advice of
it.

To have fully cleared this Question, it was perhaps necessary that I should
have begun with the Year 1600. and the Restitution of Charles the Second, or at
least at his Death; but this would have taken too much time to have presently
gone about it; and if I find this is well received, and encouraged, I will in a
convenient time do it; especially if I may have the liberty of the
Council-Book, and the Paper-Office, and such other helps as are necessary.

And in the mean time, I conceive this short Abstract of the Public Printed
Papers, is sufficient to convince any Man, that the Popish Party were resolved
we should be Rebels, (as they now account us) or Slaves; and His late Majesty
was so far prevailed upon by them, that he chose rather to desert his Throne,
than to lose all the Possibilities of Establishing an absolute Sovereignty over
the Nation, and Popery with it.

I suppose it is not pretended in England, His late Majesty forfeited his Right
to Govern by his Misgovernment; but that the sense of it prevailed upon him
rather to throw up the Government, than to concur with an English
Free-Parliament in all that was needful to re-establish our Laws, Liberties and
Religion; and this is a proper legal Abdication, as it is distinguished from a
Voluntary Resignation on the one hand, and a Violent Deposition on the other.

He was bound to govern us according to Law, and we were not bound to submit to
any other than a legal Government; but be would not do the one, and saw he
could not force us to submit to the other, and therefore deliberately
relinquished the Throne, and withdrew his Person and Seals, dissolving (as much
as he could) the whole Frame of our Government.

The Reader may observe, though he give Reasons why he withdrew the second time,
he never gave any why he went away at first; nor can any be assigned (as I
verily believe) but that which I have expressed.

Now if this be the true state of this great Affair, then we were legally
discharged of our Allegiance to James the Second, the Eleventh of December last
past; and his Return afterward, which was forced and involuntary, could have
no Influence upon us; and if he were now to be restored again, he must be
re-crowned and sworn de novo, as Henry the Sixth was after he was restored by
the Earl of Warwick.

There may possibly be some few Men so superlatively Loyal, that rather than
they would not still be under the Government of James the Second, they would
throw up all the English Liberties and Privileges, and submit to an absolute
and unlimited Sovereignty, either out of Scruple of Conscience, Vanity, or
Humor; now to these I have nothing to say, but that if they are willing to be
Slaves, they may; but it is unreasonable that they should enslave all the rest
of the Nation too; and as the Number is not great, so I am persuaded (if
Patience and gentle Methods are used) these Men will in a short time be
convinced by their own Interest, and acquiesce at least, if they do not
heartily join with the rest in the Defense of the present Government.

As to the small Piece which I have answered, I cannot but admire at the
Encomiums have been given it; I hope there is nothing in it worth regarding,
which I have not fairly answered; at least I am sure it is very answerable, it
being wholly founded on Mistakes, either as to the matter of Fact, or the Laws
of England: But be this as it will, I submit to it the Reader to judge between
us.

April 6th. 1689.
THE HISTORY OF THE DESERTION, AND AN ANSWER to a DISCOURSE, Entitled, The
Desertion discussed: In a Letter to a Country Gentleman.
THE late Transactions of that part of our Nation, which have espoused the
Interests and Principles of the Church of Rome, are so full of Wonder, that I
persuade my self, Posterity will look upon the Story of the last ten years, as
a mere Romance; and will very hardly believe so small a Party durst attempt, or
so great a Body would ever so long suffer what we have born with a Stoical
Patience, I had almost said Insensibility. But then this Assurance was not
owing either to their Courage, or their Cunning, but a strong Persuasion, that
how ill soever they used us of the Church of England, the Doctrine of
Non-resistance would keep us in awe; and if the other part of the Protestants
should offer to rescue the Nation out of their Claws, our Zeal for the
Monarchy, and the Royal Family would have the same effect it had in the
Monmouth Invasion, and end in the Ruin of them.

However, to prevent the worst, they resolved to keep up a numerous Army to
suppress betimes any Party that might stir in the Nation; and to fix them the
more to their Interest, they not only exempted the Soldiers from the Civil
Jurisdiction, but suffered them to outrage and injure whom they they pleased
almost without restraint.

To divide us yet more, they procured a Toleration for the Dissenters, and made
such fulsom Applications to them, and they again returned the Complement in
such Rhetorical Addresses, that it was verily thought the Church of England
Party would very easily have been given up for a Sacrifice to the kind,
sincere, well-meaning Catholics.

But our Dissenters were not so easily wheedled into a forgetfulness of what
they had so lately suffered; and although they gave the Fathers many good words,
and fair Promises, yet when they had opportunity, they gave such bold hints of
their Resolution to defeat the Expectations of these Gentlemen, that I protest
I wondered at nothing more than to see them so sar infatuated, as to believe
they should ever reap any Advantage from our Non-cons.

They were however engaged, and therefore they must go on, be the Event what it
would; and finding it would be a work of time; and that it was not possible
James II. should live to see it effected, and that after his death the
Succession of the then Princess of Orange would put an end to all this Babel of
Confusion they had with so much Labor and Hazard erected. They resolved in the
next place to take care for a Catholic Successor to finish this great Work.
And in truth it was a Project worthy of such bold Undertakers, if they could
have as easily deluded the English Nation, as they frequently do those who have
a mighty fondness for Miracles, and had rather be deceived than find out the
Legerdemains of the Priesthood: But then this was so highly improbable, that I
wonder they ever entered into it; and that none of the Fathers have yet told us,
that we ought not to think it possible for them to be such Fools as to attempt
to impose in a matter of that Consequence upon so learned, so curious, so
distrustful and fierce a Nation as this of England is: I assure them this
Argument would have more force than all the Depositions they have printed in
that case, and engage many to espouse their Quarrel out of pure Piquantry.

How far they might yet have gone, and what would in the end have been the
consequence of this formal Plot upon our Lives, Liberties, and Religion, is
known to none but God: They looked upon the Protestant or British Interest in
Ireland, as wholly at their Mercy: Scotland was in such a condition, that
nothing could be begun there, which would not termiin the ruin of the
Undertakers: And England was so divided in Interest and Religion, that they
expected a considerable Body of the Protestants would lend them their
assistance to ruin the rest, and therefore called them their Scaffolds.
France, the most Potent of our Neighbors, was apparently engaged in the same
Design; Denmark and Sweden engaged against each other in the Quarrel of the
Duke of Holstein. The Protestant Princes in Germany were either awed by the
French, or divided between the Northern Crowns: Spain was weak, and unable to
defend it self, and too Catholic at last to espouse heartily the Interests of
a Protestant Nation against a Roman Catholic Prince; so that they had nothing
to fear but the States of Holland, and the Prince of Orange: And they looked
upon the States as a knot of Merchants, more intent upon their Trade, than
concerned for the Fate of England; and yet if they should attempt any thing,
England and France by Sea and Land would easily reduce them into the same state
they were in in the year 1672.

Now supposing the French King who is so zealous a Roman Catholic, had not so
vigorously (and as far as I can see) so impolitickly carried on the
Controversy with the Pope about the Franchises of his Ambassador at Rome; and
that he had had the patience to suffer the Emperor to recover what his
Ancestors had lost to the Turks, and left the Controversies between the Elector
Palatine (who is a Roman Catholic) and the Duchess of Orleans, to the
determination of the Pope, what had France lost in all this? And who then could
have made one step to the Recovery of England? I know very well it is said, the
Emperor would certainly begin a War with France so soon as ever he had ended
this with the Turks to his mind: And in truth he had just reason so to do. But
it is more probable he would have spent first some years in fortifying,
peopling, and settling his new Conquests to secure himself on that side against
his most formidable Neighbor, rather than that he would presently transfer his
Arms and victorious Armies from the East to the West, and pass so suddenly from
one long and ruinous War to another of no less hazard and expense. And yet if
he had done so, the Princes of the Empire would never so heartily and generally
have joined with him against France, if he had been the Aggressor, how just
soever his cause had been, as it might easily have been foreseen they would,
when they were first attacked, and as it were forced to fly to the Emperor for
his Protection. So that it was apparently the Interest of France to have sat
still, and to have taken the first opportunity had offered it self to have
enslaved the first of his Neighbors that had called him to their assistance;
and our English Jesuits did not doubt but that he would.

In the Interim it was well for England, that the French King acted as he did;
for to him, in a great measure, our Delivery is owing (though he never intended
it) his Breach with the Pope and the Empire, having not only given the Dutch a
pretense to arm by Sea and Land, and so blinded the Eyes of our English Court,
that they never saw, nor would believe themselves concerned in it, till it was
too late to help it: But it also united not only all the Protestant, but all
the Catholic Princes too (except France) in the Project of delivering us for
their own security, that we might be in a condition to unite with them again
for the preservation of Europe, from following the triumphant Chariot of France
in Chains.

His late Majesty seems to have been the only Prince in Christendom, who made
it his great, and almost only design to advance the Interests of the Church of
Rome, without, and against his own temporal Interest. The rest of the Princes
and their Council look in the first place to their own Concerns at home and
abroad, and make the Affairs of Religion subservient to their other Designs.
The Pope is not so fond of his old Mumpsimus, or of the Decrees of the Council
of Trent it self, as to suffer France to conquer Italy, Spain, or Germany, no
nor England, nor Holland neither, how much soever it might seem to facilitate
their Reduction to the Sea of Rome; because he knows very well the first Prince
that shall make himself the Universal Monarch of Europe, or gain such a power
over the rest, as is not to be disputed or opposed, will certainly put an end
to the Sovereignty, Wealth, Grandeur, and Independency of the Court of Rome;
and the Pope will become as subject to him (notwithstanding his Infallibility)
as the Mufty is to the Grand Signior, who never makes any Scruple to depose, or
bow-string the Infallible Gentleman whenever he crosses his Designs, and to
set up another in his stead, whose Infallibility will be more complaisant. The
Emperor of Germany is as religious and as zealous a Prince for the Roman
Catholic Religion as ever sprung out of that Family: But he has no mind, after
all, to lose his Life, his Empire, and his Liberty; he had rather there should
be some Heretics in Germany, than to suffer the French King to send his
Apostolic Dragoons to convert them, and drive him into Exile. The King of
Spain values the poor dispeopl'd share he has yet left him in Europe, too well
to put it into the Hands of the French, in order to the reducing the Northern
Heretics to the Sea of Rome. No wonder then that these Princes should all
unite with his now Majesty of England, against a Prince of their own Religion,
when they saw he had embraced a design which would certainly end in his and all
their Ruins, and which would raise France to such an height of Power, as could
never be retrieved.

This was very near the state of Affairs at home and abroad, when Monsieur the
Comte d' Avaux, the French King's Ambassador N. S.
at the Hague the 9th. of September last published this Memorial, which first
opened the Eyes of our small Statesmen here in England.

My Lords,
October 30. 1688.
THe sincere desire the King my Master has to maintain the Tranquillity of
Europe, will not suffer his Majesty to see the great Preparations for War, both
by Sea and Land, made by your Lordships, without taking the measures that
Prudence (the continual Companion of all his Actions) inspires him with, to
prevent the Mischiefs these Warlike Preparations will certainly draw after
them.

And although the King persuaded of the Wisdom of your Councils, would not
imagine that a Free state should so easily resolve to take up Arms, and to
kindle a War, which in the present Juncture cannot but be fatal to all
Christendom: Nevertheless his Majesty cannot believe your Lordships would
engage your selves in so great Expenses both at home and abroad, to entertain
in pay so many Foreign Troops, to put to Sea so numerous a Fleet so late in the
year, and to prepare so great Magazines, if you had not a design formed
answerble to the greatness of these Preparations.

All these Circumstances, and many others that I may not here produce, persuade
the King, my Master, with reason, that this Arming threatens England: Wherefore
his Majesty has commanded me to declare to you on his part, That the Bands of
Friendship and Alliance between him and the King of Great Britain, will oblige
him not only to assist him, but also to look on the first act of Hostility that
shall be committed by your Troops or your Fleet, against his Majesty of Great
Britain, as a manifest Rupture of the Peace, and a Breach with his Crown.

I leave to your Lordships Prudence to reflect on the Consequences that such
Enterprises may have, his Majesty not having ordered me to make you this
Declaration on his Part, without his sincere Intention to prevent (as I have
already had the Honor to tell you) all that may trouble the Peace of Europe.

Given at the Hague the 9th. of September, 1688.

England all things were then in the utmost degree of Disorder and Security;
the Army committing the utmost degree of Insolence in all places where they
were quartered, and the People making frequent and loud Complaints: Whereupon
his late Majesty issued out again an old Order which had been frequently, and
to no good purpose published before, commanding that no Soldier should be
lodged in any private House, without the free and voluntary Consent of the
Owner; and that all Houses should be deemed private Houses except
Victualling-Houses, and Houses of public Entertainment, or such as have
License to sell Wine or any other Liquor, etc. Under this pretense they brought
in all Bakers, Cooks, etc. This Order bears date the 2d. of September at
Windsor.

Though the English Army were become thus intolerable to the Nation, and there
was so great a Storm gathering in Holland, yet so stupid were our Drivers, that
nothing would serve our then Masters, but the filling the Army with Irish men,
who were likely to be more disorderly, and more hated; to that end Major
Slingsby, Lieutenant Governor of Portsmouth, under his Grace the Duke of
Berwick, had ordered the Regiment there quartered, to take in about thirty
Irish Gentlemen, which was opposed by John Beaumont, Lieutenant Coll. Thomas
Pastor, Simon Park, Thomas Orme, William Cook, and John Port, Officers and
Commanders in that Regiment, which they had raised at their own Costs and
Charges, during the Monmouth Invasion. The first of these made this Speech by
their appointment, and in all their names to the Duke of Berwick.

Sir,
I am desired by these Gentlemen (with whose Sense I concur) to inform your
Grace, that we do not think it consistent with our Honors to have Foreigners
imposed upon us, without being complained of, that our Companies were weak, or
Orders to recruit them, not doubting but if such Orders had been given us, We
that first in very ill times raised them Hundreds, could easily now have made
them according to the Kings Complement: We humbly Petition we may have leave to
fill up our Companies with such men of our Nation we may judge most suitable
for the Kings Service, and to support our Honors; or that we may be permitted,
with all imaganable Duty and Respect, to lay down our Commissions.


The Account of this Opposition being forthwith sent to Windsor, where the
Court then was, the Rage and Fury against these rebellious, heretical Officers,
was unspeakable; and in truth nothing could be more contrary to their Designs,
which was by degrees to fill up the English Army with Irish and Roman
Catholics, because they found it was not possible to do it at once, as they
had done in Ireland: And now nothing would serve them but the hanging the six
honest Gentlmen by Martial Law; and accordingly a Party of Horse were ordered
to go down to Portsmouth to bring them up in custody, and a Court Martial was
ordered to proceed against them; and if the Memorial of the French Ambassador
had not ^ome in that very Morning to show them their danger, ^n all probability
they had been so treated; but upon this, the ^0th. of September they were only
casheer'd, after they had on the Road been treated with great Severity and
Indignity: However, this was one of those things which contributed very much to
what followed.

The 20th. of September, the King being then returned with the Court to
Whitehall, published this Declaration.

HAving already signified Our pleasure to call a Parliament to meet at Our City
of Westminster in November next, and Writs of Summon being issued accordingly,
lest those whose Right it is to choose Members of Parliament, should be under
any Prejudices and Mistakes through the Artifices of disaffected Persons; We
think fit to declare, That it is Our Royal Purpose to endeavor a legal
Establishment of an Universal Liberty of Conscience for all Our Subjects; it is
also our Resolution inviolably to preserve the Church of England by such a
Confirmation of the several Acts of Uniformity, that they shall never be
altered by any other ways than by repealing the several Clauses which inflict
Penalties upon Persons not promoted, or to be promoted to any Ecclesiastical
Benefices or Promotions within the meaning of the said Acts, for using and
exercising their Religion contrary to the Tenor and Purport of the said Acts of
Uniformity. And for the further securing not only the Church of England, but
the Protestant Religion in general, We are willing the Roman Catholics shall
remain incapable to be Members of the House of Commons; whereby those Fears and
Apprehensions will be removed, which many persons have had, That the
Legislative Authority would be engrossed by them, and turned against
Protestants.

We do likewise assure all our loving Subjects, that We shall be ready to do
every thing else for their safety and advantage, that becomes a King, who will
always take care of his People; and if they desire the happiness of their
Country, We exhort them to lay by all Animosities, and dispose themselves to
think of such Persons to represent them in Parliament, whose Abilities and
Temper render them fit for so great and good a Work.

And for the preventing any Disorders, Irregularities, or undue Proceedings
whatsoever that may happen either before, or at the time of Election of Members
for the ensuing Parliament, We do hereby strictly require and command all
Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other Officers whatsoever, to whom the
execution of any Writ, Summons, Warrant, or Precept for, or concerning the
choice of Members for the ensuing Parliament shall belong, That they cause such
Writ, Summons, Warrant, or Precept to be duly published and executed according
to the Tenor thereof: And the Members that shall be chosen, to be fairly
returned according to the Merits of the Choice.

The Nation was by this time become so distrustful of all the Proceedings of
the Court, that this Declaration was thought absolutely necessary to assure
them a Parliament should be holden, and yet after all it was little believed.
The Preparations in Holland had made it necessary to wheedle the Church of
England-men, and therefore they were told only the Penalties of the Acts of
Uniformity should be repealed, that an Universal Liberty of Conscience might be
established: And the Roman Catholics not being likely to be chosen for Members
of the lower House in this Parliament, they were contented to continue
incapable of being chosen in there, intimating, they intended however to sit in
the House of Lords.

The 26th of September there was an Order made to authorize and empower the
Lords Lieutenants (many of which were Roman Catholics, or unqualified persons)
of the several Counties, to grant Deputations to such Gentlemen as had been
lately removed from being Deputy Lieutenants; and his Majesty also gave
directions to the Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor of England, to put into
the Commission of the Peace such Gentlemen as had been lately laid aside, and
shall be recommended by the said Lords-Lieutenants.

In the Interim certain Intelligence being brought, that the Preparations in
Holland were designed against England: The 24th of September were summoned the
Bishop of London, Winchester, Ely, Chichester, Rochester and Bristol, and the
Archbishop of Canterbury; and the 28th of September. they appeared at Whitehall,
and there waited accordingly that day upon the King in a Body; Winchester, Ely,
Chichester, Rochester, Bath and Wells, and Peterborough; but London and Bristol
came not then to Town; and the Archbishop was sick, and came alone the next
day. There passed nothing then but general Expressions of his Favor, and
Promises of Duty on the Bishops part. Whereupon they all desired the Archbishop
to beg a second-Admission, which was appointed on Tuesday the 2d. of October,
but was put off till the next day.

The 28th of September his Majesty put out this following Declaration.

WE have received undoubted Advice, That a great and sudden invasion from
Holland with an armed Force of Foreigners and Strangers, will speedily be made
in an hostile manner upon this Our Kingdom; and although some false Pretenses
relating to Liberty, Property and Religion, contrived or worded with Art and
Subtilty, may be given out (as shall be thought useful upon such an Attempt) it
is manifest however (considering the great Preparations that are making) that
no less matter by this Invasion is proposed, than an absolute Conquest of these
Our Kingdoms, and the utter subduing and subjecting Us, and all Our People, to
a foreign Power, which is promoted (as We understand, although it may seem almost
incredible) by some of Our Subjects, being persons of wicked and restless
Spirits, implacable Malice, and desperate Designs, who having no sense of
former intestine Distractions, the Memory and Misery whereof should endear, and
put a value upon that Peace and Happiness which has long been enjoyed; nor
being moved by Our reiterated Acts of Grace and Mercy, wherein we have studied
and delighted to abound toward all Our Subjects, and even toward those who
were once avowed and open Enemies, and who do again endeavor to imbroil this
Kingdom in Blood and Ruin to gratify their own Ambition and Malice, proposing
to themselves a Prey and Booty in such a public Confusion.


We cannot omit to make it known, that although We had notice some time since,
that a foreign force was preparing against Us, yet We have always declined any
foreign Succors, but rather have chosen (next under God) to rely upon the true
and ancient Courage, Faith and Allegiance of our own People, with whom we have
often ventured Our life for the honor of this Nation, and in whose defense
against all Enemies We are firmly resolved to live and die: And therefore We
solemnly conjure Our Subjects to lay aside all manner of Animosities,
Jealousies and Prejudices, and heartily and cheerfully to unite together in the
defense of Us and their native Country, which thing alone will (under God)
defeat and frustrate the principal Hope and Design of Our Enemies, who expect
to find Our People divided, and by publishing perhaps some plausible Reasons of
their coming hither, as the specious, though false pretenses of maintaining the
Protestant Religion, or asserting the Liberties and Properties of Our People,
do hope thereby to conquer this great and renowned Kingdom: But albeit the
design has been carried on with all imaginable Secrecy and Endeavor to
surprise and deceive Us, We have not been wanting on our part, to make such
Provisions as did become Us, and by Gods Blessing, We make no doubt of being
found in so good a Posture, that Our Enemies may have cause to repent such
their rash and unjust Attempt.


We did intend (as we lately declared) to have met our Parliament in November
next, and the Writs are issued forth accordingly, proposing to Our selves,
amongst other things, that We might be able to quiet the minds of all Our
People in matters of Religion, pursuant to the several Declarations We have
published to that effect; but in regard of this strange and unreasonable
Attempt from our Neighboring Country (without any manner of Provocation)
designed to divert Our said Gracious Purposes, We find it necessary to recall
Our said Writs, which We do hereby recall accordingly, commanding and requiring
Our loving Subjects to take notice thereof, and to surcease all further
proceedings thereon. And forasmuch as the approaching Danger which now is at
hand, will require a great and vigorous Defense, We do hereby strictly charge
and command all Our loving Subjects both by Sea and Land (whose ready
Concurrence, Valor and Courage, as true Englishmen, We no way doubt in a just
cause) to be prepared to defend their Country. And We do hereby require and
command all Lords-Lieutenants, and Deputy Lieutenants, to use their best and
utmost endeavors to resist, repel, and suppress Our Enemies who come with such
Confidence and great Preparations to invade and conquer these Our Kingdoms. And
lastly, We do most expressly and strictly enjoin and prohibit all and every Our
Subjects of what degree or condition soever, from giving any manner of Aid,
Assistance, Countenance or Succor, or from having or holding any Correspondence
with these Our Enemies, or any of their Accomplices, upon pain of High Treason,
and being prosecuted and proceeded against with the utmost severity.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 28 of September. 1688.
The Reader may be pleased to observe, that foreign Forces, which must be
French, were declined; which implies they were proffered, and perhaps it had
been never the worse for them, if the Irish, which considering their Religion
and temper toward the English, are as much Foreigners as the French, hadbeen
declined too; for we shall see they did him much Mischief, and little or no
Service. 2. That the meeting of the Parliament was discharged before ever there
was any mention of restoring the Charters of the Corporations.

September the 30. his Grace the Duke of Newcastle, the Earl of Lindsey, the
Earl of Derby, and the Lord Germyns, and others of the Nobility were said to
have offered their Service to his Majesty, and several of them had Commissions
sent to them to raise men in their Countries. None of these, and very few other
of the Nobility or Gentry coming up, but only sending Letters, which were now
thought wonderful Obligations, so dreadful was the thought of the Invasion at
Court, and so great the discontent of the whole Body of the Nation for the late
Transactions.

Tuesday the 2d. of October the King declared publicly in Council, that he
would restore the Charter of the City of London; so that the next day the
Bishops turned that Request into Thanks, for having prevented their Petition.

The Ministers by this time became so sensible of their Danger, and of the
temper of the Nation, that the 2d. day of October they procured a General
Pardon, in the beginning of which are these words; It has always been our
earnest Desire since Our Accession to the Crown, that all Our People should
live at ease, and in full enjoyment of Peace and Happiness under Our
Government, and nothing can be more agreeable unto Us, than that Offenders
should be reformed by Acts of Mercy extended toward them, rather than
Punishment; Our open Enemies having upon Repentance found Our Favor; and
although besides Our particular Pardons which have been granted to many Persons,
it be not long since We issued forth Our Royal Proclamation of General Pardon
to all our People; yet forasmuch as they who live most peaceably, do often fall
within the reach of some of Our Laws, etc. Besides the usual Exceptions, were
excepted all Treasons committed or done in the parts beyond the Seas, or any
other place out of this our Realm, and by name Robert Parsons, Edward Matthews,
Samuel Venner, Andrew Fletcher, Colonel John Rumsey, Major: John Mauly, Isaac
Manley, Francis Charleton, Fsque John Wildman, Esquire Titus Oats, Robert Ferguson,
Gilbert Burnet, Sir Robert Peyton, Laurence Braddon, Samuel Johnson Clerk,
Thomas Tripping, Esquire and Sir Rowland Guynne.

The Pardon here hinted at, came out some few days before this; and in that all
Corporations and Bodies Politics were excepted, which looked so like a design
against the Bishops, Deans and Colleges, that it was taken notice of; and this
new Pardon sent after the former to show the World the Ministers were only a
little too intent upon their own security (as they had most need of this
Pardon) that they never thought of the other.

On Wednesday, October the 3d. the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishops of
London, Winchester, Asaph, Ely, Chichester, Rochester, Bath and Wells, and
Peterborough, all in a Body waited upon the King, when the Archbishop spoke
thus to him.

May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
WHen I had lately the Honor to wait upon you, you were pleased briefly to
acquaint me with what had passed two days before between your Majesty and these
my Reverend Brethren: by which, and by the Account which they themselves gave
me, I perceived, that in truth, there passed nothing, but in very general Terms
and Expressions of your Majesty's gracious and favorable Inclinations to the
Church of England, and of our reciprocal Duty and Loyalty to your Majesty: The
Bishop of Bath and Wells.
Both which were sufficiently understoodand declared before; and (as one of my
Brethren then told you) would have been in the same state, if the Bishops had
not stirred one foot out of their Diocesses. Sir, I found it grieved my Lords
the Bishops to have come so far, and to have done so little; and I am assured
they came then prepared to have given your Majesty some more particular
Instances of their Duty and Zeal for your Service, had they not apprehended
from some words which fell from your Majesty, That you were not then at leisure
to receive them. It was for this Reason that I then besought your Majesty to
command us once more to attend you all together, which your Majesty was pleased
graciously to allow and encourage. We therefore are here now before you, with
all Humility, to beg your Permission, that we may suggest to your Majesty such
Advices as we think proper at this Season, and conducing to your Service, and
so leave them to your Princely Consideration. Which the King being graciously
pleased to permit, the Archbishop proceeded as follows.

I. Our first humble Advice is, That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to
put the Management of your Government, in the several Counties, into the Hands
of such of the Nobility and Gentry there, as are legally qualified for it.

II. That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to annul your Commission for
Ecclesiastical Affairs; and that no such Court as that Commission sets up, may
be erected for the future.

III. That your Majesty will graciously be pleased, That no Dispensation may be
granted or continued, by Virtue whereof, any person not duly qualified by Law,
has been, or may be put into any Place, Office, or Preferment in Church or
State, or in the Universities, or continued in the same, especially such as
have Cure of Souls annexed to them; and in particular, that you will be
graciously pleased to restore the President and Fellows of St. Mary Magdalen
College in Oxford.

IV. That your Majesty will graciously be pleased to set aside all Licenses or
Faculties already granted; by which any persons of the Romish Communion may
pretend to be enabled to teach Public Schools; and that no such be granted for
the future.

V. That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to desist from the Exercise of
such a Dispensing Power, as has of late been used; and to permit that Point to
be freely and calmly debated and argued, and finally settled in Parliament.

VI. That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to inhibit the four Foreign
Bishops, who style themselves Vicars Apostolical, from further invading the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction which is by Law vested in the Bishops of this
Church.

VII. That your Majesty will be pleased graciously to fill the vacant
Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical Promotions within your Gift, both in
England and Ireland, with men of Learning and Piety; and in particular (which I
must own to be my peculiar boldness, for it is done without the privity of my
Brethren) That you will be graciously pleased forthwith to fill the
Archiepiscopal Chair of York (which has so long stood empty, and upon which a
whole Province depends) with some very worthy Person: For which (pardon me,
Sir, if I am bold to say) you have now here before you a very fair Choice.

VIII. That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to supersede all further
Prosecution of Quo Warranto's against Corporations, and to restore to them
their ancient Charters, Privileges, and Franchises, as we hear God has put
into your Majesty's Heart to do for the City of London, which we intended to
have made otherwise one of our principal Requests.

IX. That if it so please your Majesty, Writs may be issued out with convenient
speed, for the calling of a free and regular Parliament, in which the Church of
England may be secured according to the Acts of Uniformity; Provision may be
made for a due Liberty of Conscience, and for securing the Liberties and
Properties of all your Subjects; and a mutual Confidence and good Understanding
may be established between your Majesty and all your People.

X. Above all, That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to permit your
Bishops to offer you such Motives and Arguments as (we trust) may, by God's
Grace, be effectual to persuade your Majecty to return to the Communion of the
Church of England, into whose most holy Catholic Faith you were baptized, and
in which you were educated, and to which it is our daily earnest Prayer to God,
that you may be reunited.

These, Sir, are the humble Advices, which out of Conscience of the Duty we owe
to God, to your Majesty, and to our Country, we think fit at this time to offer
to your Majesty, as suitable to the present State of your Affairs, and most
conducing to your Service; and so to leave them to your Princely Consideration.
And we heartily beseech Almighty God, in whose hand the Hearts of all Kings
are, so to dispose and govern yours, that in all your Thoughts, Words and
Works, you may ever seek his Honor and Glory, and study to preserve the People
committed to your Charge, in Wealth, Peace and Godliness, to your own both
temporal and eternal Happiness. Amen.

We do heartily concur H. London, P. Winchester. W. Asaph. W. Cant. Fran. Ely.
Jo. Cicestr. Tho. Roffen. Tho. Bath and Wells. Tho. Petriburg.



We may guess at the Rages the Priests were in at these Advices, by the
resentment they Dutch Design Anatomized, p. 29. The Bishops Proposals are the
contrivance of the King's Enemies, framed of purpose to amuse the people, as if
till they be granted, we are not safe.
expressed afterward against these innocent and good Proposals, when their
Affairs were in a much worse state than now they were. The Bishop of Rochester
observes, that they were drawn at Lambeth on M^nday, the first of October, and
presented the third; and the Prince of Orange's Declaration was signed in
Holland the tenth, New Style, which was the first of our Month, and the matter
of them is very near the same, except one or two particulars, too high for
Subjects to meddle with; and all this at a time when the King thought of
nothing but Victory, when, in all probability, he was the strongest both at Sea
and Land, when as yet there was no appearance of such a Prodigious alienation
of his Subjects Affections; when at least his Army was thought to be still firm
to him, and when the very Winds and Seas seemed hitherto as much on his side as
they all afterward turned against him.

October the 5th, two days after the Bishops had made the Ten famous Proposals
above-recited, the King declared in Council, That in pursuance of his
Resolution and Intentions to protect the Church of England, and that all
Suspicions and Jealousies to the contrary may be removed, he had thought fit to
dissolve the Commission for Causes Ecclesiastical, etc. and accordingly did
give Directions to the Lord Chancellor of England to cause the same to be
forthwith done. Now this was only half what was asked; it not being declared
illegal, nor any Promise made, so soon as ever the times would serve, it should
not be renewed: And we shall see the Jesuits were champing on it bye and bye.

The 6th. of October the King was also graciously pleased to restore to the
City of London all their ancient Franchises and Privileges, as fully as they
enjoyed them before the late Judgment upon the Quo Warranto; and the Lord
Chancellor did them the honor to bring down the Instrument of Restitution and
Confirmation, under the Great Seal of England. And Sir John Chapman was thereby
constituted Lord Mayor till the time of Election, and was accordingly sworn in
the Guild Hall with the usual Solemnity.

The same day the Aldermen (now in being) that were at the time of the said
Judgment took their former Places, and the Vacancies were to be supplied by the
Election of the Citizens, according to the Ancient Custom of the City.

And an Address of Thanks was forthwith voted and signed for the Favor granted
to them.

October the 10th. his Majesty having received several Complaints of great
Abuses committed in the late Regulations of the Corporations, he thereupon in
Council thought fit to authorize and require the Lords Lieutenants of the
several Counties to inform themselves of all such Abuses and Irregularities,
within their Lieutenancies, and to make forthwith Report thereof to his
Majesty, together with what they conceive fit to be done for the redressing of
the same: Whereupon he would give such further Orders as should be requisite.
But pressing News coming over from time to time of the great Preparations in
Holland, these slow Methods soon appeared unsafe, and not fit to be relied
upon; and therefore it became necessary to throw up at once this great and
beloved Advantage, now it was utterly impossible to keep it any longer. By all
which we may observe, that all was pure Force and Fear; and it will appear more
fully in what is to follow.

The 11th. of October there was published a Form of Prayers to be used in all
Cathedral, Collegiate, and Parochial Churches and Chapels, within this
Kingdom, during the time of Public Apprehensions from the Danger of Invasion,
and to be added to the daily Office both Morning and Evening, immediately after
the Prayers for the King and the Royal Family. The first of these was a Prayer
for Repentance; the second, for the King.

O Almighty God, the blessed and only Potentate, we affer up our humble
Supplications and Prayers to thy Divine Goodness, beseeching thee in this time
of Danger to save and protect our most gracious King: Give thy holy Angels
charge over him; preserve his Royal Person in Health and Safety; inspire him
with Wisdom and Justice in all his Counsels; Prosper all his Undertakings for
thy Honor and Service with good Suceess; Fill his Princely Heart with a
Fatherly Care of all his People; and give all his Subjects Grace always to bear
Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty; that both King and People joining
together to promote thy Glory, and conscientiously discharging their Duties in
their several Stations, may all give thee Thanks and Praise for thy most mighty
Protection, and for all other thy great Mercies vouchsafed to us, through Jesus
Christ thy Son our Savior. Amen. The third Prayer for Peace and Unity.

O Lord God, our only Hope in time of need; save and deliver us, we humbly
beseech thee, from all those Dangers that threaten us; Give Peace in our Days,
O Lord, if it be thy Will, and prevent the Effusion of Christian Blood in our
Land: Reconcile all our Dissentions, and heal all our Breaches: Preserve that
holy Religion we profess, together with our Laws and Ancient Government; and
unite us all in unfeigned and universal Charity one toward another, and in one
and the same holy Worship and Communion; that with one Heart and one Mouth we
may glorify thy holy Name, and show forth thy Praise from Generation to
Generation: And this we beg for the sake of Jesus thy beloved, in whom thou art
well pleased; to whom, with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory
now and evermore. Amen. I am fully persuaded, these Prayers contributed very
considerably to the late Revolution, and taught Men they were no more bound to
promote any of the late King's Undertakings with their Swords, than with their
Prayers, but what tended to the Honor and Service of God: And the very
supplicating God to Preserve our Holy Religion, together with our Laws and
Ancient Government, necessarily put Men in mind that they had been endangered;
and by whom, was as well known; and it seemed Nonsense and Hypocrisy to pray
to God to preserve these, and in the mean time to aid and assist the Enemies of
both to destroy and ruin them.

October the 17th. there was a Proclamation put out for Restoring Corporations
to their Ancient Charters, Liberties, Rights, and Franchises, as follows.

Whereas We are informed, That several Deeds of Surrender, which have been
lately made by several Corporations and Bodies Corporate, of and in Our Cities
and Towns within Our Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, of their
Charters, Franchises, and Privileges, are not yet Recorded or Enrolled: And
that upon the Proceedings and Rules for Judgment, which have lately been had
upon the Quo Warranto's, Judgments are not yet entered upon Record: Whereupon,
notwithstanding New Charters have been granted in the Reign of Our late dear
Brother, and in Our Reign; which said Deeds (being not Enrolled nor Recorded)
do not amount unto, or in Law make any Surrender of the Charters, Franchises,
or Liberties therein mentioned: And such of the said Corporations or Bodies
Politic against which Rules for Judgment have been made in the Lifetime of
Our late dear Brother, or since, in Our Court of King's Bench (but no Judgments
entered upon Record) are not Discorporate or Dissolved, and that it is in Our
Power to leave such Corporations in the same State and Condition they were in,
and to discharge all further Proceedings and Effects that may be of such Rules
for Judgments, and Deeds of Surrender: WE do hereby publish and declare, That
upon due Search and Examination made, We have satisfaction, that the Deeds of
Surrender made by the Corporations and Bodies Politic of the said Cities and
Towns, except the Corporations following (that is to say) Thetford, Nottingham,
Bridgwater, Ludlow, Bewdley, Beverley, Teuksbury, Exeter, Doncaster,
Colchester, Winchester, Launceston, Lisderd, Plimpton, Tregony, Plymouth,
Dunwich, St. Ives, Fowy, East-Looe, Camelford, West-Looe, Tintegal, Penryn,
Truro, Bodmyn, Haldleigh, Lestwithell and Saltash, are not enrolled or recorded
in any of our Courts: And though Rules for Judgments have passed upon
Informations in Nature of a Quo Warranto, against the Corporations and Bodies
Politic of several Cities and Towns in our said Kingdom and Dominion, yet no
Judgments have been or are entered upon Record upon any such Informations,
except against the City of London, Chester, Calne, St. Ives, Pool, York,
Thaxted, Llanghour, and Malmesbury. And We of Our mere Grace and Favor being
resolved to restore and put all our Cities, Towns, and Buroughs in England and
Wales, and also Our Town of Berwick upon Tweed, into the same State and
Condition they were and was in Our late dear Brothers Reign, before any Deed of
Surrender was made of their Charters or Franchises, or Proceedings against
them, or the Corporations or Bodies Politic in or of the said Cities, Towns,
or Buroughs, upon any Quo Warranto, or Information in nature of a Quo
Warranto, had.

We do therefore hereby publish, declare, direct, and require, That the said
Corporations and Bodies Politic and Corporate, of all the said Cities, Towns,
and Buroughs, whose Deeds of Surrender are not Enrolled, nor Judgments entered
against them as aforesaid, and the Mayors, Bailiffs, Sheriffs, Aldermen,
Common-council-men, Assistants, Recorders, Town-clerks, Magistrates, Ministers,
Officers, Freemen, and all and every others the Members of or in every of them
respectively, upon the Publication of this Our Proclamation, take on them and
proceed to act as a Corporation or Body Politic; and where Places are vacant
by Death, or otherwise, to make Elections, constitute, and fill up the same,
(notwithstanding the usual Days and Times of Elections, by the Ancient Charters
and Constitutions, shall happen to be past) and to do and execute and perform
all and every Matter and Thing as they lawfully might and ought to have done,
if no such Deeds of Surrender, Rules for Judgment, or other Proceedings upon
any such Quo Warranto's or Informations had been had or made. And for the
better effecting Our said Intention, We have by Order made by Us in Council,
and under Our Sign Manual; and We do also by this Our Proclamation, made with
the Advice of Our said Council, discharge, remove, and dismiss all and every
Person and Persons, of and from all Offices and Places of Mayors, Bailiffs,
Sheriffs, Aldermen, Common-council-men, Assistants, Recorder, Town Clerk, and
all and every Office and Place, which they or any of them have or claim only by
Charter, Patent, or Grant from Our dear Brother, or from Our Self, since the
Dates of the respective Deeds of Surrender or Rules of Judgment; except such
Corporations whose Deeds of Surrender are Enrolled, or against whom Judgment is
entered; and that all and every such Person and Persons deliver up into the
Hands of the said Persons hereby appointed and intended to act and execute the
said Offices and Places, all and every the Charters, Records, Books, Evidences,
and Matters concerning the said Corporations.

And We do hereby further publish and declare, That We have caused all and
every the said Deeds of Surrender which can be found, to be delivered and put
into the Hands of Our Attorney General, to be by him cancelled, and returned to
the Corporations and Bodies Politic of the respective Cities and Towns whom
they concern; and have also given to Our said Attorney Authority, and do hereby
Warrant and Command him, not only not to proceed or enter Judgment upon the
said Quo Warranto's or Informations in nature of a Quo Warranto, or any of
them, but to enter upon the respective Records Noli Prosequi's and Legal
Discharges thereof. And We do hereby publish and declare Our further Grace and
Favor to the said Cities, Corporations, and Buroughs, at any time hereafter,
by any further Act, to grant, confirm, or restore unto them all their Charters,
Liberties, Franchises, and Privileges that at the respective times of such
Deeds of Surrender or Rules for Judgment made or given, they held or enjoyed.
And in order to the perfecting Our said Gracious Intentions, We do hereby
likewise publish and declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure for and concerning the
Restoring to such Our Cities, Corporations, and Buroughs, within our said
Kingdom and Dominion, which have made Deeds of Surrender, or have had Judgment
given against them, which Surrenders and Judgments are entered of Record, That
Our Chancellor, Attorney General, and Sollicitor-General, without Fees to any
Officer or Officers whatsoever, upon Application to them made, shall, and they
are hereby required to prepare and pass Charters, Instruments, Grants, and
Letters Patent, for the Incorporating, Re granting, Confirming, and Restoring
to all and every the said Cities, Corporations, and Buroughs, their respective
Charters, Liberties, Rights, Franchises, and Privileges, and for restoring the
respective Mayors, Bailiffs, Recorders, Sheriffs, Town-clerks, Aldermen,
Common-council-men, Assistants, Officers, Magistrates, Ministers, and Freemen,
as were of such Cities, Corporations, and Buroughs, at the time of such Deeds
of Surrender or Judgments respectively given or had, and for the putting them
into the same State, Condition, and Plight they were in at the times of such
Deeds of Surrender, or Judgment made or given. And whereas diverse Buroughs
that were not heretofore Corporations, have since the Year 1679. had Charters
of Incorporation granted and passed unto them; We hereby further express and
declare Our Royal Pleasure, to determine and annul the said last-mentioned
Charters and Corporations: And to that end, We have in pursuance to the Power
reserved in the said Charters, by Our Order in Council, and under Our Sign
Manual, removed and discharged, and We do also by this Our Proclamation, made
with the Advice of our said Council, remove and discharge all and every Person
of or in the said last-mentioned Corporations, of and from all Offices and
Places of Mayors, Bailiffs, Recorders, Sheriffs, Aldermen, Common-council-men,
Assistants, and of and from all and every other Office and Place from which We
have Power reserved by the said Charters respectively to remove or discharge
them. And We do hereby promise and declare, That We will do and consent to all
such Acts, Matters, and Things as shall be necessary to render these Our
Gracious Intentions and Purposes effectual: It being Our Gracious Intention to
call a Parliament as soon as the General Disturbance of Our Kingdom by the
intended Invasion, will admit thereof.

Given at Whitehall.
It was necessary to transcribe this long Piece, to show what an hurry of
Confusion the Nation was then in, and how reasonable it was for the Bishops in
their Seventh Proposal to desire the Restitution of all these Corporations and
Buroughs to their Ancient State, without which (as things had been carried of
late especially) it was altogether impossible a Free and Legal Parliament
should be holden.

The 12th. of October his Majesty having declared his Resolution to preserve
the Church of England in all its Rights and Immunities, as an Evidence of it,
signified his Pleasure to the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of
Winchester, as Visitor of St. Mary Magdalen College in Oxford, to settle that
Society Regularly and Statutably, who accordingly caused the 16th. of that
Month a Citation to be fixed up on the College Gates, to recall Dr. Hough and
the former Fellows of that Society, by the second of November following: And he
accordingly went down to reinstate them, and was joyfully received by the
University; but an Account coming that very Post, that the Dutch Fleet had
suffered very much in a Storm the 16th. of the same Month N. S. and that they
would hardly be able to sail till the Spring, his Lordship was recalled to
London, and the Restitution put off. But soon after that false News being
contradicted, the Affection to the Church of England revived, and the 24th. of
October he returned, and went through with the Work.

The 20th. of October we had the Favor of the following Proclamation bestowed
upon us.

FOrasmuch as the great Preparations made to invade and conquer this Our
Kingdom, require Our utmost Care in providing for the necessary Safety and
Defense thereof, wherein we resolve (through God's Assistance) not to be wanting;
and to the intent that Our Enemies, who will bring the heavy and sad Calamities
of War, may not strengthen themselves at their coming hither, by seizing the
Horses, Oxen, and Cattle of any of Our Subjects, which may be useful and
serviceable to them for Burden and Draught: We have therefore thought fit, and
We do here by this Our Royal Proclamation (published by and with the Advice of
Our Privy Council) strictly charge and command all and every the Lords
Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants of Our respective Counties adjoining to the
Sea, and all Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, and all and every
other Officers and Ministers Civil and Military, within their respective
Counties, Cities, Towns, and Divisions, That they cause the Coasts to be
carefully watched, and upon the first approach of the Enemy, to cause all
Horses, Oxen, and Cattle which may be fit for Burden or Draught, and not
actually employed in the Defense and Service of Us and the Country, to be
driven and removed by the space of at least Twenty miles from the Place where
the Enemy shall attempt to Land, and to secure the same in such effectual
manner, that they may not fall into the hands or power of any of Our Enemies:
Wherein nevertheless it is Our Will and Pleasure that the respective owners may
suffer as little damage and loss as may be consistent with the great and
public safety of the Kingdom.

The same day the Earl of Oxford, who had but a short time before been turned
out of the Lieutenancy of Essex for refusing to consent to the Repeal of the
Penal Laws and Tests, was restored to the said Office, as several others were
about the same time.

The 22d. of October his Majesty ordered the Council to be assembled, and
desired the Queen Dowager, and such of the Peers of this Kingdom, both
Spiritual and Temporal, as were in Town, as also the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
London, and the Judges, and several of their Majesty's Council learned in the
Law, and the Ladies, Lords, and others that were present at the Queen's Labor,
did appear there, and declare upon Oath what they knew of the Birth of his
Royal Highness the Prince of Wales (as he was then called) of all which a full
and particular Relation was then promised to be published, as was soon after
done; but then those Depositions are too well known to need, and too long to be
here inserted without cause: They have since been examined by another Pen, and
therefore I may the better pass them by, when I have put this short question,
Why were they so long delayed, and to what purpose were they now published?
Why, they had received intelligence that the Troops were now on Shipboard, and
that the Prince of Orange would embark himself so soon as the Ships from the
Texel have joined with those in the Maes.

The Nation was by this time exasperated and fermented to that height against
the Court and the Popish party, that all places were filled with Reports and
Whispers to their Disadvantage, many of which were false, and some ridiculous
and impossible, which yet were then greedily swallowed, and industriously
spread and promoted; the Authors of them being utterly unknown, and doing it on
various accounts, some out of mere Wantonness and Banter; others out of Spite,
Design, and Aversion. And there can be nothing more unreasonable than to expect
his now Majesty should be obliged to prove all the silly Stories were then
spread abroad by those who pretended to favor his Interest, but did in reality
rather mischief than good to him. To put a stop to these Rumors, the 26. of
October this following Proclamation was published.

Although since Our Accession to the Crown, We have graciously extended Our Royal
Mercy and Clemency to Our Subjects by several General Pardons, one whereof was
lately published; yet we are sensible that diverse evil disposed persons being
not reformed or wrought upon by such Our Grace and Favor, do notwithstanding
make it their business by Writing, Printing or, Speaking, to defame Our
Government with false and seditious News and Reports, thereby intending to
amuse Our loving Subjects, and as far as they are able, to create in them an
universal Jealousy and Discontent, especially in this time of public Danger
threatened by the intended Invasion upon this our Kingdom, and consequently to
alienate the Hearts of such of Our loving Subjects from Us, who otherwise would
readily yield unto Us that Aid and Assistance which by their Natural Allegiance
they are bound to do: And whereas by the ancient Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, great and heavy Penalties are inflicted upon all such as shall be found
to be Spreaders of false News, or Promoters of any malicious Slanders and
Calumnies in their ordinary and common Discourse, or otherwise; and
morespecially upon such who shall utter, or publish any words or things to
incite or stir up the People to hatred or dislike of Our Person, or the
established Government: Notwithstanding which, there have been of late more
bold and licencious Discourses than formerly, and men have assumed to
themselves a liberty, not only in Coffee houses, but in other Places and
Meetings both public and private, to censure and defame the Proceedings of
State, by speaking evil of things they understand not: We therefore considering
that Offenses of this nature proceed from the restless Malice of evil Persons,
or from the careless Demeanor of others, who presume too much upon Our
accustomed Clemency and Goodness, have therefore thought fit by this Our Royal
Proclamation, by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, straightly to
forewarn, and command all Our Subjects of what estate or condition they be,
that they presume not henceforth, either by Writing, Printing, or Speaking, to
utter or publish any false News or Reports whatsoever, or to intermeddle with
the Affairs of State or Government, or with the Persons of any of Our
Counselors or Ministers, in their common and ordinary Discourses, as they will
answer the contrary at their utmost perils.

And because all bold and irreverent Speeches touching matters of high nature,
and all malicious and false Reports tending to Sedition, or to the Amusement of
Our People, are punishable not only in the Speakers, but in the Hearers also,
unless they do speedily reveal the same unto some of Our Privy Council, or some
other of Our Judges or Justices of the Peace: Therefore that all persons may be
left without excuse, who shall not hereafter contain themselves within that
modest and dutiful Regard which becomes them, We do further declare, that We
will proceed with all Severity and Rigor against all such persons who shall be
guilty of any such malicious and unlawful Practices, by Writing, Printing, or
other Publication of such false News and Reports, or who shall receive or hear
the same without revealing or giving Information thereof, as aforesaid, in due
time: We being resolved to suppress the said Enormities by a most strict and
exemplary Punishment of all such Offenders, as shall hereafter be discovered.
And We do hereby strictly charge and cammand all and singular Our Judges,
Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, and all other Our Officers
and Ministers whatsoever, to take effectual care for the speedy Apprehension,
Prosecution, and severe Punishment of all such persons who shall at any time
hereafter be found Offenders herein.

This Proclamation rather increased the Aversion men then generally had for the
Government; and there were very few who did not presently reflect on Father
Petre, who was then one of the Privy Council, as fitter to be hanged, than
reverenced; but they were then under Hatches, and must comply, and for two or
three days News was wondrous scarce; but then they fell to it again with so
much the greater liberty, the public hatred prevailing over their Fear, as the
day of their wished Redemption grew nearer. But however, the Roman Catholics
from this time forward were studiously avoided, no man fearing any trouble from
any body else, as in truth I never heard of any man that was prosecuted on this
account.

The 28th. of October the Earl of Sunderland was removed from the Office of
Principal Secretary of State, and the Lord Viscount Preston put in his room:
This Change pleased all men, but it came too late.

As the Cause of the Dismission of the Earl of Sunderland was then wholly
unknown, so it gave occasion to the reviving a Report that had been spread not
long before, upon the Imprisonment of Sir Bevil Skeleton the English Ambassador
in France, that there had lately been a League concluded between the King of
England and France, for the Extirpation of the Protestant Religion here, and
the establishing Popery and Arbitrary Government; to which end the French King
was (as was said) to send a considerable Army, and great Sums of Money into
England; and as it was before pretended, that Skeleton being a Protestant, had
discovered this Transaction to the Prince of Orange: So it was now said,
Sunderland had lost the Original League out of his Scritore, and that it was
carried over to the Prince of Orange, who would produce it to the Parliament of
England. But since that the Earl of Sunderland has published a Letter, wherein
he has given a larger Account of the true Cause of his being laid aside, than
is any where else to be met with; and therefore I think it reasonable to add it
here.

The Earl of Sunderland 's Letter to a Friend in London, published March 23d.
1689.
TO comply with what you desire, I will explain some things which we talked of
before I left England. I have been in a Station of a great noise, without Power
or Advantage whilst I was in it, and to my Ruin now I am out of it. I know I
cannot justify my self by saying, though it is true, that I thought to have
prevented much Mischief; for when I found that I could not, I ought to have
quitted the Service; neither is it an Excuse that I have got none of those
things which usually engage men in public Affairs: My Quality is the same it
ever was, and my Estate much worse, even ruined, though I was born to a very
considerable one, which I am ashamed to have spoiled, though not so much as if I
had increased it by indirect means. But to go on to what you expect: The
pretense to a Dispensing Power being not only the first thing which was much
disliked since the death of the late King, but the foundation of all the rest,
I ought to begin with that which I had so little to do with, that I never heard
it spoken of till the time of Monmouth's Rebellion, that the King told some of
the Council of which I was one, that he was resolved to give Employments to
Roman Catholics, it being fit that all persons should serve who could be
useful, and on whom he might depend. I think every body advised him against it,
but with little effect, as was soon seen: That Party was so well pleased with
that the King had done, that they persuaded him to mention it in his Speech at
the next meeting of the Parliament, which he did, after many Debates whether it
was proper or not; in all which I opposed it, as is known to very considerable
Persons, some of which were of another opinion; for I thought it would engage
the King too far, and it did give such offense to the Parliament, that it was
thought necessary to prorogue it; after which, the King fell immediately to the
supporting the Dispensing Power, the most Chimerical thing that was ever
thought of, and must be so till the Government here is as absolute as in
Turkey, all Power being included in that one. This is the sense I ever had of
it, and when I heard Lawers defend it, I never changed my Opinion or Language;
however it went on, most of the Judges being for it, and was the chief business
of the State, till it was looked on as settled. Then the Ecclesiastical Court
was set up, in which there being so many considerable men of several kinds, I
could have but a small part; and that after Lawyers had told the King it was
legal, and nothing like the High Commission Court, I can most truly say, and it
is well known that for a good while I defended Magdalen College purely by care
and industry, and have hundreds of times begged of the King never to grant
Mandates, or to change any thing in the regular course of Ecclesiastical
Affairs, which he often thought reasonable, and then by perpetual Importunities
was prevailed upon against his ownsense; which was the very case of Magdalen
College, as of some others.

These things which I endeavored, though without Success, drew upon me the
Anger and Ill Will of many about the King. The next thing to be tried, was to
take off the Penal Laws and the Tests, so many having promised their
concurrence toward it, that his Majesty thought it feasible; but he soon found
it was not to be done by that Parliament, which made all the Catholics desire
it might be dissolved, which I was so much against, that they complained of me
to the King, as a man who ruined all his Designs by opposing the only thing
could carry them on; Liberty of Conscience being the Foundation on which he was
to build. That it was first offered at by the Lord Clifford, who by it had done
the work, even in the late King's time, if it had not been for his weakness,
and the weakness of his Ministers: Yet I hindered the Dissolution several Weeks,
by telling the King that the Parliament in Being would do every thing he could
desire, but the taking off the Penal Laws and the Tests, or the allowing his
Dispensing Power, and that any other Parliament, though such a one could be had
as was proposed, would probably never repeal those Laws; and if they did, they
would certainly never do any thing for the support of the Government, whatever
exigency it might be in. At that time the King of Spain was sick, upon which I
said often to the King, that if he should die, it would be impossible for his
Majesty to preserve the peace of Christendom, that a War must be expected, and
such a one as would chiefly concern England; and that if the present Parliament
continued, he might be sure of all the help and service he could wish; but in
case he dissolved it, he must give over all thoughts of fereign Affairs, for no
other would ever assist him, but on such terms as would ruin the Monarchy; so
that from abroad, or at home, he would be destroyed, if the Parliament were
broken, and any accident should happen, of which there were many, to make the
aid of his People necessary to him. This and much more I said to him several
times privately, and in the hearing of others. But being overpowered, the
Parliament was broke, the Closetting went on, and a new one was to be chosen,
who was to get by closetting, I need not say; but it was certainly not I, nor
any of my Friends; many of them suffered, who I would fain have saved, and yet
I must confess with grief, that when the King was resolved, and there was no
remedy, I did not quit, as I ought to have done, but served on in order to the
calling another Parliament. In the midst of all the preparations for it, and
whilst the Corporations were regulating, the King thought sit to order his
Declarations to be read in all Churches, of which I most solemnly protest, I
never heard one word, till the King directed it in Council, that drew on the
Petition of my Lord the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other Lords the
Bishops, and their Prosecution, which I was so openly against, that by arguing
continually to show the Injustice and the Imprudence of it, I brought the Fury
of the Roman Catholics upon me to such a degree, and so unanimously, that I
was just sinking, and I wish I had then sunk; but whatever I did foolishly to
preserve my self, I continued still to be the Object of their hatred, and I
resolved to serve the public as well as I could, which I am sure most of the
considerable Protestants then at Court can testify; and so can one very
eminent man of the Country, whom I would have persuaded to come into business,
which he might have done, to have helped me to resist the violence of those in
power; but he despaired of being able to do any good, and therefore would not
engage. Sometime after came the first News of the Prince's designs, which were
not then looked on as they have proved, no body foreseeing the Miracles he has
done by his wonderful Prudence, Conduct, and Courage, for the greatest thing
which has been undertaken these thousand years, or perhaps ever, could not be
effected without Virtues hardly to be imagined till seen nearer hand. Upon the
first thought of his coming I laid hold of the opportunity to press the King to
do several things which I would have had done sooner; the chief of which were
to restore Magdalen College, and all other Ecclesiastical Preferments, which
had been diverted from what they were intended for, to take off my Lord Bishop
of London's Suspension, to put the Counties into the same hands they were in
some time before, to annual the Ecclesiastical Court, and to restore entirely
all the Corporations of England These things weredone effectually by the help
of some about the King; and it was then thought I had destroyed my self, by
enraging again the whole Roman Catholic Party to such
a height as had not been seen; they dispersed Libels of me every day, told the
King that I betrayed him, that I ruined him by persuading him to make such
shameful Condescentions; but most of all by hindering the securing the chief of
the disaffected Nobility and Gentry, which was proposed as
a certain way to break all the Prince's Measures; and by advising his Majesty
to call a Free-Parliament, and to depend upon that, rather than upon foreign
Assistance. It is true I did give him those Counsels which were called weak to
the last moment he suffered me in his Service; then I was accused of holding
Correspondence with the Prince, and it was every where said amongst them, That
no better could be expected from a man so related as I was to the Bedford and
Leicester Families, and so allied to Duke Hamilton, and the Marquess of
Halifax. After this Accusations of High Treason were brought against me, which,
with some other reasons relating to affairs abroad, drew the Kings displeasure
upon me, so as to turn me out of all without any consideration, and yet I
thought I escaped well, expecting nothing less than the loss of my head, as my
Lord Middleton can tell, and I believe none about the Court thought otherwise;
nor had it been otherwise, if my Disgrace had been deferred a day longer; all
things being prepared for it, I was put out the 27th. of October, the Roman
Catholics having been two Months working the King up to it, without
intermission, besides the several Attacks they had made upon the before, and
the unusual assistance they obtained to do what they thought so necessary for
the carrying on their Affairs, of which they never had greater hope than at
chat time, As may be remembered by any who were then at London. But you desired
I would say something to you of Ireland, which I will do in very few words, but
exactly true.

My Lord Tyroonnell has been so absolute there, that I never had the credit to
make an Ensign, or keep one in, nor to preserve some of my Friend, (...) was
much concerned, from the lust Oppression and (...) though I endeavored it to the
utmost or my power; but yet with care and diligence, being upon the place, and
he absent, I diverted the calling; a Parliament there, which was designed to
alter the Acts of Settlement. Chief Justice Nugent, and Baron Rice were sent
over
with a draught of an Act for that purpose, furnished with all the pressing
Arguments could be thought on to persuade the King; and I was offered forty
thousand pounds for my Concurrence, which I told to the King, and showed him at
the same time the Injustice of what was proposed to him, and the prejudice it
would be to that Country, with so good success, that he resolved not to think
of it that year, and perhaps never. This I was helped in by some Friends,
particularly any Lord Godolphin who knows it to be true, and so do the Judges
before named, and several others.

I cannot omit saying something of France, there having been so much talk of a
League between the two Kings. I do protest I never knew of any; and if there
were such a thing, it was carried on by other sort of men last Summer. Indeed
French Ships were offered to join with our Fleet, and they were refused; since
the noise of the Prince's design more Ships were offered, and it was agreed how
they should be commanded, if ever desired. I opposed to death the accepting of
them, as well as any assistance of men, and can say most truly, that I was the
principal means of hindering both, by the help of some Lords, with whom I
consulted every day, and they with me,
to prevent what we thought would be of great prejudice, if not ruinous to the
Nation. If the Report is true, of Men, Ships, and Money intended lately for
England out of France, it was agreed upon since I was out of business, or
without my knowledge; if it had been otherwise, I believe no body drinks my
Disgrace would have happened. My greatest Misfortune has been to be thought the
Promoter of those things I opposed and detested, whilst some I could name have
been the Inventors and Contrivers of what they have had the Art to lay upon
others; and I was often foolishly willing to beast what my Master would have
done, tho I used all possible Endeavors against it. I lie under many other
Misfortunes and Afflictions extreme heavy, but I hope they have brought me to
reflect on the occasion of them the loose, negligent, unthinking life I have
hitherto led, having been perpetually hurried away from all good Thoughts, by
Pleasure, Idleness, the Vanity of the Court, or by Business: I hope, I say,
that I shall overcome all the disorders my former life had brought upon me, and
that I shall spend the remaining part of it in begging of Almighty God, that he
will please either to put an end to my sufferings, or to give me strength to
bear them; one of which he will certainly grant to such as rely on him, which I
hope I do, with the Submission that becomes a good Christian. I would enlarge
on this Subject, but that I fear you might think something else to be the
reason of it, besides a true sense of my Faults, and that obliges me to
restrain my self at present. I believe you will repent in having engaged me to
give you this account, but I cannot the doing of what you desire of me.


The 29th. an Account was given, that the Dutch Fleet consisting of 52 Men of
War, with a very numerous Attendance of Victuallers, and other Ships and
Vessels for the Transportation of the Land Forces, sailed the Friday before,
which was the 19th. from N. S.
the Flats near the Briel, with the Wind at S. W. and by S. and the Prince of
Orange embarkt on a Frigate of 28, or 30 Guns, and with him the Count of Nassau,
General of the Horse, the Count de Solmes, Colonel of his Foot-Guards; the
Count de Stirum, the Sieur Benting, and the Sieur Cuerkerker, and the Marshal
de Schomberg went on board such another Frigate. And the 20th. most of the Fleet
was seen in the Morning from Schevelingue when the Wind coming more Westerly,
and the next Night proving very stormy, it obliged them to come in again,
having suffered considerable damage, 400 Horses being thrown overboard, and
several dead men, and one of their Men of War was stranded, and another
disabled.

There was very little of this Story true, but it was a Report set on foot to
deceive the Court here, and it had the effect which was expected, and the
Priests began to boast very much of the assistance they expected from the
Virgin Mary, and the rest of the Saints who had been powerfully solicited to
confound this Heretical Fleet. The first of November we were again told from
the Hague, that the damage the Dutch Fleet had sustained by the late Storms,
was greater than was at first reported; That there were 1500 Horses dead or
unserviceable, That the Prince of Orange had lost most of his own Horses, and
the Marshal de Schomberg the best of his; That his Son Count Charles Schomberg
was in great danger, the Ship he was in having spent her main Mast; That a
Captain of Horse in the Sieur- Bentin'gs Regiment was missing, with his whole
Troop; and two Captains of Foot-Guards were likewise missing with their
Companies; That to supply these losses a great many fresh Horses were ordered
to be sent to the Fleet; and that it was said the Regiment of the Baron de
Frizes should be imbarkt; That in the mean time the Prince of Orange continued
at Helvoetsluys, intending to sail again so soon as the Fleet was in a
condition, and the Weather would permit. Thus was our Court at that time
imposed upon for want of good intelligence.

About this time a parcel of the Prince of Orange's Declarations were
intercepted in London, upon reading that expression in it, That the Prince was
most earnestly invited hither by diverse of the Lords both Spiritual and
Temporal, and by many Gentlemen and others. The King sent for some of the
Bishops again, and required of them a Paper under their hands in abhorrence of
the Prince of Orange's intended Invasion by such a day; the following
Declaration was then in the Press, and this Abhorrence was designed to be
tacked to it; but the Bishops of Canterbury, London, Peterborough and Rochester
(on whom only this Storm fell) refused to do it, as contrary to their
privilege of Peerage, and their Profession in promoting a War against a Prince
so near allied to the Crown; and they earnestly desired this might be left to a
Free-Parliament. His Majesty hereupon was very much incensed against them, and
parted from them with Indignation. And thereupon the Jesuited Party at Court
were so violently enraged, that as we are Second Letter, page 49.
credibly informed (says the Bishop of Rochester) one of the chief advised in
a heat, they should all be imprisoned, and the Truth extorted from them by
violence. By which it appears, no Solicitation could force the King to yield to
the sitting of a Parliament, whatever hazard he ran.

November there was published another Proclamation for the suppressing of the
Prince of Orange's Declaration.

WHereas the Prince of Orange and his Adherents, who design forthwith to invade
Our Kingdoms, in order thereunto have contrived and framed several treasonable
Papers and Declarations, hoping thereby to seduce Our People, and (if it were
possible) to corrupt our Army, a very great number whereof being printed,
several persons are sent and employed to disperse the same throughout Our
Kingdoms: And although all persons (as well in criminal as in other cases) are
bound to take notice of the Laws at their peril; yet to the intent that none
may think to escape due punishment, or to excuse themselves when they shall be
detected, by pretending Ignorance of the nature of their Crime, We are
graciously pleased by this Our Royal Proclamation published, by the Advice of
our Privy Council, to forewarn and admonish all Our Subjects of what degree or
quality soever, that they do not publish or disperse, repeat or hand about the
said treasonable Papers or Declarations, or any of them, or any other Paper or
Papers of such like nature, without discovering and revealing the same as
speedily as may be to some of Our Privy Council, or some of Our Judges,
Justices of the Peace, or public Magistrates, upon peril of being prosecuted
according to the utmost severity of the Law.

This Proclamation had the same effect with all the rest of their Counsels, for
men suspected thereupon, that there was much more in the Declarations and
Papers than they afterward found, and accordingly became more desirous by far
to see it; and the Spanish Ambassador here in London gave them (as I have been
credibly informed) to whosoever desired them.

For about almost three Weeks together the Wind stood perpetually West; during
all which time the common question was every Morning, Where is the Wind to day?
And a Seaman was observed to curse the Dragon in Cheapside, for turning his
Head where his Tail should be. But in the latter end of October the Wind came
East, to the great Sorrow of the Roman Catholics, and the Joy of the rest of
the Nation. And when all men expected the Invasion would fall on the North, the
third of November between ten and eleven of the Clock the Dutch Fleet was
discovered about half Seas over, and about five this numerous Fleet was passed
by that Town, steering a Channel course Westward, the Wind at East North-East,
a fresh Gale.

The same day Captain Aylmer, Commander of the Swallow, brought into the Downs
a Fly-boat belonging to this Fleet, which had on board four Companies of the
Foot of Colonel Babington's Regiment commanded by Major Colambine. They said
the Prince sailed from Goree on Thursday the first of November. This Ship had
had the misfortune to strike upon a Sand which had torn off her Rudder, without
doing her any other damage, so that she was forced to float as the Winds and
Seas drove her, and could hold no Course, which was the cause of her being
taken: And this small piece of good Fortune turned to their disadvantage, men,
from the number taken in this Ship, concluding that the Dutch Army was three
times as great, as it really was.

By this time they found that the Prince of Orange his Declaration could not be
totally suppressed; and thereupon one of the Scribbling Jesuits put out a
Pamphlet against it, entitled, The Dutch Design Anatomized, or the Discovery
of the Wickedness and Unjustice of the intended Invasion, and a clear Proof,
That it is the Interest of all the King's Subjects to defend his Majesty and
their Country against it. This Author has the Confidence to tell us, That the
forged Heads of the Prince's Declaration, and the Bishops Ten Proposals, are
known to be the Contrivance of the King's Enemies, framed on purpose to amuse
the People, and make them believe the setting us at rights is the only design
of the Dutch; and till those Proposals be granted, we are not safe (page 29.)
So that if the design had miscarried, not only the Redress of those Grievances
was utterly to be dispaired of, but those that had made them to preserve the
King from ruin, were already arraigned for his Enemies, and accordingly to be
treated. Page the 39. If (says he) out of peevish stubbornness some will sit
still, and not assist the King in this Juncture, or traitorously join with the
Invaders, what can they expect from his victorions Arms, but the Punishment due
to their Perfidiousness and Cowardice. So that here was no Mercy for any but
those who were very active in the ruin of the Invaders; and by what followed
upon the Defeat of the late Duke of Monmouth, all men were able to make an
Estimate what would be our Destiny now.

Another of the same Party comes forth soon after in Print, under the Title of
Reflections upon his Highness the Prince of Orange 's Declaration; but then
neither of the these were suffered to print the Declaration it self, and
therefore what they said of it, was neither regarded, nor believed by any of
the Protestants, and served only to exasperate the Nation the more against them.

The 5th. of November the Dutch Fleet passed by Dartmouth, and it being a hazy
foggy Morning, and full of Rain, they over-shot Torbay where the Prince
intended to land, but about nine of the Clock the Weather cleared up, and the
Wind changed W. S. W. and the Fleet stood Eastward, with a moderate Gale,
entering Torbay, and being then about 4 or 500 Sail in Number. This Change of
the Wind was observed by Dr. Burnet to have been of no long duration, but
immediately it chopped into another Corner, when it had executed its Commission.

Whilst the Prince was busy Landing his Army in the West, the King puts out
here the 6th. of November this following Declaration.

AS We cannot consider this Invasion of Our Kingdoms by the Prince of Orange,
without Horror, for so unchristian and unnatural an Undertaking, in a Person so
nearly related to Us; so it is Matter of the greatest Trouble and Concern to
Us, to reflect upon the many Mischiefs and Calamities which an Army of
Foreigners and Rebels must unavoidably bring upon Our People. It is but too
evident, by a late Declaration published by him, That notwithstanding the many
specious and plausible Pretenses it carries, his Designs at the bottom do tend
to nothing less than an Absolute Usurping of Our Crown and Royal Authority: As
may fully appear by his assuming to himself in the said Declaration the Regal
Style, requiring the Peers of this Realm both Spiritual and Temporal, and all
other Persons of all Degrees, to obey and assist him in the Execution of his
Designs; a Prerogative inseparable from the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And
for a more undeniable Proof of his immoderate Ambition, and which nothing can
satisfy but the immediate Possession of the Crown it self, he calls in
question the Legitimacy of the Prince of Wales, Our Son, and Heir apparent; tho
by the Providence of God,
there were present at his Birth so many Witnesses of unquestionable Credit, as
if it seemed to have been the particular Care of Heaven on purpose to
disappoint so wicked and unparalleled an Attempt.

And in order to the effecting of his Ambitious Designs, he seems desirous in
the Close of his Declaration to submit all to the Determination of a Free
Parliament, hoping thereby to ingratiate himself with Our People; though
nothing is more evident, than that a Parliament cannot be Free, so long as
there is an Army of Foreigners in the Heart of Our Kingdoms; so that in truth
he himself is the fool Obstructer of such a Free Parliament: We being fully
resolved, as We have already declared, so soon as by the Blessing of God Our
Kingdoms shall be delivered from this Invasion, to call a Parliament, which can
no longer be liable to the least Objection of not being freely chosen, since We
have actually restored all the Buroughs and Corporations of this Our Kingdom
to their Ancient Rights and Privileges, in which we shall be ready not only to
receive and redress all the Just Complaints and Grievances of Our Good
Subjects, but also to repeat and confirm the Assurances We have already given
to them in Our several Declarations, of Our Resolution by God's Blessing to
maintain them in their Religion, their Liberties and Properties, and all other
their Just Rights and Privileges whatsoever. Upon these Considerations, and the
Obligations of their Duty and Natural Allegiance, we can no ways doubt, but
that all Our Faithful and Loving Subjects will readily and heartily concur and
join with Us in the entire Suppressing and Repelling of those Our Enemies, and
Rebellious Subjects, who have so injuriously and disloyally invaded and
disturbed the Peace and Tranquillity of these Our Kingdoms.

All this while the Prince's Declaration was kept in, and few had seen it; but
Men had now a general Idea of it. This Declaration in the mean time was
pleasing to very few. It was penned with too much Spleen and Passion, to create
suitable Thoughts in the Hearts of those who had less Interest in the Defeat of
the Prince's Army than the R. C's had. The Birth of the Prince of Wales being
thus worded, made Men smile; and they could presently recollect the Force and
Value of the Deposers Evidence, which had now been some time published; but
then nothing disgusted the Generality of Men more, than to see the King
continue so averse to the holding a Parliament, till the Prince was expelled
out of the Nation, the Consequence of which was notorious. To what end, said
they, should we fight, when the Prince of Orange offers at first to submit to
a Free Parliament? What, shall we drive him out, that we may never have one
that shall sit to do us good? Are the Jesuits such Reverers of Promises, as to
regard them when they can choose? No, let us have a Parliament while the Prince
is here to see us have Right, or fight who will for me.

The same 5th. day of November an Account was sent from Brixham, That about 300
of the Dutch Fleet were come into Torbay; several of which came directly to
Brixham Key, and Landed some Soldiers; and the rest were sending them on Shore
in Boats, about 5 or 600 being then Landed; and it was then said the Prince of
Orange was come on Shore.

This Fleet consisted of 51 Men of War, 18 Fire ships, and 330 Tenders, for the
carriage of Men, Horses, Arms, and Ammunition: At his first Attempt he lost 400
Horse in a Storm, and a Vessel was separated with 400 Foot, which after came
back to the Texel. Hereupon order was given to the Harlem and Amsterdam
Gazetteers to make a dreadful Representation of this Loss, which had its effect
upon our credulous Court. The Fleet was soon got in order again, and sailed the
first of November: There lay then an English Fleet in the Buoy and Nore,
consisting of 34 Sail of Men of War; and there were three in the Downs; but the
Wind was at E. N. E. and so they could not get out, and they had no mind
besides to do it. At his Landing the People in great numbers from the Shore
welcomed his Highness with loud Acclamations of Joy. The first that Landed were
six Regiments of English and Scoth, under Mackay, who met with no opposition,
but a hearty Welcome, with all manner of Refreshments. Thus the 5th. 6th. and
7th. of November were employed in Landing the Army, the Countrymen bringing
them in Provisions in great plenty.

The 6th. of November an Account was sent from Exeter, That the Prince of
Orange was marching toward that City; and they being in no Condition to oppose
him, the Bishop of that Diocese thought fit to leave the Town, and to go to
London; which so pleased the King, that he ordered him to be Translated to the Sea of York, which was then vacant, the 16th. of November.

November the 7th. the King published this Account of the Forces brought over
by the Prince of Orange.

Horse. The Life Guard. Regiment of Guards commanded by Benting. Waldeck's
Regiment. Nassaw. Mompellian. Ginckel. Count Vander Lip. The Princes Dragoons.
Marrewis Dragoons. Sgravemoer. Sapbroeck. Floddorp. Seyde. Suylestein. In all,
Troopers 1683 Life. Guard 197 Benting's 480 Princes Dragoons 860 Marrewis 440
3660

Foot. Companies. Foot-Guard under Count Solmes, 2000 25 Mackay 12 Balfort 12
Talmash 12 Bellises 12 Washops 12 Ossories 10 Berkevelt 10 Holstein 10
Wirtemberg 12 Hagendorn 10 Fagel 10 Nassaw 10 Carelson 12 Brander 10 Prince of
Berkevelt 10 In all 164 Companies, at 53 in a Company. 8692 Guards 2000 10692

Horse 3660 Foot 10692 14352 List of the Fleet.
Men of War 65 Fly-boats 500 Pinks 60 Fireships 10 In all 635

However Men were not easily then induced to believe, that this was above one
half of the Number brought over; they concluding from the Number of Ships, and
the Companies taken in the Fly-boat by the Swallow-Frigat, that the Army must
be at least double to this Number; though afterward it appeared to be very
near a true Account.

November the 8th. the Prince went from Chudleigh toward Exeter, where he
arrived about One of the Clock, and made a very splendid Entry with his Army,
the People much rejoicing at it, and looking upon him as their Deliverer from
Popery and Slavery. That Night the Prince lodged at the Deanery, the Dean as
well as the Bishop having left the Town.

The 9th. Dr. Burnet was sent to order the Priest and Vicars of the Cathedral
not to pray for the Pretended Prince of Wales, which they would not comply with
till they were severely threatened. The same day the Prince went to the
Cathedral, and was present at the singing Te Deum, after which his Declaration
was publicly read to the People.

The same day the late King published this Order.

FOr the more punctual and regular Payment of Quarters in the March of Our
Forces, We do hereby strictly charge and require, That upon the Arrival of any
Regiment, Troop, or Company, in any Town or Village, Publication be immediately
made by Beat of Drum or otherwise, and Notice given to the Chief Magistrate or
Civil Officer of Our Pleasure, That all Officers and Private Soldiers shall
duly pay their Quarters, and that such Chief Magistrate or Civil Officer do
the next Morning come to the Place where such Regiment, Troop, or Company is
drawn up before their March, and make their Complaint to the Commander in Chief
of any Wrong done, or Quarters left unpaid: Whereupon Our express Will and
Pleasure is, That such Commander in Chief shall cause Satisfaction to be made
to the Party injured, and the Debt to be paid. And if any Commander in Chief
shall fail therein, We do hereby declare Our Resolution upon Complaint to
punish such Commander in Chief, by Cashiering or otherwise, and to cause such
Injury to be redressed, and the Debt to be duly satisfied without delay.

The Soldiery had lived with very little Discipline in the Times of Peace; and
now the War was opening, became more Insolent: So that the ill observing this
Order, was one of those things which tended as much as any thing to the Ruin
of that Army, they being reduced to a great Want of all Necessaries by the
People, who feared their Payment, and hated both them and the Cause they were
embarked in.

About the same time there was published a very advantageous Character of the
Prince of Orange, which was greedily read, and industriously spread underhand.

The Prince continued three days at Exeter, before any of the Gentry or
Nobility appeared for him, which caused a great Wonder in his Army, and was
published here the 18th. we being told, that some of the Rabble listed
themselves for him, and had Arms given them; but the Mayor and Clergy of the
City stood their Ground.

The 11th. of November the King published an Account, That the Enemy seized all
the King's Money was found in the West, and that they had taken 300 l. from the
Collector of the Excise at Exeter, and committed the Officer to Custody; and
that not one Person of Quality was yet come in to them. This last was again
confirmed by another Express the next day.

The 13th. an Account came from Cirencester, That the Lord Lovelace going to
the Prince with between 60 and 70 Horse, was there seized by the Militia, by
Order of the Duke of Beaufort, with about 13 of the Party, one Major Lorege
being slain in the Action, together with his Son, Captain Lee, and Leiutenant
Williams and six Common Soldiers wounded; but notwithstanding this Resistance,
the Lord Lovelace was at last forced to yield, and secured by the Duke of
Beaufort; and this was very acceptable News at Whitehall, but the Joy was
short, and not well founded.

The 14th. there came an Account from Salisbury, That upon the 12th. the Lord
Cornbury pretending to have received Orders from his Majesty, caused the Royal
Regiment of Horse, the Royal Regiment of Dragoons whereof he was Colonel, and
the Duke of St. Albans Regiment of Horse commanded by Colonel Langston, to
march from Salisbury to Dorchester, where they refreshed themselves, and then
they went to Bridport and Axminster. Several of the Officers thereupon
apprehending some Design, asked the Lord Cornbury, as was said, whither they
were going? Who answered, To beat up the Enemies Quarters at Honiton: But he
finding the Royal Regiment of Horse, and several Officers of the Dragoons, did
more and more suspect him, he marched with those that would follow him toward
Honiton, Langston going before with the Regiment of St. Albans; but the Royal
Regiment of Horse, and several of the Dragoons, returned to Bridport. And the
same day the Earl of Feversham came to Salisbury, to Command the Forces in
Chief. The next day these Regiments returned from Bridport to Salisbury, and we
were told, there was not ten Troopers of the Royal Regiment wanting; which
sufficiently shows how firm they were in their Fidelity to his Majesty: But
notwithstanding this Flourish, this News caused a great Consternation at
Whitehall.

The 16th. there was published a Proclamation to prohibit the keeping of Exeter
Fair, and other Fairs thereabouts, because many on that Pretense went over to
the Prince of Orange.

The same day the Reverend Dr. Lamplu, then Bishop of Exeter, was Translated to
the Archbishopric of York, and Dr. Trelawny from the Sea of Bristol to that of
Exeter: And his Majesty also ordered a Public Collection to be made through the
City of London, the Liberties and Suburbs thereof, for the Relief of the poor
and distressed Inhabitants of the City, who were by the Distractions of the
Times, and the Interruption of Trade, reduced to great Want and Misery.

The 17th. of November the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of York
Elect, the Bishop of Ely, and the Bishop of Rochester, presented this Petition
to the King.

May it please Your Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, in a deep sense of the Miseries of a
War now breaking forth in the Bowels of this Your Kingdom, and of the Danger to
which Your Majesty's Sacred Person is thereby like to be exposed, as also of
the Distractions of Your People, by reason of their present Grievances, do
think our selves bound in Conscience of the Duty we owe to God and our Holy
Religion, to Your Majesty and our Country, most humbly to offer to Your
Majesty, That in our Opinion, the only visible way to preserve Your Majesty and
this Your Kingdom, would be the Calling a Parliament, Regular and Free in all
its Circumstances.

We therefore most earnestly beseech Your Majesty, That You would be graciously
pleased with all speed to call such a Parliament, wherein we shall be most
ready to promote such Counsels and Resolutions of Peace and Settlement in
Church and State, as may conduce to Your Majesty's Honor and Safety, and to
the quieting of the Minds of Your People.

We do likewise humbly beseech Your Majesty, in the mean time to use The Means
here hinted at was a Treaty with the Prince, and the Nobility and Gentry who
had Declared for him.
such Means for the preventing the Effusion of Christian Blood, as to Your
Majesty shall seem most meet.

W. Cant.
Grafton.
Ormond.
Dorset.
Clare.
Clarendon.
Burlingten.
Anglesey.
Rochester.
Newport.
Nom. Ebor.
W. Asaph.
F. Ely.
Tho. Roffen.
Tho. Petriburg.
T. Oxon.
Paget.
Chandois.
Osulston.


It was said there was a sharp Answer given to this excellent Petition, which
was the Sense of all the King's Friends in the Nation, except a few desparate
Men, whose Crimes had rendered them incapable of the Mercy of a Parliament, and
some others who designed the Ruin of the English Liberties and Religion, with
the utmost hazard of the King and Kingdom.

The same day in the Afternoon the King left the City, and with his Royal
Highness Prince George of Denmark went to Windsor, and the next Morning he went
to Salisbury; appointing in his absence the Privy Council to meet for the
Dispatch of all Affairs as occasion should require.

The 19th. of November the Lords for their own Vindication published the
Petition afore-represented; and the next day the King's Answer to it was
printed also, which was this.

His Majesty's most Gracious Answer.
My Lords,
WHat you ask of Me, I most passionately desire; and I promise you UPON THE
FAITH OF A KING, That I will have a Parliament, and such an one as you ask for,
as soon as ever the Prince of Orange has quitted this Realm: For how is it
possible a Parliament should be Free in all its Circumstances, as you Petition
for, whilst an Enemy is in the Kingdom, and can make a Return of near an
hundred Voices?


This was sufficiently disobliging, considering the State of Affairs, and the
Temper of the Nation at that time; but the Jesuits were so enraged at the
printing the Petition, that they published a Paper with this Title, Some
Reflections upon the Humble Petition to the King's Most Excellent Majesty, of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, who subscribed the same, presented November
17th. 1688. which follows in these words.

THat the Peacemakers are blessed, is a Truth our Savior has left recorded
in the holy Scriptures, and those are truly to be honored, who can contribute
any thing to so happy a work: But that either this way of Petitioning, or the
matter in it desired, is likely to produce so great a Blessing, is a Question
worthy thy serious Consideration.

I shall first therefore take notice of some of the dubious Expressions in the
Petition, and then lay down some few Reasons why I judge the Petition in it
self unseasonable; and lastly endeavor to show how unpracticable the summoning
of a Parliament is at this present.

The Expression, That a War is now breaking forth in the Bowels of the Kingdom,
shows that their Lordships either know or foresee that a Civil War is
fomenting; and I pray God this Petition do not,more than any thing else,
occasion it; or that the Prince of Orange intends to carry on the War through
the Bowels of the Kingdom, whereas those that wish well to the King, hope it
will be kept in and about the parts where he landed.

Secondly, As to the distraction of the People under their present Grievances;
it seems to many true Members of the Church of England, that it had been every
whit as agreeable to your Lordships Character to have rather thanked his
Majesty for his late extraordinary and gracious Favors, than to have amused
the Subjects at this time with the Apprehensions of Grievances, without any
intimation what they were; for it is most manifest, that by such remonstrating
of Grievances, the People were instigated to that bloody Rebellion in 1641.

As to the Expression, That your Lordships think your selves bound in
Conscience of the Duty you owe to God and our holy Religion, and to his Majesty
and our Country, most humbly to offer to his Majesty, That in your opinion the
ONLY visible way to prehis Majesty and his Kingdom, would be the calling of a
Parliament regular and free in all its Circumstances. I hope to make out, that
the summoning of a Parliament now, is so far from being the Only way to effect
these things, that it will be one of the principal causes of much Misery to the
Kingdom; and I am sure both our Duty to God and our holy Religion, as well as
to his Majesty and our Country, does plainly enjoin us to use One other
effectual means to obviate the Miseries of a Civil or Invasive War; which is,
the keeping inviolably our Allegiance to our Sovereign, and effectually joining
with him to resist all his Enemies, whether there Foreign Aggressors, or Native
Rebels: And it is much to be wondered at, that this Duty, so well known to your
Lordships, should never be mentioned.

As to the Regular and Free Parliament in all its Circumstances, I shall now
proceed to prove, that at this Season all our Wishes for such a one are
impotent, and must be ineffectual.

First, it is a known Truth, and sadly experienced, That whenever the People
are in a great Ferment, and contrary Parties are bandying one against another,
the giving liberty to the People to meet in great Bodies, is dangerous to the
Government; and you your selves not long since were of that opinion, when you
opposed the vehement Addresses to King Charles II. for summoning a Parliament,
when he judged it would strengthen the Faction against him; and you very well
know, when great heats were among the Members, and unreasonable Votes were
passed against the Lineal Succession, and other matters endangering the
Government, the King was obliged to prorogue some Parliaments from time to
time, that such separation might produce more sober Counsels: And then the
great cry was, That for the Preservation of the King's Person and our Religion,
they were so earnest to have a Parliament meet.

Secondly, it is impossible there can be a Regular and Free Election, while the
Electors are so violently divided; one part of them being so vehement Wishers
of the Success of the Prince of Orange, that they slight all the Miseries that
unavoidably will fall on the Country thereby, upon the bare hope that he will
preserve Religion and Property. Now in such a time as this, when, if we will
give credit to the Prince's Declaration, there are so many that have invited
him, can it be safe for the King to grant a Commission, even to the People, to
assemble in such great Confluxes, as may afford them opportunity of listing
themselves against him?

Thirdly, If we yield that Elections can be without outrageous Routs; yet when
the Parliament is met, it is requisite by the very Constitution, that every
part of that August Assembly should be free in their Assent or Dissent to what
is to be debated; and that Freedom is as fundamentally necessary in the Person
of the King, as in the Members of either House; and that one of the proper and
necessary Circumstances of that Convention ought to be, that all the Members
shall be present. I shall therefore show, that at this time none of these can
be practicable.

First, As to the King: While such powerful Enemies are in the Country, and so
many ready to catch any opportunity to join with them, how can the King be
absent from his Army? The providing for, cherishing, animating and ordering of
which, will sufficiently employ the most indefatigable of Princes. And none can
think that any Prince can watch the motions of such an Enemy, and time his
opportunities of assaulting them, or defending himself, and at the same time be
embarass'd with a Party in the Houses, that may as dangerously be levelling
their Votes against him, as the Invaders are their Artillery.

However there can be no freedom to the King, how undaunted soever, because the
impending Storm may so affright his Council, that they may advise to the
yielding of some things that may be of ill consequence to the Government; for
whatever lessens the King's just Prerogative, as this may do, in depriving him
of exercising his Negative Voice, is at one time or other prejudicial to his
Subjects.

Secondly, As to the Lords: There can be no free Convention of them, since
several of them have so far forgot their Allegionce, that they are actually in
the Prince of Orange's Army, and many other Lords are attending the King, and
their Charges; so that while these Armies are in Being, they cannot meet in
their House but by their Proxies; which I suppose none can expect will be
allowed to the Peers that are in Rebellion, if we may be allowed to call that
such, which all our Laws so adjudgeth.

The like may be said for the House of Commons: All the Gentlemen of Interest
in their Country, by their Allegiance are bound to serve the King in his Wars
at his Command, and will be few enough to keep their respective Counties in
peace. And I am confident none will think such a Parliament, as this ought to
be that is desired, should consist of such who have been little conversant in
public Affairs, or have small Interests in their Counties.

So, that upon the whole, I cannot see how any Free Parliament can meet, unless
it be such a Convention as the Saxons obtained of the Britains on
Salisbury-Plains, where the eminentest of both People were to meet unarmed, and
there amicably adjust matters in difference; but it is well known, that the
Saxons under their long Coats had their Weapons, wherewith they slew the Flower
of the British Nobility, and thereby rendered their Conquest more easy.

It is true, such a Stratagem is now like to take ffect, but the King and those
that wish well to the Succession of the Monarchy, and the preservation of their
Country, must needs fear, that there will be as dangerous Contests within the
Houses, as may be in the open Fields; and thereby little can be expected from
such a Parliament, which can redound to the public good of the Kingdom.

Fourthly, Those Spiritual and Temporal Lords that have signed this Petition,
either have not, or they have consulted the Prince of Orange, before they
proposed this Advice.

If they have not consulted him, they ought to satisfy the King how they can
warrant a Cessation of Arms on the Prince's side, or how they can hinder him
from advancing further to awe Debates in the Houses, or what assurance they can
give, that he will acquiesce in the free Decision of the matters proposed, or
that he will peaceably depart out of the Land, when things are settled, and will
not pretend a stay here, till the vast Sums be paid him that he has expended
on this occasion; or lastly, will not find new occasions of questioning the
security of Performance of any Agreement to be made.

If they have consulted the Prince, they ought to show his Commission,
authorizing them to make Proposal or show the Heads of those Grievances he
demands to be redressed; for some they urge in their Petition there are, which
distract the People; but I suppose they are more careful of their Heads, than
to own any such correspondence.

If these Noble Persons would have effectually saved Effusion of Blood, they
would rather have used all their Interest to have kept the Prince of Orange in
his Country, though with his Army and Fleet in readiness, and have obtained his
sending his demands, and have waited like dutiful Subjects till the King had
convened his Parliament, and have tried how Gracious the King would have been
in redressing Grievances, and securing Religion and Property, and after the
King's refusal there might have been some color for his Invasion, but none
upon any pretense whatsoever to have invited him to it.

Fifthly, Those who will not openly, and with a bare face justify the Prince
of Orange's Pretensions, cannot think it consistent with the Honor of the King
to stoop so low as to summon a Parliament at the direction of an Invader, who
can never be conceived to desire it with that eagerness, if he did not judge it
very much conduceable to his Interest, for which very reason the King ought to
be jealous of such Councils.

And I humbly conceive those Peers have not sufficiently considered how
prejudicial this sort of Address may be to the King's Affairs, and how much it
will conduce to the further alienating of the Affections of the Subjects from
the King, when they shall hear of his denial to comply at present with this
Expedient, and never hear the reasons thereof, since they have not divulged his
Majesty's Gracious Answer, together with their Petition; and I am sure, at this
time the putting the King upon such a Dilemma, is the greatest dis-service can
be done him, and very little inferior to joining with his Enemies.

I might add many more Arguments to prove, that the King cannot in Honor yield
to this Advice, without quitting that undeniable Prerogative the Laws give him,
of making War, or concluding peace, if those matters should be submitted to the
Arbitriment of the two Houses; or owning that the Allegiance of his Subjects
did not bind them to assist him in the defense of his Crown and Dominions,
without the Votes of a Parliament. But I shall conclude with some few
Considerations I humbly offer to those Right Reverend, and Noble Lords, and all
those who are of the same Judgment with them, to reflect upon.

First then, I desire them to consider, whether it will not be more glorious,
and agreeable to the Principles of our Religion, effectually to assist our
undoubted lawful Sovereign, than to suffer him to be dethroned solely because
he is a Roman Catholic, since the Papists themselves, though they never take the
Oath of Allegiance or Supremacy, yet do, and ever have declared, that if any
Roman Catholic Prince, yea the Pope himself in person, should invade any King
of England, though a Protestant, yet that they are bound to defend such a King
against them, as much as if they were Turks.

Secondly, Whether since the true and original Cause of this Invasion, and
consequently of all the Bloodshed these Lords so earnestly desire to prevent,
has not been the denying to concur with the King in establishing of Liberty of
Conscience, even with such security to the Protestant Religion, and Church of
England, as could be desired: and whether in all human probability, that would
not be more conduceable to establish the public Tranquillity of the Kingdom,
and its increase in Wealth and People, and consequently the most efficacious
means to reduce the Dutch to be just and tractable Allies and Neighbors,
rather than any thing can be effected by this Invasion, or the truckling to
such avowed Enemies to our Country, our Religion, and our King.

Thirdly, Whether the King's entire Trust in the Fidelity of his own Subjects
for his defense, and not admitting of foreign Aids that were unsought for,
proffered, do not oblige all that have any sense of Gratitude or Duty, to aid
him to the very utmost against such Foreigners as so unnaturally, and so
unjustly invade him; and when it has pleased God to give success to the King's
just Arms, we are not to doubt, but the King, according to his solemn promise
in his late Royal Declaration, will speedily call a Parliament, and in it
redress all such Grievances as his people can justly complain of, with a full
and ample security to the Church of England, and all his Protestant Subjects,
which it will much more be our Interest to have in a truly harmonious, and
Free-parliamentary way at that time established, than at this present in a
tumultuary and precipitate haste so patched up, as will not be durable; and the
more earnestly we desire to see this good work to be set upon, the more haste
the Nobility and Gentry should make to expel those who hindered the Convention
of that Parliament, which was much more likely to have settled matters to the
content of the King and his People, than this Invasion can ever hope to effect.

The Prince of Orange's Declaration could be no longer suppressed, and
therefore it was suffered about this time to be printed with a short Preface,
and some modest Remarks (as the Author pretends) on it: In 4to.

The Prince of Orange's Declaration, showing the Reasons why he invades
England, with a short Preface, and some modest Remarks on it.
THERE having been various Discourses about the Reasonableness and Justice of
the Dutch Invasion, the Prince's great Love and special Care of the Protestant
Religion, and English Protestants, set forth in the most charming manner, and
the Desperateness of the Protestant State and Condition, painted in the
blackest and most frightful Colors; Our Natural Liege Lord, notwithstanding
his Unparalled Grace to all, represented as designing the greatest Cruelty
against his own Subjects; strange Stories of ill things whispered, and nothing
less than a Secret League between His Majesty of Great Britain, and the French
King, to extirpate all Protestants, entered into. These Reports are with so much
Art and Cunning spread, as to startle the most They did so whilst the danger
hung over our heads, though now nothing less dreadful.
considering Protestants of all Persuasions, whence nothing could be more
eagerly desired, than a sight of the Prince of Orange 's Declaration. For the
Expectations of most Men are, That some extraordinary Secrets, some hidden
Works of Darkness should be revealed and brought to light, as generally those,
who yet never saw the Prince's Declaration, do still believe: But there not
being one word of any such Treaty, we cannot see why it is that the Prince
comes over; and if others impartially peruse the Declaration, we doubt not but
'twill convince them, that they give no Reason powerful enough to justify so
Bloody an Enterprise, as this, in the issue must needs be.

We will therefore give you a true Copy of the Prince's Declaration, word for
word, as it runs in the West.

The Declaration of his Highness, WILLIAM HENRY, by the Grace of God, PRINCE of
ORANGE, etc. of the Reasons inducing him to appear in Arms in the Kingdom of
England, for preserving of the Protestant Religion, and for restoring the Laws
and Liberties of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
1. IT is both certain and evident to all men, that the public Peace and
Happiness of any State or Kingdom cannot be preserved, where the Laws,
Liberties, and Customs established by the lawful Authority in it, are openly
transgressed and annulled: More especially where the Alteration of Religion is
endeavored, and that a Religion which is contrary to Law, is endeavored to be
introduced: Upon which those who are most immediately concerned in it, are
indispensably bound to endeavor to preserve and maintain the established Laws,
Liberties and Customs, and above all, the Religion and Worship of God that is
established among them; and to take such an effectual care, that the
Inhabitants of the said State or Kingdom, may neither be deprived of their
Religion, nor of their Civil Rights: Which is so much the more necessary,
because the Greatness and Security both of Kings, Royal Families, and of all
such as are in Authority, as well as the Happiness of their Subjects and
People, depend, in a most especial manner, upon the exact observation and
maintenance of these their Laws, Liberties and Customs.

2. Upon these grounds it is, that we cannot any longer forbear to declare that
to our great Regret, we see that those Counselors, who have now the chief
Credit with the King, have overturned the Religion, Laws and Liberties of those
Realms, and subjected them in all things relating to their Consciences,
Liberties, and Properties, to Arbitrary Government, and that not only by secret
and indirect ways, but in an open and undisguised manner.

3. Those evil Counselors for the advancing and coloring this with some
plausible Pretexts, did invent and set on foot the Kings Dispensing Power, by
Virtue of which they pretend, that according to Law, he can suspend, and
dispense with the Execution of the Laws that have been enacted by the Authority
of the King and Parliament, for the security and happiness of the Subject, and
so have rendered those Laws of no effect; though there is nothing more certain,
than that as no Laws can be made, but by the joint concurrence of King and
Parliament, so likewise Laws so enacted, which secure the public Peace, and
safety of the Nation, and the Lives and Liberties of every Subject in it,
cannot be repealed or suspended but by the same Authority.

4. For tho the King may pardon the Punishment that a Transgressor has
incurred, and to which he is condemned, as in the Cases of Treason or Felony;
yet it cannot be with any color of Reason inferred from thence, that the King
can entirely suspend the Execution of those Laws relating to Treason or Felony;
unless it is pretended, that he is clothed with a Despotick and Arbitrary
Power; and that the Lives, Liberties, Honors, and Estates of the Subjects
depend wholly on his good Will and Pleasure, and are entirely subject to him;
which must infallibly follow, on the King's having a Power to suspend the
Execution of the Laws, and to dispense with them.

5. Those Evil Counselors, in order to the giving some Credit to this strange
and execrable Maxim, have so conducted the Matter, that they have obtained a
Sentence from the Judges, declaring, that this Dispensing Power is a Right
belonging to the Crown; as if it were in the power of the Twelve Judges to
offer up the Laws, Rights, and Liberties of the whole Nation to the King, to be
disposed of by him Arbitrarily and at his Pleasure, and expressly contrary to
Laws enacted for the Security of the Subjects. In order to the obtaining this
Judgment, those Evil Counselors did before hand examine secretly the Opinion
of the Judges, and procured such of them as could not in Conscience concur in
so pernicious a Sentence, to be turned out, and others to be substituted in
their rooms, till by the Changes which were made in the Courts of Judicature,
they at last obtained that Judgment. And they have raised some to those Trusts,
who make open Profession of the Popish Religion, tho those are by Law rendered
incapable of all such Employments.

6. It is also manifest and notorious, That as his Majesty was, upon his coming
to the Crown, received and acknowledged by all the Subjects of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, as their King, without the least Opposition, tho he made
then open Profession of the Popish Religion; so he did then promise, and
solemnly swear at his Coronation, That he would maintain his Subjects in the
free Enjoyment of their Laws and Liberties; and in particular, that he would
maintain the Church of England as it was established by Law: It is likewise
certain, that there have been at diverse and sundry times several Laws enacted
for the Preservation of those Rights and Liberties, and of the Protestant
Religion; and among other Securities, it has been enacted, That all Persons
whatsoever, that are advanced to any Ecclesiastical Dignity, or to bear Office
in either University, as likewise all other that should be put in any
Employment, Civil or Military, should declare that they were not Papists, but
were of the Protestant Religion, and that by their taking of the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Test; yet these Evil Counselors have in
effect annulled and abolished all those Laws, both with relation to
Ecclesiastical and Civil Employments.

7. In order to Ecclesiastical Dignities and Offices, they have not only
without any color of Law, but against most express Laws to the contrary, set
up a Commission, of a certain number of Persons, to whom they have committed
the Cognizance and Direction of all Ecclesiastical matters; in the which
Commission there has been, and still is one of his Majesty's Ministers of
State, who makes now public profession of the Popish Religion, and who at the
time of his first professing it, declared that for a great while before he had
believed that to be the only true Religion. By all this, the deplorable State
to which the Protestant Religion is reduced, is apparent, since the Affairs of
the Church of England are now put into the hands of persons who have accepted
of a Commission that is manifestly illegal, and who have executed it contrary
to all Law; and that now one of their chief Members has abjured the Protestant
Religion, and declared himself a Papist; by which he is become incapable of
holding any public Employment. The said Commissioners have hitherto given such
proof of their Submission to the Directions given them, that there is no reason
to doubt, but they will still continue to promote all such designs as will be
most agreeable to them. And those Evil Counselors take care to raise none to
any Ecclesiastical Dignities, but persons that have no Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, and that now hide their unconcernedness for it, under the specious
pretense of Moderation. The said Commissioners have suspended the Bishop of
London, only because he refused to obey an Order that was sent him to suspend a
worthy Divine, without so much as citing him before him to make his own
Defense, or observing the common forms of Process. They have turned out a
President chosen by the Fellows of Magdalene College, and afterward all the
Fellows of that College, without so much as citing them before any Court that
could take legal Cognizance of that Affair, or obtaining any Sentence against
them by a competent Judge. And the only reason that was given for turning them
out, was their refusing to choose for their President, a person that was
recommended to them, by the Instigation of those Evil Counselors, though the
Right of a Free-Election belonged undoubtedly to them. But they were turned out
of their Free-holds contrary to Law, and to that express Provision in the Magna
Charta; That no man shall lose Life or Goods, but by the Law of the Land. And
now these Evil Counselors have put the said College wholly into the hands of
Papists, though as is abovesaid, they are incapable of all such Employments, both
by the Law of the Land, and the Statutes of the College. These Commissioners
have also cited before them all the Chancellors and Archdeacons of England,
requiring them to certify to them the Names of all such Clergymen as have read
the King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, and of such as have not read
it, without considering that the reading of it was not enjoined the Clergy by
the Bishops who are their Ordinaries. The Illegality and Incompetency of the
said Court of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners was so notoriously known, and it
did so evidently appear, that it tended to the Subversion of the Protestant
Religion, that the Most Reverend Father in God, William Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, seeing that it was raised
for no other end but to oppress such persons as were of eminent Virtue,
Learning and Piety, refused to sit, or to concur in it.

8. And though there are many express Laws against all Churches or Chapels for
the exercise of the Popish Religion, and also against all Monasteries and
Convents, and more particulary against the Order of the Jefuits, yet those Evil
Counselors have procured orders for the building of several Churches and
Chapels for the exercise of that Religion. They have also procured diverse
Monasteries to be erected, and in contempt of the Law, they have not only set
up several Colleges of Jesuits in diverse places for the corrupting of the
Youth, but have raised up one of the Order to be a Privy Counselor, and a
Minister of State. By all which they do evidently show, that they are
restrained by no rules of Law whatsoever, but that they have subjected the
Honors and Estates of the Subjects and the established Religion, to a
Despotick Power, and to Arbitrary Government. In all which they are served and
seconded by those Ecclesiastical Commissioners.

9. They have also followed the same Methods with relation to Civil affairs;
for they have procured orders to examine all Lords Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and all others that were in
any public Employment, if they would concur with the King in the repeal of the
Test and Penal Laws, and all such whose Consciences did not suffer them to
comply with their designs, were turned out, and others were put in their
places, who they believed would be more compliant to them in their designs of
defeating the Intent and Execution of those Laws which had been made with so
much care and caution for the security of the Protestant Religion. And in many
of these places they have put professed Papists, though the Law has disabled
them, and warranted the Subjects not to have any regard to their Orders.

10. They have also invaded the Privileges, and seized on the Charters of most
of those Towns that have a right to be represented by their Burgesses in
Parliament, and have procured Surrenders to be made of them, by which the
Magistrates in them have delivered up all their Rights and Privileges, to be
disposed of at the pleasure of those Evil Counselors, who have thereupon
placed new Magistrates in those Towns, such as they can most entirely confide
in; and in many of them they have put Popish Magistrates, notwithstanding the
Incapacities under which the Law has put them.

11. And whereas no Nation whatsoever can subsist without the administration of
good and impartial Justice, upon which men's Lives, Liberties, Honors and
Estates do depend, those Evil Counselors have subjected these to an Arbitrary
and Despotick Power: In the most important Affairs they have studied to
discover beforehand the Opinions of the Judges, and have turned out such as
they found would not conform themselves to their intentions, and have put
others in their places, of whom they were more assured, without having any
regard to their Abilities. And they have not stuck to raise even professed
Papists to the Courts of Judicature, notwithstanding their Incapacity by Law,
and that no regard is due to any Sentences flowing from them. They have carried
this so far, as to deprive such Judges, who in the common administration of
Justice, showed that they were governed by their Consciences, and not by the
Directions which the others gave them. By which it is apparent, that they
design to render themselves the absolute Masters of the Lives, Honors and
Estates of the Subjects, of what rank or dignity soever they may be; and that
without having any regard either to the Equity of the Cause, or to the
Consciences of the Judges, whom they will have to submit in all things to their
own Will and Pleasure; hoping by such ways to intimidate those who are yet in
Employment, as also such others, as they shall think fit, to put in the rooms
of those whom they have turned out; and to make them see what they must look
for, if they should at any time act in the least contrary to their good liking;
and that no failings of that kind are pardoned in any Persons whatsoever. A
great deal of Blood has been shed in many places of the Kingdom, by Judges
governed by those Evil Counselors, against all the Rules and Forms of Law,
without so much as suffering the Persons that were accused to Plead in their
own Defense.

12. They have also, by putting the Administration of Justice in the hands of
Papists, brought all the matters of Civil Justice into great uncertainties;
with how much Exactness and Justice soever that these Sentences may have been
given. For since the Laws of the Land do not only exclude Papists from all
Places of Judicature, but have put them under an Incapacity, none are bound to
acknowledge or to obey their Judgments, and all Sentences given by them are
null and void of themselves: So that all Persons who have been cast in Trials
before such Popish Judges, may justly look on their pretended Sentences, as
having no more force than the Sentences of any private and unauthorised Person
whatsoever. So deplorable is the case of the Subjects, who are obliged to
answer to such Judges, that must in all things stick to the Rules which are set
them by those Evil Counselors, who as they raised them up to those
Employments, so can turn them out of them at pleasure; and who can never be
esteemed Lawful Judges; so that all their Sentences are in the Construction of
the Law, of no Force and Efficacy. They have likewise disposed of all Military
Employments, in the same manner: For though the Laws have not only Excluded
Papists from all such Employments, but have in particular, Provided that they
should be disarmed; yet they, in contempt of these Laws, have not only armed
the Papists, but have likewise raised them up to the greatest Military Trusts,
both by Sea and Land, and that Strangers as well as Natives, and Irish as well
as English, that so by those means, having rendered themselves Masters both of
the Affairs of the Church, of the Government of the Nation, and of the Courts
of Justice, and subjected them all to a Despotick and Arbitrary Power, they
might be in a capacity to maintain and execute their wicked Designs, by the
assistance of the Army, and thereby to enslave the Nation.

13. The dismal effects of this Subversion of the Established Religion, Laws
and Liberties in England, appear more evidently to us, by what we see done in
Ireland; where the whole Government is put in the Hands of Papists, and where
all the Protestant Inhabitants are under the daily fears of what may be justly
apprehended from the Arbitrary Power which is set up there: which has made
great numbers of them leave that Kingdom, and abandon their Estates in it,
remembering well that Cruel and Bloody Massacre which fell out in that Island in
the Year 1641.

14. Those evil Counselors have also prevailed with the King to declare in
Scotland, That he is clothed with Absolute Power, and that all the Subjects
are bound to Obey him without Reserve: upon which he has assumed an Arbitrary
Power both over the Religion and Laws of that Kingdom; from all which it is
apparent, what is to be looked for in England, as soon as matters are duly
prepared for it.

15. Those great and insufferable Oppressions, and the open Contempt of all
Law, together with the Apprehensions of the sad Consequences that must
certainly follow upon it, have put the Subjects under great and just Fears; and
have made them look after such lawful Remedies as are allowed of in all
Nations: yet all has been without effect. And those Evil Counselors have
endeavored to make all Men apprehend the loss of their Lives, Liberties,
Honors, and Estates, if they should go about to preserve themselves from this
Oppression, by Petitions, Representations, or other means authorized by Law.
Thus did they proceed with the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other Bishops,
who having offered a most humble Petition to the King, in terms full of
Respect, and not exceeding the number limited by Law, in which they set forth
in short, the Reasons for which they could not obey that order which, by the
Instigation of those Evil Counselors, was sent them, requiring them to appoint
their Clergy to read in their Churches the Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience; were sent to Prison, and afterward brought to a Trial, as if they
had been guilty of some enormous Crime. They were not only obliged to defend
themselves in that pursuit, but to appear before professed Papists, who had not
taken the Test, and by consequence were Men whose Interest led them to condemn
them; and the Judges that gave their Opinion in their favors, were thereupon
turned out.

16. And yet it cannot be pretended, that any Kings, how great soever their
Power has been, and how Arbitrary and Despotick soever they have been in the
exercise of it, have ever reckoned it a Crime for their Subjects to come in all
Submission and Respect, and in a due number, not exceeding the limits of the
Law, and represent to them the Reasons that made it impossible for them to obey
their Orders. Those Evil Counselors have also treated a Peer of the Realm as a
Criminal, only because he said, That the Subjects were not bound to obey the
Orders of a Popish Justice of Peace; though it is evident, that they being by
Law rendered incapable of all such Trusts, no regard is due to their Orders.
This being the security which the People have by the Law for their Lives,
Liberties, Honors and Estates, that they are not to be subjected to the
Arbitrary Proceedings of Papists, that are contrary to Law, put into any
Employments Civil or Military.

Both We our selves, and our Dearest and most Entirely Beloved Consort the
Princess, have endeavored to signify, in terms full of respect to the King,
the just and deep Regret which all these Proceedings have given us; and in
Compliance with his Majesty's desires signified to us, We declared both by Word
of Mouth, to his Envoy, and in Writing, what our Thoughts were touching the
Repealing of the Test and Penal Laws; which we did in such a manner, that we
hoped we had proposed an Expedient, by which the Peace of those Kingdoms, and a
happy agreement among the Subjects of all Persuasions, might have been settled:
but those Evil Counselors have put such ill Constructions on these our good
Intentions, that they have endeavored to alienate the King more and more from
us; as if We had designed to disturb the Quiet and Happiness of the Kingdom.

18. The last and great Remedy for all those Evils, is the calling of a
Parliament, for securing the Nation against the evil Practices of those wicked
Counselors: but this could not be yet compassed, nor can it be easily brought
about. For those Men apprehending, that a Lawful Parliament being once
assembled, they would be brought to an account for all their open Violations of
Law, and for their Plots and Conspiracies against the Protestant Religion, and
the Lives and Liberties of their Subjects, they have endeavored, under the
specious Pretense of Liberty of Conscience, first to sow Divisions among
Protestants, between those of the Church of England and the Dissenters: The
Design being laid to engage Protestants, that are all equally concerned, to
preserve themselves from Popish Oppression, into mutual Quarrellings, that so
by these some Advantages might be given to them to bring about their Designs;
and that both in the Election of the Members of Parliament, and afterward in
the Parliament it self. For they see well, that if all Protestants could enter
into a mutual good understanding one with another, and concur together in the
preserving of their Religion, it would not be possible for them to compass
their wicked Ends. They have also required all Persons in the several Counties
of England, that either were in any Employment, or were in any considerable
Esteem, to declare beforehand, that they would concur in the Repeal of the
Test and Penal Laws; and that they would give their Voices in the Elections to
Parliament, only for such as would concur in it: Such as would not thus
preingage themselves, were turned out of all Employments; And others who entered
into those Engagements, were put in their places, many of them being Papists:
And contrary to the Charters and Privileges of those Buroughs that have a
Right to send Burgesses to Parliament, they have ordered such Regulations to be
made, as they thought fit and necessary, for assuring themselves of all the
Members that are to be chosen by those Corporations: and by this means they
hope to avoid that Punishment which they have deserved; though it is apparent,
that all Acts made by Popish Magistrates are null and void of themselves: So
that no Parliament can be Lawful, for which the Elections and Returns are made
by Popish Sheriffs and Mayors of Towns; and therefore as long as the Authority
and Magistracy is in such hands, it is not possible to have any Lawful
Parliament. And though according to the Constitution of the English Government,
and Immemorial Custom, all Elections of Parliament Men ought to be made with an
entire Liberty, without any sort of Force, or the requiring the Electors to
choose such Persons as shall be named to them; and the Persons thus freely
Elected, ought to give their Opinions freely, upon all Matters that are brought
before them, having the good of the Nation ever before their Eyes, and
following in all things the dictates of their Conscience; yet now the People of
England cannot expect a Remedy from a Free Parliament, legally Called and
Chosen. But they may perhaps see one Called, in which all Elections will be
carried by Fraud or Force, and which will be composed of such Persons, of whom
those Evil Counselors hold themselves well assured, in which all things will
be carried on according to their Direction and Interest, without any regard to
the Good or Happiness of the Nation. Which may appear evidently from this, that
the same Persons tried the Members of the last Parliament, to gain them to
Consent to the Repeal of the Test and Penal Laws, and procured that Parliament
to be dissolved, when they found that they could not, neither by Promises nor
Threatenings, prevail with the Members to comply with their wicked Designs.

19. But to Crown all, there are great and violent Presumptions, inducing us to
believe, that those Evils Counselors, in order to the carrying on of their ill
Designs, and to the gaining to themselves the more time for the effecting of
them, for the encouraging of their Accomplices, and for the discouraging of all
good Subjects, have published, That the Queen has brought forth a Son; though
there have appeared both during the Queen's pretended bigness, and in the
manner in which the Birth was managed, so many just and visible grounds of
Suspicion, that not only we our selves, but all the good Subjects of those
Kingdoms, do vehemently suspect, that the pretended Prince of Wales was not
born by the Queen. And it is notoriously known to all the World, that many both
doubted of the Queen's Bigness, and of the Birth of the Child, and yet there
was not any one thing done to satisfy them, or to put an end to their Doubts.

20. And since our Dearest and most Entirely Beloved Consort the Princess, and
likewise We Our Selves, have so great an Interest in this Matter, and such a
Right, as all the World knows, to the Succession to the Crown: Since also the
English did in the Year 1672, when the States General of the United Provinces
were invaded in a most unjust War, use their utmost Endeavors to put an end to
that War, and that in opposition to those who were then in the Government; and
by their so doing, they run the hazard of losing both the Favor of the Court,
and their Employments: And since the English Nation has ever restified a most
particular Affection and Esteem, both to our Dearest Consort the Princess, and
to Our Selves, We cannot excuse our selves from espousing their Interests, in a
Matter of such high Consequence; and from Contributing all that lies in us, for
the Maintaining both of the Protestant Religion, and of the Laws and Liberties
of those Kingdoms, and for the securing to them the continual enjoyment of all
their just Rights. To the doing of which, We are most earnestly solicited by a
great many Lords, both Spiritual and Temporal, and by many Gentlemen and other
Subjects of all Ranks.

21. THEREFORE it is, that We have thought fit to go over to England, and to
carry over with us a Force, sufficient by the Blessing of God, to defend us
from the Violence of those Evil Counselors. AND WE being desirous that our
Intentions in this may be rightly understood, have for this end prepared this
Declaration, in which as we have hitherto given a True Account of the Reasons
inducing us to it; So we now think fit to DECLARE, That this our Expedition is
intended for no other Design, but to have a Free and Lawful Parliament
assembled, as soon as is possible: and that in order to this, all the late
Charters by which the Elections of Burgesses are limited contrary to the
ancient Custom, shall be considered as null and of no force: And likewise all
Magistrates who have been unjustly turned out, shall forthwith resume their
former Employments, as well as all the Buroughs of England shall return again
to their Ancient Prescriptions and Charters: And more particularly, that the
Ancient Charter of the Great and Famous City of London, shall again be in
force: And that the Writs for the Members of Parliament shall be addressed to
the proper Officers, according to Law and Custom. That also none be suffered to
choose or to be chosen Members of Parliament, but such as are qualified by Law:
And that the Members of Parliament being thus lawfully Chosen, they shall meet
and sit in full Freedom; That so the Two Houses may concur in the preparing of
such Laws, as they upon full and free Debate shall judge necessary and
convenient, both for the confirming and executing the Law concerning the Test,
and such other Laws as are necessary for the Security and Maintenance of the
Protestant Religion; as likewise for making such Laws as may establish a good
agreement between the Church of England and all Protestant Dissenters; as also
for the covering and securing of all such who will live peaceably under the
Government, as becomes good Subjects, from all Persecution upon the account of
their Religion, even Papists themselves not excepted; and for the doing of all
other things, which the Two Houses of Parliament shall find necessary for the
Peace, Honor and Safety of the Nation, so that there may be no more danger of
the Nations falling at any time hereafter under Arbitrary Government. To this
Parliament we will also refer the Enquiry into the Birth of the pretended
Prince of Wales, and of all things relating to it, and to the Right of
Succession.

22. And We, for our part, will concur in every thing that may procure the
Peace and Happiness of the Nation, which a Free and Lawful Parliament shall
determine; Since we have nothing before our Eyes in this our Undertaking, but
the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, the Covering of all Men from
Persecution for their Consciences, and the securing to the whole Nation the
free enjoyment of all their Laws, Rights and Liberties, under a Just and Legal
Government.

23. This is the Design that we have proposed to our selves, in appearing upon
this occasion in Arms: In the Conduct of which, We will keep the Forces under
our Command, under all the strictness of Martial Discipline; and take a special
care, that the People of the Countries through which we must march, shall not
suffer by their means; and as soon as the state of the Nation will admit of it,
We promise that we will send back all those Foreign Forces that we have brought
along with us.

24. We do therefore hope that all People will judge rightly of us, and approve
of these our Proceedings: But we chiefly rely on the Blessing of God for the
Success of this our Undertaking, in which we place our whole and only
Confidence.

25. We do in the last place invite and require all Persons whatsoever, all the
Peers of the Realm both Spiritual and Temporal, all Lords Lieutenants, Deputy
Lieutenants, and all Gentlemen, Citizens, and other Commons of all ranks, to
come and assist us, in order to the Executing of this our Design, against all
such as shall endeavor to Oppose us; that so we may prevent all those Miseries
which must needs follow upon the Nations being kept under Arbitrary Government
and Slavery: And that all the Violences and Disorders which have overturned the
whole Constitution of the English Government, may be fully redressed in a FREE
AND LEGAL PARLIAMENT.

26. And we do likewise resolve, that as soon as the Nations are brought to a
state of Quiet, We will take care that a Parliament shall be called in
Scotland, for the restoring the Ancient Constitution of that Kingdom, and for
bringing the Matters of Religion to such a Settlement, that the People may live
easy and happy, and for putting an end to all the injust Violences, that have
been in a course of so many years committed there.

27. We will also study to bring the Kingdom of Ireland to such a state, that
the Settlement there may be religiously observed; and that the Protestant and
British Interest there, may be secured. And we will endeavor by all possible
means, to procure such an Establishment in all the Three Kingdoms, that they
may all live in a happy Union and Correspondence together; and that the
Protestant Religion, and the Peace, Honor and Happiness of those Nations, may
be established upon lasting Foundations.

Given under our Hand and Seal, at our Court in the Hague, the Tenth Day of
October, in the Year of our Lord 1688. WILLIAM HENRY, PRINCE OF ORANGE.
By his Highness's special Command, C. HUY GENS

THus you have an exact and full Account of the Prince of Orange 's
Declaration: And can you find one word of a Treaty with France, to extirpate
all Protestants? Or can you imagine, that if they had the least Reason for such
a Talk, they who aggravate every little thing, would let this Declaration pass
without the least mentioning of what is so momentous and important? This
Modesty of the Expression is a Justification of the Sincerity and Civility of
the Declarer.
And is there any thing more than a violent Presumption suggested about the
Prince of Wales? And is the very Noise of such a Presumption reason enough to
justify a real War? As for the other things urged, are they not redressable by
a Parliament, and so far as it is possible without one, already Redressed?
Nothing but a Free Parliament could re-establish our shattered Privileges and
Liberties, and therefore it was so stiffly denied.
It Is a Parliament then that is the main thing to be insisted on, which, though
Chosen as the last was, would be too see le an Argument to clear the present
Invasion from the charge of being Injust and Unrighteous.

The Great Men of this Kingdom ever thought a Parliament Irregularly Chosen
more eligible than either a War, or a rash Enquiry into the manner of the
Choice. Did Queen Elizabeth 's Parliament admit of a Words being spoken to
bring Queen Mary 's Parliament into doubt? Did they not look on it as most
dangerous to do so? And although by the Triennial Bill, the long Parliament in
the late King's Reign was actually Dissolved Nine Months before it thought on
the Repeal thereof, yet even after 'twas destroyed by it, the Dissolved
Parliament sat and repealed the Dissolving Bill, and made the Conventicle-Act,
the Test-Laws, repealed the Writ De Haeretico Comburendo, and passed the Habeas
Corpus Bill into a Law. But was the Assembly that acted thus Irregularly, ever
called to an Account for it, or any of their Laws declared Void and Null? Or
was it ever esteemed a Good Reason for a War? And yet this is much more than
has been ever done by His Present Majesty. True, the Charters were taken away
to secure the Succession and Monarchy then, but now to ruin the English
Liberty, and Protestant Religion.
Besides, 'twas the late King that took away the Charters, and those who were
entering on violent Courses for their Restoration, were proclaimed Trayt^rs,
and several executed for it, while all the Pulpits throughout England sounded
of the Horridness, Blackness, Vileness, Devilishness of that Conspiracy; And is
what was Black and Horrid then, become Noble, Great, Generous and Glorious now?

Thus much was also a part of the late Duke of Monmouth 's Declaration, and yet
as Parliament chosen by the Garbled Corporations proclaimed him a raytor, and
Attainted him: But does the Blood of Monmouth, as well as of the forementioned
Conspirators, and of all those in the West, lie on the Judges, Juries,
Nobility, and other Gentry of the Church of England, Their Loyalty, or rather
Credulity, had been too notoriously abused, to be now again imposed on by this
Argument: So it fell on the Offerer, and raised a just Indigration, instead of
Submission to a second Cheat.
that had a hand in condemning such as by violent Methods would have restored
the Charters. If these things could not vindicate the Presbyterian Plotters in
the late King's Reign, or Monmouth 's Rebellion, it cannot excuse the present
Undertaking; for this does infinitely exceed those and the Civil War too; for
neither of them brought in a Foreign Power upon us, as now is done.

But it must be observed, that how great soever our Grievances have been, yet
now, all that Relief that can reasonably de desired, is granted us. The
Ecclesiastical Commission actually broken up, the Bishop of London, the Master
and Fellows of Magdalen College, and the Ancient Charters of Cities and
Buroughs actually restored, all things on the ancient Bottom, for the calling
a Free Parliament, which His Majesty would have done before this time, had not
the Prince of Orange hindered him; and as soon as the Prince of Orange The
Redresses granted had no certainty, because the Dispersing Power was still
defended, the Bishop of London's Sentence remitted, but not declared Illegal;
the Charters were restored, but still subject to new Quo Warranto's. And as for
the promised Parliament, tho^ it was after granted; yet so dreadful it was,
that the abandoning the Throne was more eligible than the sight of that
Assembly. So all this Cant produced no good effect on the exasperated Minds of
M^n.
departs, the King will call one; whereby all the Prince's Pretensions are
taken away and nothing more remains for him to do, but to return home, or
contend for the Crown.

Yet the Prince would have us believe, that though he is not satisfied in this,
yet he intends no such thing as the Crown, or a Conquest of it, as appears by
his Highness's Additional Declaration.

His Highness's Additional Declaration.
AFter we had prepared and printed this our Declaration, we have understood,
that the Subverters of the Religion and Laws of those Kingdoms, hearing of our
Preparations, to assist the People against them, have begun to retract some of
the Arbitrary and Despotick Powers that they had assumed, and to vacate some of
their Injust Judgments and Decrees. The sense of their Guilt, and the distrust
of their Force, have induced them to offer to the City of London some seeming
Relief from their great Oppressions; hoping thereby to quiet the People, and to
divert them from demanding a Re-establishment of their Religion and Laws under
the shelter of our Arms: They do also give out, That we do intend to Conquer
and Enslave the Nation; and therefore it is that we have thought fit to add a
few words to our Declaration.

We are confident, that no Persons can have such hard thoughts of us, as to
imagine that we have any other Design in this Undertaking, than to procure a
Settlement of the Religion, and of the Liberties and Properties of the Subjects
upon so sure a Foundation, that there may be no danger of the Nations relapsing
into the like Miseries at any time hereafter. And as the Forces that we have
brought along with us, are utterly disproportioned to that wicked Design of
Conquering the Nation, if we were capable of Intending it; so the great numbers
of the Principal Nobility and Gentry, that are Men of Eminent Quality and
Estates, and Persons of known Integrity and Zeal both for the Religion and
Government of England, many of them being also distinguished by their constant
Fidelity to the Crown, who do both accompany us in this Expedition, and have
earnestly solicited us to it, will cover us from all such malicious
Insinuations: For it is not to be imagined, that either those who have Invited
us, or those that are already come to Assist us, can join in a wicked attempt
of Conquest, to make void their own lawful Titles to their Honors, Estates and
Interests. We are also confident, that all Men see how little weight there is
to be laid on all Promises and Engagements that can be now made; since there
has been so little regard had in time past, to the most solemn Promises. And as
that imperfect Redress that is now offered, is a plain Confession of those
Violations of the Government that we have set forth; so the Defectiveness of it
is no less apparent: For they lay down nothing which they may not take up at
pleasure; and they reserve entire, and not so much as mentioned, their Claims
and Pretenses to an Arbitrary and Despotick Power; which has been the Root of
all their Oppression, and of the total Subversion of the Government. And it is
plain, that there can be no Redress nor Remedy offered but in Parliament; by a
Declaration of the Rights of the Subjects that have been invaded, and not by
any Pretended Acts of Grace, to which the extremity of their Affairs has driven
them. Therefore it is that we have thought fit to declare, That we will refer
all to a Free Assemby of the Nation, in a Lawful Parliament.

Given under our Hand and Seal, at our Court in the Hague, theTwenty fourth day
of October, in the Year of our Lord 1688. WILLIAM HENRY, PRINCE OF ORANGE.
By his Highness's special Command, C. HUYGENS.

THis Addition does very fully unfold the Design, the Prince will abide among
us with a Foreign Power, and make the Choice of a Parliament impracticable, and
therefore the Call of one a weak and foolish thing; and yet oblige us to
distrust every Promise the King makes us, lessening what is done, and
insinuating that all things shall be soon undone. And why all these
Insinuations, but to help us to Vnravel the whole Intriegue; which, if it be
not for the Crown, must be thus: The Dutch knowing how the Prince has ravished
from them their Liberties and Privileges, and what danger they are in of being
utterly undone, if Liberty of Conscience be settled among us in England,
precipitate the Prince on this hazardous Undertaking, not doubting but they
shall be either delivered from the Prince's Exercise of a Despotick Power over
them, or spoil our Liberty, to the Continuance and Advance of their own Trade;
which may be the reason why in the entrance into the Declaration, what relates
to Religion is so worded as to gain the Bishops over to them, the more easily
to effect their Design; for says the Declaration, The Alteration of Religion is
endeavored, and that a Religion which is contrary to Law, is endeavored to be
introduced: It is not said, that the Popish Religion, but a Religion contrary
to the Law; and, it is well known, that the Laws are against the Religion of the
Dissenters, and the Prince's endeavor shall be to preserve and maintain, above
all, the Religion and Worship of God that is Established among us; which cannot
be understood of the Worship the Dissenters use, but of the Hierarchical way,
that is as contrary to the Prince's own Religion, as it is to that of the
Dissenters in England. And to persuade the Churchmen to close with him, he
Declares, That he was most earnestly solicited to come over by the Lords
Spiritual, not doubting, but that if the Belief thereof prevail among the
Mobile, they will be all of an Opinion, that the Prince's Grounds are most Just
and Reasonable; so that though it cannot be made out by any thing particularly
known, yet this general carrying a thousand unheard of Arguments in its Bowels
cannot fail of success.

But what if this prove not True? May we afterward venture to believe his
Highness in any thing, which under a violent Temptation, he may be, as now,
moved to declare? The Prince insists on it, That many of the Lords Spiritual
did most earnestly solicit him to Invade us, and yet the Lords Spiritual do
not only declare, That they look on this Invasion to be sinful, but, that they
never solicited his coming; And it must be acknowledged, That they could do no
such thing without acting most contrary How the Bishops were u^ed on th^s
score, is set down in 'its proper place.
to their avowed Principles, and contrary to most solemn Oaths and
Declarations; and Men should take heed, how they receive this Report against
the Right Reverend Bishops; the Design in which they are said to Embarque being
founded on that very Principle, in pursuance of which the Head of Charles the
Blessed Martyr was brought to the Block; and Embarque they cannot, but by
joining with a Foreign Army; the chief part of which is made up of those, who
though they would willingly enough ensnare our Bishops, cannot be reasonably
supposed to be true in the Promises they make about supporting their
Hierarchical Grandeur; the utmost they must expect in the long-run can be no
more than a turning their Lands into Money, that, to the end their dependence
on the Government may be the more effectually secured, instead of their present
Lands, Leases, etc. they may have an Yearly Salary answerable to their worth
and desert; which as 'twill be uncertain, so it cannot be hop^d that its utmost
height shall arise to the State and Degree of a Baron; for Baronies go with
their Lands. By this you may see, how unlikely any sort of Englishmen should
by this Invasion gain any thing but Misery.

TO this was subjoyned a short Discourse, styled, Animad-versions upon the
Declaration of his Highness the Prince of Orange. Which is about twelve Pages
in Quarto, supposed to be written by Steward, but then attributed to
Castlemain; but whoever was the Author of it, it is a spruce piece of
Sophistry; and he was a Person who well knew what could be said for a bad Case,
and where it was not possible to make any defense, and there would insensibly
glide by, as if he had not minded the difficulty.

Page 21, he has this Expression; Put it to the Nation, and all the Nation must
declare, that every Man enjoys his Conscience, his Liberty, and his Property,
even to the envy of their less happy Neighbors; and that there has been no
proceeding against a single Man, but for his single misdemeanor; and this is
not Arbitrary, but Legal Power. And then to asperse his Majesty with
overturning all Laws, under the Name of Evil Counselors! Why, Sir, let his
Counselors be never so bad, they are worse, whose Service his Highness has
used in P^uning his Declaration. By this Sample the Reader may judge of that
whole Paper.

First, He uses the utmost assurance to outface the World as to the Matter of
Fact. Secondly, Pretends Redress. Thirdly, Promises a Parliament, when it may
be denied or overawed. Fourthly, Makes all the Prince's Assisters Traitors,
and Perjured. And Lastly, Because the King was not accountable to his own
Subjects, concludes, that neither was he so to the Prince, though a Sovereign
Prince. So he was to be revered like a God, and Nobody (not a
Neighbour-interested Prince) was to presume to say to him, What do thou? To
that height of stupidity was their Flattery then arrived, but soon after it
expired!

This is the best Abstract I can give of that Defense, which is too long to be
entirely inserted in this Work, though it were to be wished a larger might in
due time be published, with all the material Papers at large. This Paper was
afterward Answered; but things then had so rapid a motion, that the Reply
coming too late, was scarce read or regarded. The Prince being then invited to
London by the Peers, by the Guild Hall Declaration.

Though there was not all that Men had fondly expected in this Declaration, yet
here was enough to satisfy any rational Man, that the Expelling this Prince
and his Army before our Religion, Liberties, Properties and Government were
effectually settled in Parliament; and those who had so outragiously attempted
the ruin of them were called to an Account, would certainly end in the ruin
of them; and was a kind of cutting up our Laws and Religion with our Swords.
This and nothing else was the cause that wherever the Prince's Declaration was
read, it conquered all that saw or heard it; and it was to no purpose to excite
Men to fight against their own Interest, and to destroy what was more dear to
them than their Lives.

At the same time, an Extract of the States General their Resolution, Thursday
the Twenty eighth of October, 1688. was also Printed privately in London;
wherein, among other Reasons why they had entrusted the Prince of Orange with
this Fleet and Army, is this which follows:

THE King of France has upon several occasions showed himself dissatisfied
with this State; which gave cause to sear and apprehend, that in case the King
of Great Britain should happen to compass within his Kingdom, and obtain an
Absolute Power over his People, that then both Kings, out of Interest of State,
and Hatred and Zeal against the Protestant Religion, would endeavor to bring
this State to Confusion, and, if possible, quite to subject it.

At the same time was Printed also this Letter of the Prince of Orange, to the
Officers of the Army.

Gentlemen and Friends,
WE have given you so full and so true an Account of our Intentions in this
Expedition, in our Declaration, that as we can add nothing to it, so we are
sure you can desire nothing more of us. We are come to preserve your Religion,
and to restore and establish your Liberties and Properties; and therefore we
cannot suffer our selves to doubt, but that all true Englishmen will come and
concur with us in our desire to secure these Nations from POPERY and SLAVERY.
You must all plainly see, that you are only made use of as Instruments to
enslave the Nation, and ruin the Protestant Religion; and when that is done,
you may judge what ye your selves ought to expect, both from the Cashiering all
the Protestant and English Officers and Soldiers in Ireland, and by the Irish
Soldiers being brought over to be put in your Places; and of which you have
seen so fresh an Instance, that we need not put you in mind of it. You know how
many of your Fellow-Officers have been used, for their standing firm to the
Protestant Religion, and to the Laws of England; and you cannot slatter your
selves so far as to expect to be better used, if those who have broke their
Word so often, should by your means be brought out of those streights to which
they are at present reduced. We hope likewise that ye will not suffer your
selves to be abused by a false Notion of Honor, but that you will in the first
place consider, what you owe to Almighty God and your Religion, to your
Country, to your Selves, and to your Posterity, which you, as Men of Honor,
ought to prefer to all private Considerations and Engagements whatsoever. We do
therefore expect that you will consider the Honor that is now set before you,
of being the Instruments of serving your Country, and securing your Religion;
and we shall ever remember the Service you shall do us upon this occasion, and
will promise you, That we shall place such particular Marks of our Favor on
every one of you, as your Behavior at this time shall deserve of us, and the
Nation; in which we shall make a great distinction of those that shall come
seasonably to join their Arms with ours; and you shall find us to be your well
wishing and assured Friend,

W. H. P. O.


This Letter was spread underhand over the whole Kingdom, and read by all
sorts of Men; and the reason of it being undeniable, it had a great force on
the Spirits of the Soldiery; so that those who did not presently comply with
it, yet resolved they would never strike one stroke in this Quarrel, till they
had a Parliament to secure the Religion, Laws and Liberties of England; which
the Court, on the other side, had resolved should not be granted till the
Prince of Orange, with his Army, was expelled out of the Nation, and all those
that had submitted to him (which were not many then) were reduced into their
Power, to be treated as they thought fit.

In the mean time the Fleet came about from the Buoy and Ore to Portsmouth,
under the Command of the Lord Dartmouth where it arrived the Seventeenth of
November; and on Monday the Ninteenth day of November the King entered
Salisbury, which was then the Head Quarters of the Army.

The Sixteenth of November, the Lord Delamere having received certain
Intelligence of the landing of the Prince of Orange in the West, and seeing the
Irish throng over in Arms, under pretense of Assisting the King, but in reality
to Enslave us at home, as they had already reduced our Country men in Ireland
to the lowest degree of Danger and Impusance that they have at any time been in
since the Conquest of Ireland in the Reign of Henry Il. he thereupon assembled
fifty Horsemen, and at the Head of them marched to Manchester; and the next day
he went to Bodon Downs, his Forces being then an hundred and fifty strong,
declaring his design was to join with the Prince of Orange. This small Party of
Men by degrees drew in all the North, and could never be suppressed.

Before his Royal Highness the Prince of Orange left Exeter, there was an
Association drawn up, and Signed by all the Lords and Gentlemen that were with
him, the Date of which I cannot assign.

WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed, who have now joined with the Prince of
Orange for the defense of the Protestant Religion, and for the maintaining the
Ancient Government, and the Laws and Liberties of England, Scotland and
Ireland, do engage to Almighty God, to his Highness the Prince of Orange, and
to one another, to stick firm to this Cause, and to one another, in the defense
of it, and never to depart from it, until our Religion, Laws and Liberties are
so far secured to us in a Free Parliament, that we shall be no more in danger
of falling under Popery and Slavery: And whereas we are engaged in this common
Cause under the Protection of the Prince of Orange, by which in case his Person
may be exposed to danger, and to the cursed attempts of Papists, and other
bloody Men; we do therefore solemnly engage to God and one another, That if any
such attempt be made upon him, we will pursue not only those who make it, but
all their Adherents, and all that we find in Arms against us, with the utmost
severity of a just Revenge, to their Ruin and Destruction. And that the
execution of any such Attempt (which God of his infinite Mercy forbid) shall
not divert us from prosecuting this Cause which we do now undertake, but that
it shall engage us to carry it on with all the rigor that so barbarous a
Practice shall deserve.

November the Twentieth there happened a Skirmish at Wincanton, between a
Detachment of seventy Horse and fifty Dragoons and Grenadiers, commanded by one
Colonel Sarsfeild; and about thirty of the Prince of Orange's Men, commanded by
one Cambel: where notwithstanding the great inequality of the Numbers, yet the
latter fought with that desperate bravery, that it struck a terror into the
Minds of the Army, who were otherwise sufficiently averse from fighting; and
besides, the Action was every where magnified so much above the real truth,
that it showed clearly how much Men wished the Prosperity of that Prince's Arms.

The Twenty second of November, the King at Salisbury put out a Proclamation of
Pardon, which was regarded by no body.

FOrasmuch as several of our Subjects have been seduced to take up Arms, and,
contrary to the Laws of God and Man, to join themselves with Foreigners and
Strangers in a most unnatural Invasion upon us, and this their Native Country,
many of whom we are persuaded have been wrought upon by false Suggestions and
misrepresentations made by our Enemies: And we desiring (as far as is possible)
to reduce our said Subjects to Duty and Obedience by Acts of Clemency, at least
resolving to leave all such as shall persist in so wicked an Enterprise,
without Excuse, do therefore promise, grant and declare, and by this our Royal
Proclamation publish our Free and Absolute Pardon to all our Subjects who have
taken up Arms, and joined with the Prince of Orange and his Adherents, in the
present Invasion of this our Kingdom, provided they quit and desert our said
Enemies, and within the space of twenty days from the Date of this our Royal
Proclamation, render themselves to some one of our Officers, Civil or Military,
and do not again, after they have rendered themselves, as aforesaid, return to
our Enemies, or be any way aiding or assisting to them: And they who refuse or
neglect to lay hold of this our Free and Gracious Offer, must never expect our
Pardon hereafter, but will be wholly and justly excluded of and from all hopes
thereof. And lastly, We do also promise and grant our Pardon and Protection to
all such Foreigners as do or shall come over to us, whom we will either
entertain in our Service, or otherwise grant them (if they shall desire it)
freedom of passage, and liberty to return to the respective Countries from
whence they came.

The same day the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty, then assembled at
Nottingham, made this Declaration.

WE the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of these Northern Counties, assembled
at Nottingham, for the Desence of the Laws, Religion, and Properties, according
to the free born Liberties and Privileges descended to Us from our Ancestors,
as the undoubted Birthright of the Subjects of this Kingdom of England, (not
doubting but the Infringers and Invaders of our Rights will represent us to the
rest of the Nation, in the most malicious Dress they can put upon us) do here
unanimously think it our Duty, to declare to the rest of our Protestant
Fellow Subjects the grounds of our present Undertaking.

We are by innumerable Grievances made sensible, that the very Fundamentals of
our Religion, Liberties, and Properties, are about to be rooted out by our late
Jesuitical Privy Council, as has been of late too apparent: First, by the
King's dispensing with all the Established Laws at his pleasure. 2. By
displacing all Officers out of all Offices of Trust and Advantage, and placing
others in their room, that are known Papists, deservedly made incapable, by the
Established Laws of this Land. 3. By destroying the Charters of most
Corporations in the Land. 4. By discouraging all Persons that are not Papists,
and preferring such as turn to Popery. 5. By displacing all honest and
conscientious Judges, unless they would, contrary to their Consciences, declare
that to be Law, which was merely Arbitrary. 6. By branding all Men with the
name of Rebels, that but offered to justify the Laws in a legal course against
the Arbitrary Proceedings of the King, or any of his corrupt Ministers. 7. By
burthening the Nation with an Army, to maintain the Violation of the Rights of
the Subjects; and by discountenancing the Established Religion. 9. By
forbidding the Subjects the benefit of Petitioning, and construing them
Libellers; so rendering the Laws a Nose of Wax, to serve their Arbitrary ends.
And many more suchlike, too long here to enumerate.

We being thus made sadly sensible of the Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government,
that is by the influence of Jesuitical Councils coming upon us, do unanimously
declare, That not being willing to deliver our These Gentlemen, who now pretend
to such extraordinary Loyalty, should do well to consider this.
Posterity over to such a condition of Popery and Slavery, as the aforesaid
oppressions do inevitably threaten; we will, to the utmost of our power, oppose
the same, by joining with the Prince of Orange, (whom, we hope, God Almighty
has sent to rescue us from the Oppressions aforesaid) will use our utmost
endeavors for the recovery of our almostruin'd Laws, Liberties, and Religion;
and herein we hope all good Protestant Subjects will with their Lives and
Fortunes be assistant to us, and not be bug bear'd with the opprobrious Terms
of Rebels by which they would fright us, to become perfect Slaves to their
Tyrannical Insolences and Usurpations: For we assure our selves, that no
rational and unbiased Person will judge it Rebellion to defend our Laws and
Religion, which all our Princes have Sworn at their Coronation; which Oath, how
well it has been observed of late, we desire a Free Parliament may have the
consideration of.

We own it Rebellion to resist a King that governs by Law; but he was always
accounted a Tyrant, that made his Will the Law; and to resist such a one, we
justly esteem no Rebellion, but a necessary Defense: And in this Consideration
we doubt not of all honest men's assistance, and humbly hope for and implore the
Great God's protection, that turns the Hearts of His People as pleases Him
best; it having been observed, that People can never be of one mind without His
Inspiration, which has in all Ages confirmed that Observation, Vox Populi est
vox Dei.

The present Restoring the Charters, and reversing the oppressing and unjust
Judgment given on Magdalen-College Fellows, is plain, are but to still the
People, like Plumbs to Children, by deceiving them for a while: But if they
shall by this Stratagem be fooled, till this present Storm that threatens the
Papists be past, as soon as they shall be re-settled, the former Oppression
will be put on with greater vigor; but we hope, In vain is the Net spread in
the sight of the Birds; for, First, The Papists old Rule is, that Faith is not
to be kept with Heretics, as they term Protestants, tho the Popish Religion is
the greatest Heresy. And, (2ly.) Queen Mary's so ill observing her Promises to
the Suffolk men that helped her to her Throne. And above all (3ly.) the Pope's
dispensing with the Breach of Oaths, Treaties, or Promises at his pleasure,
when it makes for the Service of Holy Church, as they term it. These, we say,
are such convincing Reasons, to hinder us from giving credit to the aforesaid
Mock shows of Redress, that we think our selves bound in Conscience to rest on
no Security that shall not be approved
by a freely-elected Parliament; To whom, under GOD, we referr our Cause.

In the mean time, the Nobility about the King having used all the Arguments
they could invent to persuade him to call a Free Parliament, and finding him
unmoveably fixed in a contrary resolution, and the Army in great discontent,
disorder, and fear, and the whole Nation just ready to take fire, It is said,
Prince George came back with the King to Andover, and went away with the Duke
of Ormond, on Sunday night, the 25th. of Nov.from that place.
Prince George of Denmark, the Duke of Grasion, the Lord Churchil, and many
others of the Protestant Nobility, left him, and went over to the Prince of
Orange, who was then at Sherborn; the Prince left this Letter for the King.

SIR,
WIth an Heart full of Grief am I forced to write what Prudence will not permit
me to say to your Face: And may I ever find Credit with Your Majesty, and
Protection from Heaven, as what I now do is free from Passion, Vanity, or
Design, with which Actions of this Nature are too often accompanied. I am not
ignorant of the frequent Mischiefs wrought in the World by factious pretenses
of Religion; but were not Religion the most justifiable Cause, it would not be
made the most specious pretense. And your Majesty has always shown too
uninterested a Sense of Religion, to doubt the just effects of it in one, whose
practices have, I hope, never given the World cause to censure his real
Conviction of it; or his backwardness to perform what his Honor and Conscience
prompt him to. How then can I longer disguise my just Concern for that
Religion, in which I have been so happily educated, which my Judgment thoroughly
convinces me to be the Best, and for the Support of which, I am so highly
interested in my native Country? and, Is not England now by the most endearing
Tie become so?

Whilst the restless Spirits of the Enemies of the REFORMED RELIGION, backed by
the cruel Zeal and prevailing Power of France, justly alarm and unite all the
Protestant Princes of Christendom, and engage them in so vast an Expense for
the support of it: Can I act so degenerous and mean a part, as to deny my
concurrence to such worthy Endeavors, for the disabusing of your Majesty by
the re-inforcement of those Laws and re-establishment of that Government, on
which alone depends the well being of your Majesty and of the Protestant
Religion in Europe. This, Sir, is that irresistible and only Cause that could
come in competition with my Duty and Obligations to your Majesty, and be able
to tear me from you; whilst the same affectionate desire of serving you
continues in me. Could I secure your person by the hazard of my Life, I should
think it could not be better employed. And, would to God these your distracted
Kingdoms might yet receive that satisfactory compliance from your Majesty, in
all their justifiable pretensions, as might upon the only sure Foundation, that
of the Love and Interest of your Subjects, establish your Government, and as
strongly unite the Hearts of all your Subjects to you, as is that of,

SIR, Your Majesty's most humble and most obedient Son and Servant.


The Lord Churchil left a Letter to the same purpose, which runs thus: SIR,
SInce Men are seldom suspected of Sincerity when they act contrary to their
Interests; and though my dutiful Behavior to your Majesty in the worst of Times
(for which I acknowledge my poor Services much overpay'd) may not be sufficient
to incline you to a charitable Interpretation of my Actions; yet, I hope, the
great advantage I enjoy under your Majesty, which I can never expect in any
other change of Government, may reasonably convince your Majesty and the World,
that I am acted by an higher Principle, when I offer that Violence to my
Inclination and Interest, as to desert your Majesty at a time, when your
Affairs seem to challenge the strictest Obedience from all your Subjects, much
more from one who lies under the greatest personal Obligations imaginable to
your Majesty. This, Sir, could proceed from nothing but the inviolable Dictates
of my Conscience, and a necessary Concern for my Religion, (which no good man
can oppose) and with which I am instructed, nothing ought to come in
competition: Heaven knows with what Partiality my dutiful Opinion of your
Majesty has hitherto represented those unhappy Designs, which inconsiderate
and self-interested men have framed against your Majesty's true Interest and
the Protestant Religion. But as I can no longer join with such, to give a
pretense
by Conquest to bring them to effect, so I will always, with the hazard of my
Life and Fortune, (so much your Majesty's due) endeavor to preserve your Royal
Person and Lawful Rights, with all the tender Concern and dutiful Respect that
becomes,

SIR, Your Majesty's Most dutiful and most obliged Subject and Servant.




The going off of these Great Men struck the King himself with Terror and
Affliction; and the Army, which was before in very much disorder, became
thereby so full of Fear and Suspicion, that a false Alarm being made by design
or accident, on Sunday the 25th. of November, the King and the whole Army left
Salisbury; the Army retreating to Reading, and the King to Andover, and on
Monday the 26th. of November returned in the Evening to London. The Princess
Ann of Denmark, his second Daughter, was gone privately the night before from
Whitehall, with the Lady Churchil; and if she had not left a Letter too behind
her, which showed the reason of her retiring, in all probability, all the
Popish Party about Whitehall had been cut in pieces by the King's own Guards,
upon a surmise they had made away this beloved Princess: So that they were
forced to print her Letter to the Queen, to secure them selves from Violence.

The first thing the King did after his return to London, was, to remove Sir
Edward Hales from being Lieutenant of the Tower, and to put Sir Bevil Skeleton,
a Protestant, in his place. Sir Edward had angered the whole City to the
utmost, by planting several Mortar pieces on the Walls toward the City, which
though designed only to awe it, had enraged more than frighted them. So that His
Majesty saw he was not safe at Whitehall, as long as Sir Edward was Master of
the Tower.

The 28th. day His Majesty ordered in a Privy Council the Lord Chancellor to
issue out Writs for the Sitting of a Parliament at Westminster, the 15th. day
of January following: But it was now too late, and the Nation was in that
Ferment, that it was not much regarded what the Court did or said.

The 30th. day of November, the King, to appease the Minds of the People,
issued out this Proclamation:

WE have thought fit, as the best and most proper means to Establish a lasting
Peace in this our Kingdom, to call a Parliament, and have therefore ordered our
Chancellor to cause Writs to be issued forth for summoning a Parliament to meet
at Westminster, upon the Fifteenth day of January next ensuing the Date of this
our Royal Proclamation. And, that nothing may be wanting on our part, toward
the Freedom of Elections, as we have already restored all Cities, Towns
Corporate, and Buroughs throughout our Kingdom, to their ancient Charters,
Rights, and Privileges; so we command and require all Persons whatsoever, that
they presume not by Menace or any other undue means, to influence Elections, or
procure the Vote of any Elector. And we do also strictly require and command
all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Officers, to whom the Execution or
Return of any Writ, Summons, Warrant, or Precept, for Members to the ensuing
Parliament shall belong; that they cause such Writ, Summons, Warrant, or
Precept, to be duly published and executed, and Returns thereupon fairly made,
according to the true merits of such Elections.

And for the Security of all Persons both in their Elections and Service in
Parliament, we do hereby publish and declare, That all our Subjects shall have
free Liberty to elect, and all our Peers, and such as shall be elected
Members of our House of Commons, shall have free Liberty and Freedom to serve
and sit in Parliament, notwithstanding they have taken Arms, or committed any
act of Hostility, or been any way aiding or assisting therein. And for the
better assurance hereof, We have graciously directed a general Pardon to our
Subjects, to be forthwith prepared to pass our Great Seal.

And for the reconciling all public Breaches, and obliterating the very Memory
of all past Miscarriages, We do hereby exhort and kindly admonish all our
Subjects to dispose themselves to elect such persons for their Representatives
in Parliament, as may not be biased by Prejudice or Passion, but qualified
with Parts, Experience, and Prudence, proper for this Conjuncture, and
agreeable to the ends and purposes of this our Gracious Proclamation.

Fleot, all the Officers and the Admirals drew up this Address:

To the KING'S Most Excellent Majesty;
The Humble Address of George Lord Dartmouth, Admiral of your Majesty's Fleet,
for the present Expedition; and the Commanders of your Majesty's Ships of War,
now actually at the Spithead, in your Majesty's Service, under his Lordship's
Command.
Most Dread Sovereign,
THE deep Sense we have had of the great Dangers your Majesty's Sacred Person
has been in, and the great effusion of Christian Blood that threatened this your
Majesty's Kingdoms, and in all probability would have been shed, unless God of
His infinite Mercy had put it into your Majesty's Heart to call a Parliament,
the only means, in our Opinions, under the Almighty, left to quiet the Minds of
your People; we do give your Majesty our most humble and hearty Thanks for your
gracious Condescension, beseeching Almighty God to give your Majesty all
imaginable Happiness and Prosperity, and to grant, that such Counsels and
Resolutions may be promoted, as conduce to your Majesty's Honor and Safety,
and tend to the Peace and Settlement of this Realm, both in Church and State,
according to the established Laws of the Kingdom.

On board the Resolution, at Spithead, December. 1. 1688. Signed -- Dartmouth.
Berkley. To. Strickland. And under them, by 38. other Commanders.



In the week following, the pretended Prince of Wales was sent down to
Portsmonth, with Orders to the Lord Dartmouth to send him under a good Convoy
with his Nurse into France. This he was said to have utterly refused; whereupon
he was brought back to London again on Saturday Doc. 8. and the Queen resolved
to go over with him her self; and not contented with this, extorted from the
King a Promise to follow her himself: Which was the very worst Counsel the
worst Enemy he had in the World could possibly have given him.

But to return back, Scotland was by this time almost in as bad a condition as
England, and some of the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland were sent up with a
Petition for a Free Parliament; and the Popish Chapels at York, Bristol,
Gloucester, Worcester, Shrewsbury, Stafford, Woolverhampton, Bromidgham,
Cambridge, and St. Edmond's Bury, were about this time demolished, and
wherever the Lords in Arms came, the Papists were disarmed: And in Norfolk,
the Duke of Norfolk, their Lord Lieutenant, had a great appearance of the
Gentry with him, where he and they declared for a Free Parliament, and the
Protection of the Protestant Religion. This meeting was at Norwich the First of
December, and after that, the same Declaration was renewed at Yarmouth, and the
Suffolk men approved of it, but wanted a Lord Lieutenant to assemble and head
them, in order to the showing their concurrence with safety.

Bristol was seized by the Earl of Shrewsbury and Sir John Guise; the Lord
Lovelace was delivered by the Gentry of Gloucestershire, out of the Castle of
Gloucester, where till then he had been imprisoned. The Lords, Molineux and
Aston, in the mean time seized Chester for the King, being R. C's, and Berwick
stood firm to him too; but New Castle received the Lord Lumley, and Declared
for a Free Parliament and the Protestant Religion: York was in the hands of the
associated Lords; and the Garrison of Hull seized the Lord Langdale their
Governor, a Papist, and the Lord Montgomery, and disarmed some Popish Forces
newly sent thither, and then Declared for a Free Parliament and the Protestant
Religion: And Plymouth had long before submitted to the Prince of Orange: And
the Army at Reading, upon another false Alarm on Saturday the 8th. of December,
retired in great haste to Twyford Bridge, and endeavoring to regain their
post, a Party of the Prince's men, who were sent for by the Inhabitants of
Reading, upon their threatening to plunder and fire the Town, attacked the Irish
Dragoons, and slew Fifty of them, the Irish making little Defense, though the
Prince's Party were much fewer in number, because they believed the whole Army
was at hand.

The Popish Party was become so contemptible in London, that on Thurday the
Sixth of December there was an Hue and Cry after Father Peter's, publicly cried
and sold in the Streets of London. But this was not the worst neither; for
about the same time came forth this following Declaration, in the Name of the
Prince of Orange.

By his Highness William Henry, Prince of Orange, A Third Declaration.
WE have in the course of our whole life, more particularly by the apparent
hazards both by Sea and Land, to which we have so lately exposed our Person,
given to the whole World so high and undoubted Proofs of our fervent Zeal for
the Protestant Religion, that we are fully confident no true Englishman and
good Protestant can entertain the least Suspicion of our firm Resolution,
rather to spend our dearest Blood and perish in the Attempt, than not to carry
on the blessed and glorious Design, which by the favor of Heaven we have so
successfully begun, to rescue England, Scotland and Ireland from SLAVERY and
POPERY, and in a Free Parliament to Establish the Religion, the Laws, and the
Liberties of these Kingdoms on such a sure and lasting Foundation, that it
shall not be in the Power of any Prince for the future to introduce Popery and
Tyranny.

Toward the more easy compassing this great Design, we have not been hitherto
deceived in the just Expectation we had of the concurrence of the Nobility,
Gentry, and People of England with us, for the Security of their Religion, and
the Restitution of the Laws, and the Reestablishment of their Liberties and
Properties: Great numbers of all Ranks and Qualities having joined themselves
to us; and others, at great distances from us, have taken up Arms and Declared
for Us. And which we cannot but particularly mention in that Army which was
raised to be the Instrument of Slavery and Popery, many (by the special
Providence of God) both Officers and common Soldiers have been touched with
such a feeling sense of Religion, and Honor, and of true Affection to their
Native Country, that they have already deserted the illegal Service they were
engaged in, and have come over to Us, and have given us full assurance from the
rest of the Army, That they will certainly follow this Example, as soon as with
our Army we shall approach near enough to receive them without hazard of being
prevented and betrayed. To which end, and that we may the sooner execute this
just and necessary Design we are engaged in for the public Safety and
Deliverance of these Nations, We are resolved, with all possible diligence, to
advance forward, that a Free Parliament may be forthwith called, and such
Preliminaries adjusted with the King, and all things first settled upon such a
foot according to Law, as may give us and the whole Nation just reason to
believe the King is disposed to make such necessary Condescension on his part,
as will give entire Satisfaction and Security to all, and make both King and
People once more happy.

And that we may effect all this in the way most agreeable to our desires, if
it be possible, without the effusion of any Blood, except of those execrable
Criminals who have justly forfeited their Lives, for betraying the Religion,
and subverting the Laws of their Native Country, we do think fit to declare,
that as we will offer no violence to any but in our own necessary defense; so
we will not suffer any injury to be done to the Person even of any Papist,
provided he be found in such place and condition and circumstances as the Laws
require. So we are resolved and do declare, That all Papists who shall be found
in open Arms, or with Arms in their Houses, or about their Persons, or in any
Office or Employment Civil or Military, upon any pretense whatsoever, contrary
to the known Laws of the Land, shall be treated by Us and our Forces not as
Soldiers and Gentlemen, but as Robbers, Free-booters, and Banditti: They shall
be incapable of Quarter, and entirely delivered up to the Discretion of our
Soldiers. And we do further declare, That all Persons who shall be found any
ways aiding and assisting to them, or shall march under their Command, or shall
join with, or submit to them in the discharge or execution of their illegal
Commissions or Authority, shall be looked upon as Partakers of their Crimes,
Enemies to the Laws, and to their Country.

And whereas we are certainly informed, that great numbers of Armed Papists
have of late resorted to London and Westminster, and Parts adjacent, where they
remain, as we have reason to suspect, not so much for their own Security, as
out of a wicked and barbarous Design to make some desperate Attempts upon the
said Cities, and the Inhabitants, by Fire, or a sudden Massacre, or both, or
else to be the more ready to join themselves to a Body of French Troops,
designed, if it be possible, to land in England, procured of the French King by
the Interest and Power of the Jesuits in pursuance of the Engagements, which,
at the Instigation of that pestilent Society, his Most Christian Majesty, with
one of his Neighboring Princes of the same Communion, has entered into, for the
utter Extirpation of the Protestant Religion out of Europe. Though we hope we
have taken such effectual care to prevent the one, and secure the other, that
by God's assistance, we cannot doubt but we shall defeat all their wicked
Enterprises and Designs.

We cannot however forbear, out of our great and tender concern we have to
preserve the People of England, and particularly those great and populous
Cities, from the cruel Rage, and bloody Revenge of the Papists, to require and
expect from all the Lord-Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace, Lord Mayors,
Mayors, Sheriffs, and other Magistrates and Officers Civil and Military, of all
Counties, Cities and Towns of England, especially of the County of Middlesex,
and Cities of London and Westminster, and Parts adjacent, that they do
immediately disarm and secure, as by Law they may and ought, within their
respective Counties, Cities and Jurisdictions, all Papists whatsoever, as
Persons at all times, but now especially, most dangerous to the Peace and
Safety of the Government, that so not only all power of doing Mischief may be
taken from them, but that the Laws, which are the greatest and best Security,
may resume their force, and be strictly executed.

And we do hereby likewise declare, That we will protect and defend all those
who shall not be afraid to to do their Duty in Obedience to these Laws. And
that for those Magistrates and others, of what condition soever they be, who
shall refuse to assist Us, and in Obedience to the Laws to execute vigorously
what we have required of them, and suffer themselves at this juncture, to be
cajolled or terrified out of their Duty, we will esteem them the most Criminal
and Infamous of all Men, Betrayers of their Religion, the Laws, and their
Native Country, and shall not fail to treat them accordingly; resolving to
expect and require at their hands the Life of every single Protestant that
shall perish, and every House that shall be burnt and destroyed by Treachery
and Cowardice.

Given under our Hand and Seal, at our Head Quarters at Sherburn Castle, the
Twenty eight of November, 1688. WILLIAM HENRY, PRINCE OF ORANGE.
By his Highness's special Command, C. HUYGENS.

This was the boldest Attempt that ever was made by a private Person; for it is
certain the Prince knew nothing of this Declaration, and disowned it so soon as
he heard of it; but yet it was printed in London, and a quantity of them were
sent in a Penny-Post Letter to the Lord Mayor of London, who forthwith carried
them to the King to Whitehall; and it is thought this sham Paper contributed
very much to the fixing and hastening his Resolution of leaving the Nation:
however there was no enquiry made after the Author or Printer of it that I
could take notice of.

On Sunday the Ninth of December it is said Count Dada, the Pope's Nuncio, and
many others departed from Whitehall, and the next Morning about three or four
of the Clock the Queen, the Child and (as was said) Father Peter's crossed the
Water to Lambeth in three Coaches, each of six Horses, and with a strong Guard
went to Greenwich, and so to Gravesend, where they embarked on a Yatch for
France: And it is supposed she carried the Great Seal of England with her, it
having never appeared after this.

Before this the Marquess of Hallifax, the Earl of Nottingham, and the Lord
Godolphin, had been sent by the King and Council to treat with the Prince of
Orange, and to adjust the Preliminaries in order to the holding of a
Parliament, who the Eighth of December sent these Proposals to him.

SIR,
THe King commanded us to acquaint you, That he observes all the differences
and causes of Complaint alleged by your Highness, seem to be referred to a
Free Parliament.

His Majesty, as he has already declared, was resolved before this to call
one, but thought that in the present state of Affairs, it was advisable to
defer it till things were more composed; yet seeing that his People still
continue to desire it, he has put forth his Proclamation in order to it, and
has issued forth his Writs for the Calling of it.

And to prevent any cause of Interruption in it, he will
consent to every thing that can be reasonably required for the Security of all
those that come to it.

His Majesty has therefore sent us to attend your Highness, for the adjusting
of all Matters that shall be agreed to be necessary to the Freedom of
Elections, and the Security of Sitting, and is ready to enter immediately into
a Treaty in order to it.

His Majesty proposes, that in the mean time the respective Armies may be
retained within such Limits, and at such distance from London, as may prevent
the Apprehensions that the Parliament may be in any kind disturbed, being
desirous that the Meeting may be no longer delayed, than it must be by the
usual and necessary Forms.

Hungerford, the 8th of December, 1688. Hallifax,
Nottingham,
Godolphin.


To this his Royal Highness the Prince of Orange returned this Answer.

WE, with the Advice of the Lords and Gentlemen assembled with Us, have in
Answer made these following Proposals.

I. That all Papists, and such Persons as are not qualified by Law, be
Disarmed, Disbanded, and removed from all Employments Civil and Military.

II. That all Proclamations that reflect upon Us, or at any time have come to
Us, or declared for Us, be recalled; and that if any Persons for having
assisted Us have been Committed, that they be forthwith set at Liberty.

III. That for the Security and Safety of the City of London, the Custody and
Government of the Tower be immediately put into the Hands of the said City.

IV. That if His Majesty should think fit to be in London, during the Sitting
of the Parliament, that We may be there also, with an equal number of our
Guards; and if his Majesty shall be pleased to be in any place from London,
whatever distance he thinks fit, that We may be the same distance, and that the
respective Armies be from London forty Miles, and that no further Forces be
brought into the Kingdom.

V. And that for the Security of the City of London, and their Trade, Tilbury
Fort be put into the Hands of the City.

VI. That a sufficient part of the Public Revenue be assigned us, for the
Support and Maintenance of our Troops, until the Sitting of a Free Parliament.

VII. That to prevent the landing of the French, or other Foreign Troops,
Portsmouth may be put into such Hands, as by His Majesty and Us shall be agreed
on.

Tilbury-Fort was then Garrisoned by the Irish, and there were a great many of
them and other Papists in Portsmouth.

This Answer was sent to His Majesty on Monday the Tenth of December by an
Express; yet he resolved to leave the Town, and ordered all those Writs for the
Sitting of the Parliament, that were not sent out, to be burnt, and a Caveat to
be entered against the making use of those that were sent down. And at the same
time he sent Order to the Earl of Feversham, to Disband the Army, and Dismiss
the Soldiers.

The Letter to the Earl of Feversham was in this Form.

THings being come to that Extremity, that I have been forced to send away the
Queen, and my Son the Prince of Wales, that they might not fall into the
Enemies Hands, which they must have done if they had stayed: I am obliged to do
the same thing, in hopes it will please God, out of his infinite Mercy to this
unhappy Nation, to touch their Hearts again with true Loyalty and Honor. If I
could have relied on all my Troops, I might not have been put to the Extremity
I now am in, and would at least have had one blow for it. But though I know
there are many and brave Men among you, both Officers and Soldiers; yet you
know, that both you, and several of the General Officers and Soldiers, and Men
of the Army, told me, It was no ways advisable for me, to venture my self at
their Head, or to think to fight the Prince of Orange with them.

And now there remains only for me to thank you, and all those, both Officers
and Soldiers, who have stuck to me, and been truly Loyal. I hope you will still
retain the same Fidelity to me; and though I do not expect you should expose
your selves, by resisting a Foreign Army, and a Poisoned Nation; yet I hope
your former Principles are so inrooted in you, that you will keep your selves
free from Associations, and such pernicious things. Time presses so that I can
add no more.

Jamex Rex.


The Earl of Feversham, presently after the receipt of this Letter, Disbanded
Four thousand Men, which was all the Army he had then with him, and under his
Command; after which he sent this Letter to the Prince of Orange.

SIR,
HAving received this Morning a Letter from His Majesty, with the unfortunate
News of his Resolution to go out of England; I thought my self obliged, being
at the Head of his Army, and having received his Orders, to make no Opposition
against any body; to let your Highness know it, with the Advice of the Officers
here, so soon as was possible, to hinder the effusion of Blood. I have ordered
already, to that purpose, all the Troops that are under my Command; which shall
be the last Order they shall receive from

Feversham.


This was to all intents and purposes a clear and full Abdication or Desertion
of the Army, and put them under an inevitable necessity of submitting to the
Prince of Orange, they having no body to Lead or Head them against him. And it
is not conceivable how they could keep themselves from entering into an
Association, or Oath of Allegiance to the Prince, now he was gone, without
exposing themselves, by resisting a Foreign Army, and a Poisoned Nation. For
neither could the Nation long continue without a Prince, nor would any Person
that succeeded in that Capacity, have ever suffered them to live within his
Government, without giving him Security by Oath, for their Submission and
Loyalty to him: So that the whole design of this Letter seems to be the Sowing
a Division in the Nation; that at the same time he left us, we might not unite
or settle our selves under the other, but by our Principles be divided, that so
he might the more easily reduce us again into the State we were in, when the
Prince first designed his Expedition against England.

This being done, about Three of the Clock in the morning, December the 11th.
the King went down the River in a small Boat, toward Gravesend: The principal
Officers of the Army about the Town thereupon met about Ten of the Clock at
Whitehall, and sent an Express to the Prince of Orange, to acquaint him with
the Departure of the King, and to assure him, that they would assist the Lord
Mayor, to keep the City quiet till his Highness came, and made the Soldiery to
enter into his Service.

Much about the same time, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal about the Town came
to Guildhall, and sending for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, made the following
Declaration.

The Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in and about the Cities of
London and Westminster, Assembled at Guild Hall the 11th. of December, 1688.
WE doubt not but the World believes, that in this great and dangerous
Conjuncture we are heartily and zealously concerned for the Protestant
Religion, the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties and Properties of the
Subject. And we did reasonably hope, that the King having issued out his
Proclamation and Writs for a Free Parliament, we might have rested secure under
the expectation of that Meeting: But His Majesty having withdrawn himself, and,
as we apprehend, in order to his departure out of this Kingdom, by the
pernicious Counsels of Persons ill affected to our Nation and Religion, we
cannot, without being wanting to our Duty, be silent under those Calamities,
wherein the Popish Counsels which so long prevailed, have miserably involved
these Realms. We do therefore unanimously resolve to apply out selves to his
Highness the Prince of Orange, who with so great Kindness to these Kingdoms, so
vast Expense, and so much Hazard, has undertaken, by endeavoring to procure a
Free Parliament, to rescue us (with as little effusion of Christian Blood as
possible) from the imminent Dangers of Popery and Slavery.

And we do hereby declare, That we will with our utmost Endeavors assist his
Highness, in the obtaining such a Parliament with all speed, wherein our Laws,
our Liberties and Properties may be secured, the Church of England in
particular, with a due Liberty to Protestant Dissenters, and in general, the
Protestant Religion and Interest, over the whole World, may be supported and
encouraged, to the Glory of GOD, the Happiness of the Established Government in
these Kingdoms, and the Advantage of all Princes and States in Christendom,
that may be herein concerned.

In the mean time we will endeavor to preserve, as much as in us lies, the
Peace and Security of these great and populous Cities of London and
Westminster, and the parts adjacent, by taking care to disarm all Papists, and
secure all Jesuits and Romish Priests, who are in or about the same.

And if there be any thing more to be performed by Us, for promoting his
Highness's Generous Intentions for the Public Good, we shall be ready to do it
as occasion requires.

Signed -- W. Cant. T. Ebor. Pembrook. Dorset. Mulgrave. Thanet. Carlisle.
Craven. Ailesbury. Burlington. Sussex. Berkeley. Rochester. Newport. Weymouth.
P. Winchester. W. Asaph. F. Ely. Tho. Roffen. Tho. Potriburg. P. Wharton. North
and Gray. Chandois. Montague. T. Jermyn. Vaughan Carbery. Culpeper. Crow.
Osulston.

Whereas His Majesty has privately this Morning withdrawn himself, we the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, being
assembled in Guild Hall in London, having agreed upon and Signed a Declaration
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in and about the Cities of London and
Westminster, assembled at Guild Hall the 11th. of December, 1688. do desire the
Right Honorable the Earl of Pembrook, the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount
Weymouth, the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of Ely, and the
Right Honorable the Lord Culpeper, forthwith to attend His Highness the Prince
of Orange with the said Declaration, and at the same time to acquaint His
Highness with what we have further done at this Meeting.

Dated at Guild Hall the 11th. of December, 1688.


The same day the Lieutenancy of London Signed this following Address to the
Prince of Orange at Guild Hall, and sent it by Sir Robert Clayton, Knight, Sir
William Russel, Sir Basil Firebrace, Knights, and Charles Duncomb, Esquire.

May it please your Highness,
WE can never sufficiently express the deep Sense we have conceived and shall
ever retain in our Hearts, that your Highness has exposed your Person to so
many Dangers by Sea and Land, for the preservation of the Protestant Religion,
and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, without which unparalled
Undertaking, we must probably have suffered all the Miseries that Popery and
Slavery could have brought upon us.

We have been greatly concerned, that before this time we had not any
seasonable opportunity, to give your Highness and the World a real Testimony,
That it has been our firm Resolution to venture all that is dear to us, to
attain those Glorious Ends which your Highness has proposed for restoring and
settling these distracted Nations.

We therefore now unanimously present to your Highness our just and due
acknowledgments for that happy relief you have brought to us; and that we may
not be wanting in this present Conjuncture, we have put our selves into such a
posture, that (by the Blessing of God) we may be capable to prevent all ill
Designs, and to preserve this City in Peace and Safety, till your Highness's
happy Arrival.

We therefore humbly desire, that your Highness will please to repair to this
City with what convenient speed you can, for the perfecting the Great Work
which your Highness has so happily begun, to the general joy and satisfaction
of us all.


After his Highness had certain Intelligence, that the King was gone back to
London, he came forward by easy Journeys, and entered Salisbury on Tuesday the
4th. of December. The 5th. the Earl of Oxford came thither to him. The same
day, the Lord Herbert of Cherbury, and Sir Edw. Harley, and most of the Gentry
of Worcestershire and Hereford shire, met at Worcester, and Declared for the
Prince of Orange. Ludlow Castle was also taken in for him by the Lord Herbert
and Sir Walter Blunt, and the Popish Sheriff of Worcester secured in it by that
Peer. The 7th. of December his Highness came on to Hungerford; the 8th. the
Lords sent by the King came thither to him, and had the Dispatch I have
mentioned; and after Dinner, he went to Lidcot. The 14th. his Highness entered
Windsor about Two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The King in his departure put himself aboard a small Yatch or Smack, commanded
by one Captain Sanders, but was forced for shelter to take into East Swale,
(the Eastern part of the Isle of Sheppy) in order to the taking in Ballast;
where the Inhabitants of Feversham in Kent being out to take up Jesuits and
other suspected Persons, found this small Vessel and seized it, on Wednesday
the 12th. of December; there were then present with him Sir Edward Hales and
Mr. Labady, and none of them being known at first, they were very ill treated
by the Seamen, and brought up to Feversham as suspicious Persons: The King
being come there, and by that time known, he lodged that night at the Mayor's
House, and sent for the Earl of Winchelsea, the Lord Lieutenant of that County
to come to him.

The Lord Feversham having received a Letter from the King, the 11th. of
December, disbanded Four Thousand Men (which was all the Army was left) at
Vxbridge, where their head Quarters then were, as I have said. The same day the
Dutch Officers taken in the Fly-boat, and till then Imprisoned in Newgate, were
Discharged.

The 12th. of December the Lords Spiritual and Temporal fate in the
Council Chamger at Whitehall, and it was absolutely necessary they should, the
noise of the King's withdrawing having put the Rabble of London into such a
Ferment, as has scarce been seen. That Night they demolished the Popish Convent
and Chapel at St. John's, (which they had attempted before the King went away,
and had hardly been prevented, from destroying it, by the Death of three or
four Persons) the Convent and Chapel of Friars in Lincolns Inn-Fields, and the
Popish Chapels in Lime-street and Bucklers-Berry, and the Chapel at Wildhouse,
which was the Residence of the Spanish Ambassador. Out of the Materials of
these Buildings they made great Piles, and at Night fired them instead of
Bon-fires, and the number that ran together was incredible, and very terrible,
not only to the Roman Catholics, but to all considering men, who did reflect
seriously on the nature of the Times and the rage of the People. The same day
therefore the Lords put out an Order for the discovery of the Goods taken from
the Spanish Ambassador, promising a good Reward, and commanding all Books and
Papers taken out of his Library, to be brought to the Council Chamger in
Whitehall.

The same day the late Lord Chancellor Jeffreys was taken at Wapping in a
disguise, and sent to the Tower first by the Lord Mayor, which after was
confirmed by the Peers and Privy Council.

The 13th. an Account being brought, that the King was taken at Feversham,
several of his Servants went down to him; but I do not find the Peers or
Council sat that day.

The 14th. the Privy Council and Peers met again, and made this Order:

WE the Peers of this Realm, assembled with some of the Lords of the
Privy Council, do hereby require all Irish Officers and Soldiers to repair
forthwith to the respective Bodies to which they do or did lately belong; and
do hereby declare, that behaving themselves peaceably, they shall have
Subsistence paid them, till they shall be otherwise provided for or employed.
And the said Officers and Soldiers are to deliver up their Arms to some of the
Officers of the Ordnance, who are to deposite the same in the Stores in the
Tower of London. And we do require and command all Justices of the Peace,
Constables, and other Officers whom it may concern, that they apprehend and
seize all such Soldiers as shall not repair to their respective Bodies, and
that they be dealt with as Vagabonds.

Given at the Council Chamger at Whitehall the Fourteenth of December, 1688.
Tho. Ebor.
Hallisax.
Dorset.
Carlisle.
Craven.
Nottingham.
Rochester.
N. Duresme.
P. Winchester.
North and Gray.
J. Trever.
J. Titus.

It was but time to put out this Order; for, on Thursday morning the 13th. of
December, about Three of the Clock, there was a dreadful Alarm, that the Irish,
in a desperate Rage, were approaching the City putting Men, Women, and Children
to the Sword as they came along; whereupon the Citizens all rose, placing
Lights in their Windows from top to bottom, and guarded every man his own
Doors, with his Musket charged with Bullet; and all the Trainbands in the City
were assembled; and there was nothing but shooting and beating of Drums all
night. This Alarm spread it self the whole length and breadth of the Kingdom of
England, and all that were able to bear Arms appeared at their several places,
vowing the Defense of their Lives, Religion, Laws and Liberties, and resolving
to destroy all the Irish and Papists in England, in case any injury were
offered them; but then there were very few Papists slain in these Tumults and
Frights, but their Houses were generally rifled on pretense of searching for
Arms and Ammunition.

The Lords, after this, sent the Lords, Feversham, Ailes bury, Yarmouth, and
Middleton, most humbly to entreat the King to return to Whitchall; and ordered
his Guards to go down to him, to see him safe on board any Ship he should
choose, if he persisted in his Resolution to go out of the Nation. With them
went the Servants of his Household, to carry him Money and Clothes, all he had
of the former being taken from him by the Seamen, and his Clothes rent and torn
in the searching of him before he was known, as he had in part signified in a
Letter to the Lord Feversham. Now considering the whole Nation, in a manner,
had submitted to the Prince of Orange, before the King was heard of, after he
had withdrawn himself, it had perhaps been but reasonable to have suspended the
inviting him back to Whitchall, till they had received his Consent, or at least
asked it, or had called a greater Assembly of the Peers than that day met.

The 12th. day the four Lords sent by the Peers, with four Aldermen and eight
of the Common Council of London, parted to wait upon the Prince of Orange, with
the Declaration signed by the Body of the Peers the day before at Guildhall.

The 15th. the King removed to Rochester, in order to his Return to London, and
some of his Troops of Guard went down thither to him: And the next day, being
Sunday, he returned about Five in the Evening to Whitchall, attended by one
Troop of Grenadiers, and three Troops of Life. Guard, a Set of Boys following
him through the City, and making some Huzza's, whilst the rest of the People
silently looked on. His Highness the Prince of Orange, who was then at Windsor,
had sent Monsieur Zulestein to the King, to desire him to continue at
Rochester, but he missing him, the King came to Whitehall, and from thence sent
the Lord Feversham with a Letter to the Prince to Windsor, to invite him to St.
James's with what number of Troops he should think fit to bring with him, he
could now do no otherwise, his own Army having been disbanded by his own order,
all the Forts in England, except Portsmouth, being in the Prince's hands, and
London, and almost all the Peers in his absence having sent their Submission,
and inviting him to come forthwith to Town, to take upon him the Care of the
City.

This Letter being by the Prince referred to the Peers that were then at
Windsor, they concluded that the shortness of the time could admit no better
Expedient, than that the King might be desired to remove to some place within a
reasonable distance from London; and Ham, a House belonging to the Duchess of
Landerdale, was pitched upon, and a Note or Paper to that purpose drawn up,
which was ordered to be delivered after the Prince's Guards were in Possession
of the Posts about Whitchall.

WE desire you the Lord Marquess of Hallifax, the Earl of Shrewsbury, and the
Lord Delamere, to tell the King, That it is thought convenient, for the great
quiet of the City, and the greater safety of his Person, that he do remove to
Ham, where he shall be attended by his Guards, who will be ready to preserve
him from any disturbance.

Given at Windsor, the Seventeenth of December, 1688. W. Prince de Orange.


Monsieur Zulestein followed the King to London, and there delivered his
Letter, and the Sixteenth returned to Windsor. The Earl of Feversham went the
same day with the Letter to the Prince, which was mentioned above, and was by
him committed to the Castle of Windsor.

The King, so soon as ever he came to Whitehall, issued out this Order of
Council.

At the Court at Whitehall, the Sixteenth day of December, 1688.
Present The King's most Excellent Majesty, Duke Hamilton, Earl of Craven, Earl
of Berkley, Earl of Middleton, Lord Viscount Preston, Lord Godolphin, Master of
the Rolls, Mr. Titus.

HIS Majesty being given to understand, That diverse Outrages and Disorders are
committed in several Parts of the Kingdom, by Burning, Pulling-down, and
otherwise defacing Houses, and other Buildings, and Rifling and Plundering the
same, to the great terror of His Majesty's Subjects, and manifest Breach of the
Peace, His Majesty in Council is pleased to Direct and Command all Lord
Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Constables, and
all other Officers whom it may concern, to use their utmost endeavors for the
preventing of such Outrages and Disorders for the future, and for the
suppressing all riotous and tumultous Meetings and Assemblies whatsoever.

William Bridgeman.

There having been sufficient care taken for this by the Council before, it was
not consistent with his Interest thus to show his Zeal for the Popish Party in
the very first Act he did upon his return, as if he had come back only to serve
them.

During the time the King stayed at Whitehall, it was crowded with Irishmen,
Priests, Jesuits, and Roman Catholics, afrer the old wont; and it is said one
of the Priests sent an imperious Message to the Earl of Mulgrave the Lord
Chamberlain, to furnish his Lodgings with new Furniture, for he meant to
continue in them. And the King also (as was said) discharged Leiburn a Popish
Bishop, out of Newgate, on Monday the Seventeenth of December: So that all
things were returning apparently into the old Chanel, and we were to expect
nothing but what we had already seen and felt; and some that wished well to the
King said, he was cunningly invited back to Whitehall, with a design to ruin
him the more effectually, and without any pity from his Protestant Subjects.

The Peers at Windsor did not think it reasonable, hearing this, that the
Prince of Orange should accept the King's Invitation, and venture his Person in
the same place: for this they had another good reason, the Duke of Grafton
marching through the Strand, on the Fourteenth day, at the Head of a Foot
Regiment of Guards, to take the Fort of Tilbury out of the hands of the Irish,
by the Order of the Council, an Irish Trooper came riding up to him, and being
beaten off by the Soldiers, drew a Pistol against him; for which he was shot
dead upon the place. And it was not improbable there were more of the same
temper.

Hereupon the Peers at Windsor resolved to send the Prince's Guards to take
Possession of the Posts about Whitehall, to prevent all possibility of a
Disturbance from Guards belonging to two several Masters; which, besides other
ill Consequences, might have perhaps involved the King's own Person in the
danger that might have arisen from any Dispute. These Guards got not to London
before Ten at Night, being commanded by Count Solmes; and the Guards then on
Duty not being willing to dislodge, it was Twelve at Night before the Lords
could deliver the Paper they had brought from Windsor, of which they first sent
this Account to Secretary Middleton.

My Lord,
THere is a Message to be delivered to His Majesty from the Prince, which is of
so great Importance, that we who are charged with it, desire we may be
immediately admitted; and therefore desire to know where we may find your
Lordship, that you may introduce, My Lord,

Your Lordship's most Humble Servants, Hallifax, Shrewsbury, Delamere.



He accordingly presently introduced them, the King being by that time in Bed.
Where they made an Apology for coming at so unseasonable a time; and delivering
him the Paper, the King read it, and said he would comply with it. Upon which
the Lords humbly desired he would remove so early as to be at Ham by Noon, to
prevent meeting the Prince in his way to London, where he was to come the same
day: His Majesty readily agreed to this too, and asked whether he might not
appoint what Servants should attend him; to which the Lords replied, That it
was left to him to give order in that as he pleased, and so took their leave of
him. When they were gone as far as the Privy-Chamber, the King sent for them
again and told them, He had forgot to acquaint them with his Resolutions before
the Message came, To send my Lord Godolphin next Morning to the Prince, to
propose his going back to Rochester, he finding by the Message Monsieur
Zulestein was charged with, the Prince had no mind he should be at London; and
therefore he now desired he might rather return to Rochester, than go to any
other place. The Lords replied, That they would immediately send an Account to
the Prince of what His Majesty desired, and they did not doubt of such an
Answer as would be to his Satisfaction: Accordingly they sent to him, who was
then at Sion, and before Eight next Morning there came a Letter from Monsieur
Benting, by the Prince's Order, agreeing to the King's Proposal of going to
Rochester: whereupon he went (the Guards being made ready and Boats prepared)
that Night to Gravesend, in his own Barge, attended by the Earl of Arran, and
some few others.

The same day, Dec. the 18th. about Three in the Afternoon, his Highness the
Prince of Orange came to St. James's, attended by Monsieur Schomberg, and a
great number of the Nobility and Gentry, and was entertained with a Joy and
Concourse of the People which appeared free and unconstrained, and all the
Bells in the City were rung, and Bon-fires in every Street.

The King continued at Rochester till the 23. of December, and then about one
or two in the morning privately withdrew himself, taking only with him Mr. Ra.
Sheldon and Mr. Delabady, he went toward Dover, and embarked in a Vessel laid
ready for his Transportation for France. The Queen, who went hence the 10th.
arrived the 11th. at Calais, and was in great pain (not knowing what had
happened in England) for the King, whom she expected every tide.

The King, before he withdrew this second time, wrote and left behind him this
following Letter, which was afterward printed by his Order in London.

His Majesty's Reasons for withdrawing Himself from Rochester; Writ with his
own Hand, and ordered by him to be Published.
THE World cannot wonder at my withdrawing my self now this second time. I
might have expected somewhat better usage after what I writ to the Prince of
Orange, by my Lord Feversham, and the Instructions I gave him; but instead of
an Answer, such as I might have hoped for, what was I to expect after the usage
I received, by the making the said Earl a Prisoner, against the Practice and
Law of Nations; the sending his own Guards at Eleven at Night, to take
Possession of the Posts at Whitehall, without advertising me in the least
manner of it; the sending to me at One of the Clock at midnight, when I was in
Bed, a kind of Order by three Lords to be gone out of my Palace before Twelve
that same morning? After all this, How could I hope to be safe, so long as I
was in the power of one, who had not only done this to me, and invaded my
Kingdoms, without any just occasion given him for it, but that did by his first
Declaration lay the greatest Aspersion on me that malice could invent, in that
clause of it which concerns my Son? I appeal to all that know me, nay, even to
himself, that in their Consciences neither he nor they, can believe me in the
least capable of so unnatural a Villainy, nor of so little common Sense, to be
imposed on in a thing of such nature as that. What had I then to expect from
one, who by all Arts has taken such pains to make me appear as Black as Well,
to my own people, as well as to all the World besides? What effect that has
had at home, all Mankind has seen, by so general a defection in my Army, as
well as in the Nation amongst all sorts of people.

I was born free, and desire to continue so; and tho I have ventured my Life
very frankly on several occasions, for the Good and Honor of my Country, and
am as free to do it again (and which I hope I shall yet do, as old as I am, to
Redeem it from the Slavery it is like to fall under;) yet I think it not
convenient to expose my self to be secured, as not to be at Liberty to effect
it; and for that Reason to withdraw, but so as to be within Call whenever the
Nation's Eyes shall be opened, so as to see how they have been imposed upon by
the Specious Pretenses of Religion and Property. I hope it will please GOD to
touch their Hearts, out of His Infinite Mercy, and to make them sensible of the
ill condition they are in, and bring them to such a Temper that a Legal
Parliament may be called; and that amongst other things which may be necessary
to be done, they will agree to Liberty of Conscience, for all Protestant
Dissenters, and that those of my own Persuasion may be so far considered, and
have such a share of it, as they may live peaceably and quietly, as English men
and Christians ought to do, and not to be obliged to Transplant themselves,
which would be very grievous, especially to such as love their Country: And I
appeal to all men, who are considering men, and have had experience, whether
any thing can make this Nation so great and flourishing, as Liberty of
Conscience. Some of our Neighbors dread it.

I could add much more to confirm what I have said, but now is not the proper
time.

Rochester, December. the 22. 1688.

Having now attained that period of time I designed, what followed being the
Methods of Redressing the Disorders we fell into by the Desertion, and the
resettling the Government again, I must desire my Reader to make a Stand with
me, and to consider what it was could possibly work upon the Apprehensions of
this Prince, to persuade him at first to entertain the Thoughts of leaving his
People, and withdrawing into a Foreign Country.

When the Prince's Expedition was first certainly made known to him, he was
resolved to have had a Parliament, upon a Belief, that he should have been
entirely Master of the Lower House, by reason of the Regulations, and other
means then lately used; but yet it is probable he would have examined them man
by man, before they should have met.

But when all this was out of doors, and the Charters restored, he dreaded
nothing more than a Parliament, and the rather, because the Prince had in his
Declaration insisted, That all the Violences and Disorders which have
overturned the whole constitution of the English Government, may be fully
redressed in a Free and Legal Parliament: This contained under it these things,
which he would certainly have perished, rather than to have submitted to them,
by concurring with a Parliament.

1. The first thing is, The Examination of the Birth of the Prince of Wales,
(as he is called) the but Questioning of which, was a Stab at the Heart of this
Prince, as appears by his last Letter. And the Reflections on the Bishop's
Petition mention that as a thing not fit to be referred then to a Parliament. I
will not blame them for this, considering the proof they were able to make of
it.

II. The next thing was, that Justice would certainly have been demanded
against all the Instruments of our former Calamities, whom he had pardoned, and
was in Honor bound to protect, at least, not to punish those whom he had hired
or persuaded, or perhaps forced almost to become Criminals.

III. The third was, the consenting to the entire Ruin of the Means or Hopes
of ever settling Popery in England, and to the hanging some, and attainting
others of the Priests and Jesuits, for doing their kind, and what their Rules,
Oaths, and Vows oblige them to.

IV. He foresaw such a Parliament would not only for ever damn the
Ecclesiastical Court, and Dispensing Power, but would in all probability
retrench much of his Revenue, and more of his Legal and Ancient Prerogatives,
especially after the Prince had got all the Forts into his Hands, and reduced
the English Army to nothing. And this alone was a thing he would hardly have
consented to, though nothing else had been asked.

V. The Prince, he foresaw, would have insisted on the having some Forts in his
hands, and the Parliament for their own security, and for the fixing a Faith
which had not been over nice, would have joined with him: So, said he, if I
stay, I shall be a Nominal, rather than a real King of England, and only serve
as an Instrument to ruin my Religion, my Friends, the Monarchy, and the Child,
and after all, do and hear what is worse (to me) than a Thousand Deaths.

At first he alleged, That the Disorders the Preparations to repel the
Invasion caused, would not suffer a Parliament to meet. Secondly, After the
Prince was landed, that all the Countries he had under him would not be free.
Thirdly, That all that had joined with him, ought not to sit, but when he saw
the whole Army and Nation (the Roman Catholics excepted) of the same mind,
mere force drove him to consent to Call a Parliament; and when he had again
considered the Consequences of it, he at last resolved to throw up the Crown
all at once, rather than to submit to all these Hardships.

He seems to have had at the same time a fluttering hope, that (1.) We would
never be able long to agree, after he had made it impossible for us to have a
Legal Parliament, by burning the Writs (2.) That the Church of England
Principles would, when the fear and disorder was over, form for him a potent
Army in the Nation. And (3.) That the French King would lend him potent Forces,
and good store of Money; and if he recovered the Throne by force, he should be
freed of all these Miseries, and have what he only wanted before, a Popish
Army, to insure the Slavery of England for ever.

Now I would desire those Protestants, who pretend, now too late, to be so
zealous for him, to consider, whether what I have said would not have been
expected from him by them, for their Security; and what they would have done,
had he called a Parliament, and refused them all these things, and have
insisted, That they should have taken his Word as to the Birth of the Prince of
Wales, have suffered him to have been educated in France, and have suffered the
Army, the Prerogative, the Ministers, and the Revenues to have continued
entirely as they were, upon a Promise, He would have used them better for the
future?

If they say No; They would have had the best Security that Law or Reason could
have required: Then all the hard things I have mentioned must have been granted
them, and I much question, whether he would how return to the Throne on those
terms.

If they say, we ought however to have treated with him' have offered him
terms; I say, it would have come to a separate Treaty; and the Church, the
Liberties of the Nation, and the Government, would have been ruined that way;
and when all had been done, no Bond (that he could have broken) would have held
him longer than the Necessity had continued.

The only Advantage we could pretend to have by the coming over of the Prince
of Orange with an Army, was to force the King to what he would never have
yielded without that Force. Now when he had accordingly passed his Word to the
Nation, in the Proclamation of the Thirtieth of November, That there should be
a Free Parliament; and to the Prince of Orange, in his Message by the three
Lords, That he would consent to every thing that could reasonably be required
for the Security of those that come to it; and yet without any Provocation
would burn the Writs, and resolve to withdraw his Person before these Lords
could possibly return him any Answer (for he promised the Queen to follow her,
who went away the day before him.) I say, this breach of his Word so solemnly
made and given both to the Nation and the Prince, show that he was not Master
of himself, but turned about by others whither they pleased.

Now suppose the Prince had suffered him to continue at Whitehall, and to call
a Third Parliament, what assurance could he have given, that in the end of
another forty days we should not have the same trick played us, and then in
March or April have been left in the same state of Confusion we were in in
December, to the certain ruin of these three Kingdoms, and Holland into the
bargain. And when all had been done, the Scruples would have been the same they
are now, the Obligations of the Oath of Allegiance the same, and the sin of
Deposing a Lawful Prince, who resolved to do the Nation no Right, would have
been much greater and more scandalous, than barely to take him at his Word; and
since he had left the Throne empty, when he needed not, to resolve he should
ascend it no more.

Lastly, Suppose the Prince had been Expelled by the King, Would the King have
then granted us what he would not grant us now? Would he not have Disbanded his
Protestant Army, and have kept the Irish Forces in Pay, and have every day
increased them? What Respect would he ever after this have shown to the English
Laws, Religion or Liberties, when he had had no longer any thing to fear? The
memory of what happened after the Monmouth defeat, (though effected only by
Church of England Men) will certainly never be forgotten by others, whatever
these Bigots of Loyalty may pretend or say.

That Expression of the Lord Churchill's, in his Letter, [That he could no
longer join with Self-interested Men, who had framed Designs against His
Majesty's true Interest, and the Protestant Religion, to give a pretense by
Conquest to bring them to effect] ought to be seriously considered by all the
Protestants of the Nation: This one Argument prevailed upon him, when he ran
the hazard of his Life, Reputation and Fortunes; and now they are all on the
other side, I should consider very seriously, if I were one of them, what
Answer I could make to this turned into a Question in the Day of Death and
Judgment, before ever I should act the direct contrary to what he has done.

For my part I am amazed to see Men scruple the submitting to the present King;
for if ever Man had a just cause of War, he had; and that creates a Right to
the thing gained by it: the King by withdrawing and disbanding his-Army,
yielded him the Throne; and if he had, without any more Ceremony, ascended it,
he had done no more than all other Princes do on the like occasions; and when
the King after this was taken and brought back by force, he was no longer then
bound to consider him, as one that was, but as one that had been King of
England; and in that capacity he treated him with great Respect and Civility,
how much soever the King complained of it, who did not enough consider what he
had done to draw upon himself that usage.

But when all is said that can be said, there may possibly be some Men to whom
may be applied the Saying of Job, Thou love thine enemies, and hate thy
friends; for thou have declared this day, that thou regardest neither princes,
nor servants; for this day I perceive, that if Absolons had lived, and all we
had died this day, then it had pleased thee well. Had the Protestant Religion,
the English Liberties, the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, been all made an
Holocaust to their Reputations and Humors, their Scruples and Schoolniceties,
and the Prince of Orange perished, or returned Ruined or Inglorious into
Holland; we should then have had the Honor of cutting up our Religion, our
Laws, and our Civil Rights, with our own Swords; and we should have been the
only Church under Heaven that had refused a Deliverance, and Religiously and
Loyally had Destroyed it self. In truth, the Men that would have purchased
Popery and Slavery so dear, ought to have enjoyed both to the End of the World.

PART the SECOND.
A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE METHODS Used for the RE-ESTABLISHMENT OF OUR GOVERNMENT.
WITH REFLECTIONS ON A Pamphlet, styled, The Dissertion Discussed. In a Letter
to a Country Gentleman.
THE Prince of Orange being thus received in London, the 18th. of December. The
Common Council of that City the same day assembled and passed an Order that all
the Aldermen and their several Deputies, and two Common Council men for each
Ward should wait upon and congratulate his Highness the Prince of Orange upon
his Happy Arrival to the City at such time, and place as His Highness should
appoint, and that the two Sheriffs, and Mr. Common Sergeant should wait upon
the Prnice to know his Pleasure when they should attend him, which was done the
day after his Entry at St. James's, who appointed them the next day.

The Committee of the Common Council came accordingly the 20th. of December,
and Sir George Treby their Recorder made him this Speech in their Names.

May it please your Highness,
THe Lord Mayor being disabled by Sickness, your Highness is attended by the
Aldermen and Commons of the Capital City of this Kingdom, Deputed to
Congratulate Your Highness upon this Great and Glorious Occasion.

In which Laboring for Words we cannot but come short in Expression. Reviewing
our late Danger, we remember our Church and State, overrun by Popery and
Arbitrary Power, and brought to the point of Destruction, by the Conduct of Men
(that were our true Invaders) that brake the Sacred Fences of our Laws, and
(which was worst) the very Constitution of our Legislature.

So that there was no Remedy left but the Last.

The only Person under Heaven that could apply this Remedy was Your Highness.

You are of a Nation whose Alliance, in all times, has been agreeable and
prosperous to us. You are of a Family most Illustrious, Benefactors to Mankind,
to have the Title of a Sovereign Prince, Stadt-holder, and to have worn the
Imperial Crown, are amongst their lesser Dignities. They have long enjoyed a
Dignity singular and transcendent, viz. To be the Champions of Almighty God,
sent forth in several Ages to vindicate his Cause against the greatest
Oppressions To this Divine Commission, our Nobles, our Gentry, and among them
our brave English Soldiers, rendered themselves and their Arms upon Your
Appearing.

GREAT SIR,

WHen we look back to the last Month, and contemplate the Swiftness and Fullness
of Our Present Deliverance, astonished, we think it Miraculous; Your Highness
led by the Hand of Heaven, and called by the Voice of the People, has preserved
our dearest Interests.

The Protestant Religion, which is Primitive Christianity Restored. Our Laws,
which are our Ancient Title to our Lives, Liberties and Estates; and without
which this World were a Wilderness.

But what Retribution can we make to Your Highness? Our Thoughts are full
charged with Gratitude. Your Highness has a lasting Monument in the Hearts, in
the Prayers, in the Praises of all good men amongst us. And Late Posterity will
Celebrate Your ever Glorious Name, till time shall be no more.

The first care of his Highness was the English Army for which he made this
Order,

Whereas, upon the late Irregular Disbanding of the Forces, diverse Soldiers
carried away the Arms belonging to their respective Regiments, and have since
lost or imbezilled the same; We do hereby direct and require all Persons to
whose hands the said Arms, or any of them are come, or with whom they now
remain, forthwith to deliver them to the said Soldiers, or their Officers upon
Demand; and in default thereof, forthwith to bring them to the Officers of the
Ordnance now attending at Uxbridge, Hounslow, or the Tower of London, in order
to the returning the said Arms into the Stores of the Ordnance. Given at St.
James's the 21 of December, 1688.

His next care was the appointing Quarters for the several English, Scots, and
Irish Regiments, and the ordering them accordingly to repair to the places
therein named.

The same Day was also a great Council of the Nobility, about Sixty of the
Peers then Meeting at St. James's, who all (except two) Subscribed a Paper in
the nature of an Association: After which His Highness thus expressed himself,

My Lords,
I Have desired you to meet here to advise the best manner how to pursue the
Ends of My Declaration in Calling a Free Parliament, for the Preservation of
the Protestant Religion, and restoring the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom,
and settling the same that they may not be in danger of being again Subverted.

Upon which it was resolved, That the said Proposals should be further Debated
the next Day in the House of Peers at Westminster. And Sir John Maynard, Mr.
Holt, Mr. Polexfen, Mr. Bradford and Mr. Atkinson, five Counselors at Law,
were odered to attend them for their Advice.

The 22. the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled at Westminster in the House
of Lords, and appointed Francis Gwin Esquire to Sign such Orders as should be from
time to time by them made; which was thus signed by Tho. Ebor. Northfolk.
Somerset. Grafton. Ormond. Beauford. Northumberland. Hallifax. Oxford. Kent.
Bedford. Pembrooke. Dorset. Devonshire. Bullingbrook. Manchester. Rivers.
Stamford. Thanet. Scarsdale. Clarendon. Burlington. Sussex. Maclesfield.
Radnor. Berkeley. Nottingham. Rochester. Fauconberg. Mordant. Newport.
Weymouth. Hatton. W. Asaph. F. Ely. La Ware. R. Eure. P. Wharton. Paget. North
and Gray. Chandos. Montague. Gray. Maynard. T. Jermyn. Vaughan. Carbery. T.
Culpeper. Lucas. Delamer. Crew. Lumley. Carteret. Osulston.

These Peers thus Assembled the 25th. day of December, Signed and Presented to
His Highness this Address.

WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled in this Conjuncture, do desire
Your Highness to take upon You the Administration of Public Affairs both Civil
and Military, and the Disposal of the Public Revenue, for the Preservation of
our Religion, Rights, Laws, Liberties and Properties, and of the Peace of the
Nation; And that Your Highness will take into Your particular Care, the present
Condition of Ireland, and endeavor by the most speedy and effectual means to
prevent the Dangers Threatening that Kingdom: All which we make our Requests to
Your Highness to undertake, and exercise, till the meeting of the intended
Convention the 22d. Day of January next, in which we doubt not such proper
Methods will be taken as will conduce to the Establishment of these things upon
such sure and legal Foundations, that they may not be in Danger of being again
Subverted. Dated at the House of Lords Westminster, the 25th. of December, 1688.

WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled at Westminster in this
Extraordinary Conjuncture, do Humbly desire Your Highness, to Cause Letters to
be Written, Subscribed by Your Self, to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, being
Protestants, and to the several Counties, Universities, Cities, and Buroughs,
Cinque Ports of England, Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed; The Letters for
the Counties to be directed to the Coroners of the Respective Counties, or any
one of them; and in default of the Coroners to the Clerk of the Peace of the
Respective Counties; And the Letters for the Universities to be directed to the
respective Vice Chancellors, and the Letters to the several Cities, Buroughs
and Cinque Ports to be directed to the Chief Magistrates of each Respective
City, Borough, and Cinque Port, containing Directions for the choosing in all
such Counties, Cities, Buroughs and Cinque Ports, within ten days after the
receipt of the said Respective Letters, such a Number of Persons to represent
them as are of Right to be sent to Parliament; of which Elections, and the
times, and places thereof the Respective Officers shall give notice within the
space of five days at the least.

Notice of the intended Elections for the Counties to be Published in the
Churches immediately after the time of Divine Service, and in all Market Towns
within the Respective Counties, and Notice of the intended Elections for the
Cities, Universities, Buroughs and Cinque Ports, to be Published within the
Respective Places. The said Letters and the Execution hereof, to be returned by
such Officer or Officers, who shall Execute the same to the Clerk of the Crown
in the Court of Chancery, so as the Persons so to be chosen may meet and sit at
Westminster, on the 22d. day of January next. Dated at the House of Lords,
Westminster, December the 25th. 1688.

Both which were Signed by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal then Assembled, and
presented to His Highness the Prince of Orange the same day at St. James's.

The 28th. of December, the Prince of Orange returned this Answer to the Peers
then Assembled at St. James's.

My Lords,
I Have considered of your Advice, and, as far as I am able, I will endeavor
to Secure the Peace of the Nation, until the Meeting of the Convention in
January next, for the Election whereof, I will forthwith Issue out Letters
according to your desire; I will also take care to apply the Public Revenue to
the most proper uses, that the present Affairs require; and likewise endeavor
to put Ireland into such a condition, as that the Protestant Religion, may be
maintained in that Kingdom: And I assure you, that as I came hither for the
Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of these
Kingdoms, so I shall always be ready to expose my self to any Hazard for the
Defense of the same.

The 26th. The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, who had served in any of the
Parliaments in the time of His late Majesty Charles II. As also the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Fifty of the Common Council of the City of Lrndon, being desired
by His Highness to attend Him this day. One hundred and Sixty Members, and the
rest came call (but the Mayor who was sick) to St. James's, and were by Him
acquainted with the State of things, and desired to repair to the Commons House
at Westminster, where they chose Mr. Powle for their Speaker, then sending to
know what the Peers had done, the Addresses, as above recited, were delivered
to them, with which they concurred; And the 27th. they also presented them to
the Prince, to whom He gave the same Answer he had given to the Lords; the
28th. in the Afternoon.

The 30th. His Highness put out the usual Proclamation for the continuance of
the Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers and Ministers (not
being Papists) to act in their Respective places till the Meeting of the
Convention, or other Order to the contrary, Excepting also all such Offices or
Places, where since His Arrival in this Kingdom he had already, or should
hereafter otherwise provide.

2d. of January He put out a Declaration for the better Collecting the Public
Revenue, which I need not transcribe.

The 5th. of January, His Highness put out this following Order.

FOR the better Preventing Disorders that may happen in any Borough,
Corporation, or other place of Election of Members for the intended Convention,
by any Soldiers Quartered in those places; And that such Elections may be
carried on with the greater Freedom, and without any color of Force or
Restraint; We do hereby strictly charge and require all Colonels and Officers
in chief with any Regiment, Troop or Company, to cause such Reigments, Troops,
or Companies, to march out of the Qaurters where such Election shall be made
(the several Garrisons only Excepted) the day before the same be made, to the
next Adjoining Town or Towns, being not appointed for any Election, and not to
return to their first Quarters until the said Respective Elections be made and
fully completed; wherein they are not to fail as they will answer the contrary
at their peril.

The Scotch Nobility and Gentry in or about London, were also by His Highness's
Order Summoned to St. James's; where they met the 7th. of January, at Three in
the Afternoon; to whom the Prince made this Speech.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE only reason that induced me to undergo so great an Undertaking, was, That
I saw the Laws and Liberties of these Kingdoms overturned, and the Protestant
Religion in eminent Danger; And seeing you are here so many Noblemen and
Gentlemen, I have called you together, that I may have your Advice, what is to
be done for the securing the Protestant Religon, and Restoring Your Laws and
Liberties according to my Declaration.

Then they withdrew to the Council Chamber at Whitehall, and chose the Duke of
Hamilton their President; And after some Debates Agreed the heads of a Paper,
which they ordered to be drawn. The 8th. they met again, and the Paper was Read
and Approved, and ordered to be Engrossed. The Earl of Arran proposed in this
second Meeting, That it was his Advice, that the Prince of Orange should be
moved to desire the King to return, and call a Free Parliament, for the
securing our Religion and Property according to the known Laws of the Kingdom,
which (said he) in my humble opinion is the best way to heal all our Breaches,
which was Disgusted by all and seconded by none of them.

The 9th. They met again, and Signed the Paper which was in these Words.

WE the Lords and Gentlemen of the Kingdom of Scotland Assembled at Your
Highness's desire in this Extraordinary Conjunction, do give Your Highness our
humble and hearty thanks, for Your Pious and Generous Undertaking, for
preserving of the Protestant Religion, and Restoring the Laws and Liberties of
this Kingdom.

In Order to the attaining of these Ends, Our humble Advice and Desire is, That
Your Highness take upon You the Administration of All Affairs both Civil and
Military; The disposal of the Public Revenues and Fortresses of the Kingdom of
Scotland, and the doing of every thing that is necessary for the preservation
of the Peace of the Kingdom, until a General Meeting of the States of the
Nation, which we humbly desire Your Highness to call, to be holden at Edinburgh
the 14th. day of March next, by Your Letter or Proclamation, to be Published at
the Market Crosses of Edinburgh, and other Head Buroughs of the several Shires
and Stewartries, as sufficient intimation to all concerned, according to the
Custom of the Kingdom: And that the Publication of these Your Letters or
Proclamation, be by the Sheriff or Stewart-Clerks, for the Freeholders; who
have the value of Lands, holden according to Law, for making Elections; and by
the Town Clerks of the several Buroughs, for the Meeting of the whole
Burgesses of the Respective Royal Buroughs, to make their Elections, at least
Fifteen days before the Meeting of the Estates at Edinburgh; and the Respective
Clerks to make intimation thereof at the least ten days before the Meetings for
Election: And that the whole Electors and Members of the said Meeting at
Edinburgh, qualified as above expressed, be Protestants, without any other
Exception, or Limitation whatsoever; To deliberate and resolve what is to be
done for securing the Protestant Religion, and restoring the Laws and Liberties
of the Kingdom, according to Your Highness's Declaration.

Dated the 10th. day of January, 1689. at the Council Chamber at White Hall.
It was Signed by about Thirty Lords, and Eighty Gentlemen, and was presented
in their presence at St. James's by the Duke of Hamilton their President. The
14th. His Highness met the Scotch Lords and Gentlemen in the same place again,
and spoke to them as follows,

My Lords and Gentlemen,
IN pursuance of Your Advice, I will until the Meeting of the Estates in March
next, give such Orders concerning the Affairs of Scotland, as are necessary for
the calling of the said Meeting, for the preservation of the Peace; the
applying of the Public Revenue to the most pressing uses, and putting the
Fortresses in the hands of Persons in whom the Nation can have a just
confidence; And I do further assure you, that you will always find me ready to
concur with you in every thing that may be found necessary for securing the
Protestant Religion, and restoring the Laws and Liberties of the Nation.

The Earls of Crawford and Louthain being present in this last Meeting, but
coming up to London after the former, desired they might Sign the said Address,
and they accordingly did so.

The 8th. day January, His Highness put out a Declaration against quartering
Soldiers on private Houses. And that all Houses should be deemed Private
Houses, except Victualling Houses, and Houses of Public Entertainment, or such
as sell Wine or any other Liquor by Retail. In all which Houses We do think
fit, That all Officers and Soldiers be Lodged by the Direction and Appointment
of the Magistrates, Justices of the Peace, or Constables of the place where
such Forces shall come, and not otherwise. And we do hereby strictly forbid all
Officers and Soldiers upon any pretense whatsoever, to take up any Quarters
for themselves or others, without such Direction or Appointment, upon pain of
being Casheired, or suffering such other punishment as the offense shall
deserve.

The Prince found the Treasury very empty of Money, the Cash in it being said
to be but 40000 l. Whereupon he desired the City of London to advance a Sum for
His present Occasions, and the 10th. of January they agreed to lend 100000 l.
but it being raised by Subscriptions it amounted to above 150000 l.

The 16th. of January, the Prince put out a Declaration to assure the Mariners
and Seamen of their Pay, and suppress the false reports had been spread to the
contrary by the Discontented Party.

The Elections of the Members for the Convention in the mean time went on with
the greatest Liberty that could possibly be conceived; every man giving his
Vote for whom he pleased, without the least Solicitation from the Prince or any
of his, there had been Writs before this twice for a Parliament in a few
Months, and almost every place had before this fixed their Members, so that the
difference was not great between the Men that were, and those that would have
been chosen, if the King had suffered the first or second Parliament he called,
to have met, and this gives the truest Idea that can be desired of the temper
of the Nation, and what would have been the event if either of those
Parliaments had sat.

The two Houses met the 22d. of January, and the Upper House (there being no
Lord Chancellor) chose the Marquess of Hallifax for their Speaker, and the
Commons chose Henry Powle Esquire after which a Letter was read in both Houses from
His Highness the Prince of Orange on the Occasion of their Meeting; which was
as follows.

My Lords,
I Have endeavored to the utmost of my power, to perform what was desired from
me in order to the public peace and safety; and I do not know that any thing
has been omitted which might tend to the preservation of them, since the
Administration of Affairs was put into my hands. It now lies upon you to lay
the foundations of a firm security for your Religion, your Laws, and your
Liberties.

I do not doubt, but that by such a full and free Representative of the Nation,
as is now met, the Ends of my Declaration will be attained: And since it has
pleased God hitherto to bless my good intentions with so great success, I trust
in him, that he will complete his own work, by sending a spirit of Peace and
Union to influence your Counsels, that no interruption may be given to an happy
and lasting Settlement.

The dangerous condition of the Protestants in Ireland, requiring a large and
speedy succor, and the present state of things abroad, oblige me to tell you,
that next to the danger of Unseasonable Divisions amongst our selves, nothing
can be so fatal as too great delay in your Consultations: The States by whom I
have been enabled to rescue this Nation, may suddenly feel the ill effects of
it, both by being too long deprived of the service of their Troops which are
now here, and of your early assistance against a powerful enemy, who has
declared a War against them: And as England is by Treaty already engaged to
help them upon such Exigencies, so I am confident that their cheerful
concurrence to preserve this Kingdom with so much hazard to themselves, will
meet with all the Returns of Friendship and assistance, which may be expected
from you as Protestants and Englishmen, whenever their condition shall require
it.

Given at St. James's the 22d day of January, 1688. To the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal Assembled at Westminster. Will. H. P. d' Orange.


The first thing the Houses took care of was by mutual consent to draw up and
present the following Address.

The Address of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled at
Westminster in this present Convention to his Highness the Prince of Orange.

Die Martis 22o Januarii, 1688.
WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, assembled at Westminster
being highly sensible of the Great Deliverance of this Kingdom from Popery and
Arbitrary Power; and that our Preservation is (next under God) owing to your
Highness, do return our most humble thanks and acknowledgments to your
Highness, as the Glorious Instrument of so great a Blessing.

We do further acknowledge the great care your Highness has been pleased to take
in the Administration of the Public Affairs of the Kingdom to this time; and
we do most humbly desire your Highness, that you will take upon you the
Administration of Public Affairs both Civil and Military, and the Disposal of
the Public Revenue, for the Preservation of our Religion, Rights, Laws,
Liberties and Properties, and of the Peace of the Nation: And that your
Highness will take into your particular care the present state of Ireland, and
endeavor by the most speedy and effectual means to prevent the Dangers
threatening that Kingdom. All which we make our Request to your Highness to
undertake and exercise, till further Application shall be made by us, which
shall be expedited with all convenient speed; and we shall also use our utmost
endeavors to give dispatch to the matters recommended to as by your Highness's
Letter.

To this Address thus presented by both Houses at St. James's the Prince of
Orange made this Reply the same day.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am glad that what I have done has pleased you: And since you desire me to
continue the Administration of Affairs, I am willing to accept it. I must
recommend to you the consideration of Affairs abroad, which makes it fit for
you to expedite your business; not only for making a Settlement at home upon a
good foundation, but for the safety of all Europe.

The Houses also ordered that Thursday the 21th of January Instant, be
appointed for a day of Public Thanksgiving to Almighty God in the Cities of
London and Westminster, and ten miles distance, for having made his Highness
the Prince of Orange the Glorious Instrument of the Great Deliverance of this
Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary Power, and that Thursday the 14th of February
next be appointed for a Public Thanksgiving throughout the whole Kingdom for
the same.

The 23d of January the Lords passed this Order,

Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled at Westminster, That no
Papist, or Reputed Papist, do presume to come into the Lobby, Painted Chamber,
Court of Requests, or Westminster Hall, during the sitting of this Convention.
And it is further Ordered, That this Order be Printed and Published, and set
upon the Doors of the said Rooms.

The 28th of January the Commons passed this Vote:

Resolved, That King James the II. having endeavored to subvert the
Constitution of this Kingdom, by breaking the Original Contract between King
and People; and by the Advice of Jesuits and other wicked persons, having
violated the Fundamental Laws, and having withdrawn himself out of this
Kingdom, have abdicated the Government, and that the Throne is thereby vacant.

Resolved, That this Vote be sent up to the Lords-House tomorrow morning for
their Concurrence.

This Vote occasioned the Letter I am to Examine.

Hereupon followed several Conferences between the Lords and the Commons, none
of which being Printed, and the Written Copies dispersed about the Town being
of no good Authority, I must leave them unrelated.

February the Lords at last assented to the Vote above.

The 29th. of January this Question was proposed in the Lords-House, Whether a
Regency with the Administration of Regal power under the name and style of King
James the Second, during the Life of the said King James be the best and safest
way to preserve the Protestant Religion, and the Laws of the Kingdom?

Upon which the House divided Contents 48. Non-contents 51.


This very much facilitated the Concurrence of the two Houses in the other Vote.

The Throne being thus declared vacant, some were for the Prince of Orange to
be Elected King alone, others for the Princess to be forthwith proclaimed and
acknowledged as next Immediate Heir of the Crown of England, and others were
for a Commonwealth. But the two strongest parties were those who were for the
Prince, and those that were for the Princess, so that at last there was a way
found to twist these two into one by giving the Title indifferently to both,
and the Administration solely to the Prince, to avoid the inconvenience of two
coordinate Sovereigns.

Whilst these things were warmly debated in the Convention and the Town, and
all men were yet in suspense which way they would be determined some that were
over zealous set a foot the following Petition the first of February, and
endeavored to have it subscribed by the Multitude indifferently, going up and
down to public places to solicit Subscriptions.

To the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled in the Grand Convention, the
Humble Petition of Great Numbers of Citizens, and other Inhabitants of the
Cities of London and Westminster.
WHereas we are in a deep sense of the danger of Delays, and perplexed Debates
about settling the Government, at this time Vacant, by reason whereof the
necessary ends of Government cannot be duly administered.

We humbly desire that his most Illustrious Highness the Prince of Orange, and
his Royal Consort the Princess, may be speedily settled in the Throne, by whose
Courage, Conduct and Reputation, this Nation and the Protestant Religion may be
defended from our Enemies at Home and abroad; And that Ireland now in a
bleeding and deplorable condition, may be rescued from its miseries, and these
Kingdoms settled on a lasting foundation in Peace and Liberty.

Whereupon his Highness being informed of the ill consequences and scandal of
this way of proceeding caused this Order to be made and published to suppress
it.

By the Mayor,

WHereas his Highness the Prince of Orange, has been pleased to signify to me
this day, That diverse persons (pretending themselves to be Citizens of London)
in a tumultuous and a disorderly manner have lately disturbed the present
Convention of the Lords and Commons at Westminster, upon pretense of
Petitioning. It being regular and usual for the Citizens of this City that are
under the apprehension of any Grievance, to make their application to my self
and the Court of Aldermen: Therefore with the Advice of my Brethren, the
Aldermen of this City, these are to require you, That you command within your
Ward, that they forbear any such tumultuous Disturbance, or Assembly; as they
will answer the contrary at their utmost peril.

Dated the third day of February 1688.
The twelfth of February the two Houses at last fully agreed all things in
dispute between them in this manner.

The Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled at
Westminster.
WHereas the late King James the Second by the Assistance of diverse evil
Counselors, Judges and Ministers employed by him, did endeavor to subject and
extirpate the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

By assuming and exercising a power of Dispensing with, and suspending of Laws,
and the Execution of Laws, without consent of Parliament.

By committing and prosecuting diverse worthy Prelates, for humbly Petitioning
to be excused from concurring to the said Assumed Power.

By issuing and causing to be Executed a Commission under the Great Seal, for
erecting a Court called, The Court of Commission for Ecclesiastical Affairs.

By Levying Money for and to the use of the Crown, by pretense of Prerogative,
for other time and in other manner, than the same was Granted by Parliament.

By raising and keeping a standing Army within the Kingdom in time of Peace,
without consent of Parliament; and Quartering Soldiers contrary to Law.

By causing several good Subjects being Protestants, to be disarmed, at the
same time when Papists were both Aimed and employed contrary to Law.

By violating the Freedom of Elections of Members to serve in Parliament.

By Prosecutions in the Court of King's Bench, for matters and causes cognizable
only in Parliament, and by diverse other Arbitrary and Illegal courses.

And whereas of late years, partial, corrupt, and unqualified persons have been
returned and served on Juries in Trials, and particularly diverse Jurors in
Trials for High Treason, which were not Freeholders.

And Excessive Bail has been required of persons committed in Criminal cases,
to elude the Benefit of the Laws made for the Liberty of the Subject.

And Excessive Fines have been imposed.

And Illegal and cruel punishments inflicted.

And several Grants and Promises made of Fines and Forfeitures before any
Conviction or Judgment against the persons upon whom the same were to be levied.

All which are utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws and Statutes,
and freedom of this Realm.

And whereas the late King James the Second, having abdicated the Government,
and the Throne being thereby vacant.

His Highness the Prince of Orange (whom it has pleased Almighty God to make
the Glorious Instrument of Delivering this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary
Power) did (by the Advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and diverse
principal persons of the Commons) cause Letters to be written to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal being Protestants, and other Letters to the several
Counties, Cities, Universities, Buroughs and Cinque Ports for the choosing of
such persons to represent them, as were of right to be sent to Parliament, to
meet and sit at Westminster upon the 22d day of January 1688, in order to such
an Establishment, as that their Religion, Laws, and Liberties, might not again
be in danger of being subverted, upon which Letters Elections have been
accordingly made.

And thereupon the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, pursuant to
their Respective Letters and Elections, being now Assembled in a full and Free
Representative of this Nation, taking into their most serious consideration the
best means for attaining the Ends aforesaid, do in the first place (as their
Ancestors in like case have usually done) for the vindicating and asserting
their Ancient Rights and Liberties declare,

That the pretended power of suspending of Laws, or the Execution of Laws, by
Regal Authority, without consent of Parliament, is illegal.

That the pretended power of Dispensing with Laws, or the Execution of Laws, by
Regal Authority, as it has been assumed and exercised of late, is illegal.

That the Commission for erecting the late Court of Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Causes, and all other Commissions and Courts of the like nature,
are illegal and pernicious.

That Levying of Money to or for the use of the Crown, by pretense of
Prerogative, without Grant of Parliament, for longer time, or in other manner,
than the same is or shall be Granted, is illegal.

That it is the Right of the Subjects to Petition the King, and all Commitments
and Prosecutions for such Petitioning are illegal.

That the raising or keeping a standing Army within the Kingdom in time of
Peace, unless it be by consent of Parliament is against Law.

That the Subjects being Protestants may have Arms for their Defense suitable
to their condition, and as allowed by Law.

That the Election of Members of Parliament ought to be Free.

That the freedom of Speech, and Debates, or Proceedings in Parliament, ought
not to be impeached or questioned in any Court or Place out of Parliament.

That Excessive Bail ought not to be required, nor Excessive Fines imposed, nor
cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.

That Jurors ought to be duly Impannel'd and returned, and Jurors which pass
upon men in Trials for High Treason ought to be Freeholders.

That all Grants and Promises of Fines and Forfeitures of particular persons
before Conviction, are illegal and void.

And that for Redress of all Grievances, and for the amending, strengthing, and
preserving of the Laws, Parliaments, ought to be held frequently.

And they do claim, demand, and insist upon all and singular the Premises, as
their undoubted Rights and Liberties; and that no Declarations, Judgments,
Doings, or Proceedings, to the prejudice of the people in any of the said
Premises, ought in any wise to be drawn hereafter into consequence or example.

To which demand of their Rights they are particularly encouraged by the
Declaration of his Highness the Prince of Orange, as being the only means for
obtaining a full redress and remedy therein.

Having therefore an entire confidence, that his said Highness the Prince of
Orange will perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by him, and will still
preserve them from the violation of their Rights, which they have here
asserted, and from all other attempts upon their Religion, Rights and Liberties.

The said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons assembled at Westminster do
resolve,

That William and Mary Prince and Princess of Orange be, and be declared King
and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, to hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and
Dominions, to them the said Prince and Princess during their Lives, and the
Life of the Survivor of them; and that the sole and full exercise of the Regal
power be only in, and executed by the said Prince of Orange, in the Names of
the said Prince and Princess during their joint Lives; and after their
Deceases, the said Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions
to be to the Heirs of the Body of the said Princess; and for default of such
Issue, to the Princess Anne of Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body; and for
default of such Issue, to the Heirs of the Body of the said Prince of Orange.

And the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, do pray the said
Prince and Princess of Orange to accept the same accordingly.

And that the Oaths hereafter mentioned be taken by all persons of whom the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy might be required by Law, instead of them;
and that the said Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy be abrogated.

I A. B. Do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to Their Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY

So help me God.

I A. B. Do Swear, That I do from my heart Abhor, Detest, and Abjure, as
Impious and Heretical this Damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes
Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome,
may be Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I
do Delare, that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has
or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preheminece or Authority
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm.

So help me God.

Jo. Brown, Clericus Parliamentorum.

The same day this Delaration bears Date, Her Royal Highness the Princess of
Orange arrived in the River of Thames in the Afternoon, and was received with
all the Hearty Demonstrations and Expressions of Joy by the City, that are
usual on such Occasions.

The 13th. of February, The Lords and Commons Ordered the following
Proclamation to be published and made.

WHereas, It has pleased Allmighty God in his Great Mercy to this Kingdom, to
Vouchsafe us a Miraculous Deliverance from Popery and Arbitrary Power, and that
our Preservation is Due, next under GOD, to the Resolution and Conduct of His
Highness the Prince of ORANGE, whom GOD has Chosen to be the Glorious
Instrument of such an Inestimable Happiness to us and our Posterity: And being
Highly Sensible, and Fully Persuaded of the Great and Eminent Virtues of Her
Highness the Princess of ORANGE, whose Zeal for the Protestant Religion, will,
no doubt bring a Blessing along with Her upon this Nation. And Whereas, the
Lords and Commons, now Assembled at Westminster, have made a Declaration, and
Presented the same to the said Prince and Princess of ORANGE, and therein
Desired Them to Accept the Crown; who have Accepted the same accordingly. We
therefore the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, together with the Lord
Mayor and Citizens of London, and others of the Commons of this Realm, do with
full Consent Publish and Proclaim according to the said Declaration; WILLIAM
and MARY Prince and Princess of ORANGE to be KING and QUEEN of England, France
and Ireland, with all the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging: Who
are Accordingly so to be Owned, Deemed, and Taken, by All the People of the
aforesaid Realms and Dominions, who are from henceforward bound to acknowledge,
and pay unto them, All Faith and True Allegiance; Beseeching GOD, by whom Kings
Reign, to Bless King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, with Long and Happy Years to Riegn
over us.

GOD Save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. John Brown Clericus Parliamentorum.

The 15th. of February, The Lords and Commons Ordered, That His Majesty's most
Gracious Answer this day be added to the Engrossed Declaration in Parchment to
be enrolled in Parliament and Chancery; which is as follows.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THis is certainly the Greatest Proof of the Trust you have in us that can be
given, which is the thing that makes us value it the more; and we thankfully
accept what you have offered. And as I had no other intention in my coming
hither, than to Preserve Your Religion, Laws and Liberties: So you may be sure,
that I shall endeavor to Support them, and shall be willing to concur in any
thing that shall be for the Good of the Kingdom, and to do all that is in my
Power to Advance the Welfare and Glory of the Nation.

The Conclusion.
Thus ended that Stupendous Revolution in England, which we have so lately
seen; to the great Joy of the Generality of the Protestants of Europe, and of
many of the Catholic Princes and States, who were at last convinced, that the
attempting to force England to return under the Obedience of the Sea of Rome in
the present conjuncture of Affairs would certainly end in the ruin of this
potent Kingdom, and whilst it was doing, the present French King would possess
himself of the remainder of the Spanish Netherlands, and the Palatinate, and
perhaps of the Electorates of Cologne, Ments, and Triers, a great part of which
he has actually seized whilst the Prince of Orange was thus Gloriously
asserting the English Liberty.

The true reasons of the Swiftness of this Change may easily be assigned by
showing the temper and designs of James the II. The Temper of William the III.
our Present Sovereign, and The Nature of the English Nation, and of the times
all concurring with Wonderful Harmony to produce this wonderful effect. For had
James the II. undertook any thing but the subjecting England to Popery, and the
Exercise of an Arbitrary Power to that end; his vast Revenue, and personal
Valor, and the Reputation he had gained at home and abroad by the defeat of
the Monmouth Invasion, would have gone near to have effected it: and after all
this if he had in the beginning of October frankly granted all the Ten
Proposals made by the Bishops, and suffered a Parliament to have met and given
up a confiderable number of his Ministers to Justice, and suffered the
pretended Prince of Wales, his Birth to be freely debated and determined in
Parliament. It would in all probability have prevented or defeated the then
intended Invasion. But whilst he thought to save the Pretended Succession, the
Dispensing and Suspending power, and the Ecclesiastical Commission to carry on
his former design with, when he had baffled the Prince of Orange; the Nation
saw through the project, and he lost all.

Had a Prince of less secrecy, prudence, courage and interest than the Prince
of Orange undertaken this business it might probably have miscarried, but as
his cause was better, so his reputation, conduct, and patience infinitely
exceeded theirs; he would not stir till he saw the French Forces set down
before Philipsbourg, and then he was sure France and Germany were irrevocably
engaged in a War, and consequently he should have no other opposition than what
the Irish and English Roman Catholics could make against him. For no English
Protestant would fight his Country into Vassalage and Slavery to Popish
Priests, and Italian Women, when a Parliament sooner or later must at last have
determined all the things in Controversy, except we resolved once for all to
give up our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Estates to the will of our King, and
submit for ever to a French Government.

A Nation of less sense than the English might have been imposed upon, of less
bravery and valor might have been frighted, of a more servile temper might
have neglected its Liberties, till it had been too late to have ever recovered
them again: But none but a parcel of Jesuits bred in a Cloister, and
unacquainted with our temper as well as Constitution would ever have hoped to
have carried two such things as Popery and Arbitrary power, both at once upon
so jealous a Nation as the English is, which hates them above any other people
in the World.

The cruel slaughter they had made of the poor wretches they took after the
defeat at Bridgwater ought to have made them for ever despair of gaining any
credit with the Dissenters, who rarely forgive, but never forget any ill
treatment. Yet these little Politico's had so little sense as to build all
their hopes on the Gratitude and Insensibility of these men; as if they should
for Liberty of Conscience, arbitrarily and illegally granted, and consequently
revocable at the will of the Granter, have sold themselves to everlasting
slavery.

They were equally mistaken in their carriage toward the Church of England
party, for when some of them had pursued both Clergy and Laity with the utmost
obloquy, hatred, oppression and contempt to the very moment they found the
Dutch storm would fall upon them. Then all at once they passed to the other
extreme, the Bishops are presently sent for the Government entirely to be put
into their hands, and all places, Presses and Papers filled with the Encomiums
of the Church of England's Loyalty and Fidelity, who but three days before were
Malcontents, if not Rebels and Traitors, for opposing the Kings Dispensing
power, and the Ecclesiastical Commission. And which was the height of folly,
the same Pen which had been hired to defame and blacken the Church of England
(the Author of the Public Occurrences truly stated) was ordered to magnify
its Loyalty. By which they gained nothing but the entire and absolute
disobliging the whole Protestant party in the Nation, so that for the future no
body would serve or trust them.

To complete their folly and madness they persuaded the King to throw up the
Government, and retire into France, pretending we would never be able to agree
amongst our selves, but would in a short time be forced to recall him and yield
to all those things we had so violently opposed, or if not he might yet at
least force us to submit by the succors he might gain in France, without ever
considering how possible it was we might agree, and how difficult it would be
to force us by a French Army, which was equally contrary to the Interest of
England and all Europe besides, and to all intents and purposes destructive of
the Interest of that Prince they pretended thus to exalt and re-establish.

Had France been now in Peace there might yet have been some color for this,
but when all Europe was under a necessity to unite against him for its own
preservation then to persuade the King of Great Britain to desert his Throne,
and fly thither for succor, upon hopes of recovering his Kingdoms again by the
assistance of the French (the mortal and hereditary enemies of the English)
this was so silly a project that there seems to have been something of a Divine
Infatuation in it.

However certainly no rational man will think that all the Princes of Europe
would sit still and suffer the French King to conquer Britain under pretense of
restoring James the Second to that Throne which he had abandoned, because he
could not bring the Prince of Orange (their Allie) and all his Protestant
Subjects to his own Terms.

And yet if none of them should enterpose but the Hollanders alone, the English
and Dutch Fleets being united would render the landing a French Army so
difficult and uncertain, that it would be next door to madness to trust one to
their Navy, which is so much inferior to either of the others singly taken.

So that all things considered, either James the Second ought to have stayed at
home and have made as good terms as he could with the Prince of Orange, and his
own Subjects: Or if he would have abandoned his Kingdoms, he ought to have
despaired of any restitution, and have betaken himself to a private life as
Christina Queen of Sweden did.

Since I finished that which goes before, we have now certain Intelligence that
James the Second Landed the 12th. of March at Kingsale in Ireland, so that now
it cannot be doubted but that he hopes to recover England and Scotland by the
help of the Irish; which is all one as if he had done it by the French. His
succeeding in this design laying us at the mercy of an Irish Roman Catholic
Army; whose civility and kindness to our Nation we may learn from our
Countrymen, who after having lost all but their lives, have been forced to
flee over to us for shelter and protection. I shall not add any other
consideration to persuade my Countrymen to defend their King, Queen, and the
whole Protestant Succession, their Lives, Liberties, Privileges and Religion,
because this alone is sufficient.

THE DESERTION DISCUSSED. In a Letter to a Country Gentleman.
SIR,
. 1. I Don't wonder to find a Person of your Sense and Integrity so much
surprised at the Report of the Throne's being declared Vacant, by the Lower
House of the Convention: For how (say you) can the Seat of the Government be
Empty, while the King, who all grant had an unquestionable Title, is still
Living, and his Absence forced and involuntary? I thought our Laws, as well as
our Religion, had been against the Deposing Doctrine; therefore I desire you
would Expound this State Riddle to me, and give me the Ground of this late
extraordinary Revolution. In answer to your Question, you may please to take
notice, That those Gentlemen of the Convention, and the rest of their
Sentiments, who declare a Vacancy in the Government, lay the main stress of
their Opinion upon his Majesty's withdrawing himself: For now, especially since
the Story of the French League, and the Business of the Prince of Wales, are
passed over in Silence, most Men believe that the pretended Breach of that
which they call, The Original Contract was designed for no more than a popular
Flourish.

. 2. And that you may be not beshocked by seeing the Votes of so considerable
and public a Meeting debated by a private hand, give me leave to remind you,
That a Parliament, and a Convention, are two very different Things: The latter,
for want of the King's Writs and Concurrence, having no share in the
Legislative Power. If it is urged, That the present Posture and Exigence of
Affairs, is a sufficient Dispensation with the usual Preliminaries and Forms of
Parliament. To this I am obliged to answer, That this pretended Necessity is
either of their own Making, or of their own Submitting to, which is the same
thing; and therefore ought not to be pleaded in Justification of their
Proceedings. For if his Majesty had either not been driven out of his
Dominions, or invited back upon honorable Terms, they needed not to have had
recourse to these singular Methods. And since they have neither the Authority
of Law, or Necessity, to support their Determinations, I hope they will not
think themselves disobliged, if they are inquired into; and some part of that
Liberty which they have taken with his Majesty be returned upon themselves. For
all private and unauthorized Opinions are to be regarded no farther than they
prove their point. Like Plate without the Royal Impression, they ought not to
be obtruded for current Coin; nor rated any higher than the Intrinsic Value of
the Metal. Let us examine therefore, if his Majesty has done any thing which
imports, either in it self, or by necessary consequence, That he has
voluntarily Resigned his Crown, and Discharged his Subjects of their
Allegiance. Now the Author of The Enquiry into the present State of Affairs,
etc. for whose Judgment the Commons seem to have a very great Regard, as
appears from their concurrence with him: For their most considerable Votes are,
in a manner, transcribed from his 11th. Paragraph. This Author tells us, Page
5. That when a King withdraws himself, and his Seals, without naming any
Persons to represent him, the Government is certainly laid down and forsaken by
him. Though afterward he is so good natured as to add, That if any imminent
present Danger, or just Fear, (though indeed a King can never be decently
suspected of that; I suppose his Reason is, because Kings are invulnerable) had
driven his Majesty away, it might seem a little too hard to urge this too much.

. 3. In order to the confuting this Notion, I shall prove in the

First place, That his Majesty, before his withdrawing, had sufficient Grounds
to make him apprehensive of Danger, and therefore it cannot be called an
Abdication.

Secondly, That the leaving any Representatives behind him was impracticable at
this Juncture.

Thirdly, That we have no Grounds, either from the Laws of the Realm, or those
of Nature, to pronounce the Throne void, upon such a Retreat of a King.

. 4. But before I do this, it is not improper to observe, That this pretense of
a Demise, if it signified any thing, cannot affect Scotland or Ireland: Not the
first, For there his Majesty's Commissioners acted in the usual manner, till
they were disturbed: Nor the second, For that Kingdom continues still under the
Regular Administration of the Lord Lieutenant. Neither is it sufficient to say,
That Ireland is an Appendage to the Crown of England, and therefore it must
follow its Revolution. For allowing a Demise was really consequent upon a
Failure of Seals and Representatives; yet there would be no color to apply it
to a Case where there was no such Omission. For no Forfeiture ought to be
stretched beyond the Reason upon which it is grounded. But this only by the
way. I shall proceed to prove the first thing propounded, viz. That his
Majesty, before his withdrawing, had sufficient Grounds to make him
apprehensive of imminent Danger.

. 5. We are now fallen upon Times in which the most extravagant and almost
impossible Things are swallowed without Chewing, and the plainest Truths
outfaced and denied; as if Evidence was an Argument against Proof, and
Absurdities the only Motives of Credibility: So that now, if ever, we seem fit
for Transubstantiation. Had not some Men believed this true, in a great
Measure, they would never have disputed against matter of Fact, which was done
almost in the Face of the whole Kingdom. To speak to the present Case; Had not
his Majesty great Reason to retire, to secure his Person and his Honor, at his
first withdrawing from Whitehal? which is the time from which our Author dates
his pretended Desertion (for he will not allow him to be King at his return) I
say, had not his Majesty great Reason to retire when he had met with so many
unfortunate Disappointments, with so many surprizings and unparalled
Accidents? When part of the Army was revolted, and the Remainder too apparently
unserviceable? When the People had such fatal and unremovable prejudices
against his Majesty's Service? When there were such terrible Disorders in the
Kingdom, and all Places were either Flaming, or ready to take Fire? What should
a Prince do, when he had scarce any thing left him to lose but himself, but
consult his Safety, and give way to the irresistible Evil? But our Author
pretends the King's Affairs had a much better Aspect; Let us observe how he
proves it. Why he tells us, That when the Prince of Orange 's Proposals came to
his Majesty, the Army and the Fleet were left in his Hands. They were so, that
he might pay them for the Prince's Service; for they owned his Majesty's
Authority scarce any other way than by receiving his Money, and eating up his
Meat. (It Is to be hoped they have since repented of their Actions.) But the
Enquirer goes on with his Inventory of Forts and Revenues, which the King was
to have still. He may know, if he pleases, that we have but Four considerable
Forts in the Kingdom. Now Hull and Plymouth had already disposed of themselves,
and the Tower of London was demanded for the City; so that there was none but
Portsmouth remaining. And as for the Revenues, it is to be feared, the Northern
Collections would have been almost as Slender as those in the West. And now one
would think our Father began to relent: For he owns, That some Things, which
the Prince of Orange proposed, may be called hard; viz. his demanding that the
Laws against Papists which were in Employment might be executed. But the
Enquirer is much mistaken, if he thinks the Prince of Orange insisted upon no
more than the bare Execution of the Law in this point. For the Disbanding of
all Papists (which was part of his Proposals) is much more than what the Law
requires; by which the Papists are only excluded from Offices of Command, and
Trust. But neither the Test-Acts, nor any others bar the King from Listing them
as common Soldiers. And lastly, to deliver up his best Magazine, and the
Strength of his Capital City: To be obliged to pay a Foreign Army, which came
over to enable his Subjects to drive him out of his Dominions, were very
extraordinary demands, and looked as if there was a Design to reduce him as low
in his Honor, as in his Fortune. To forgive a Man who endeavored to Ruin me,
is great Christian Charity; but to Article away my Estate to him, because he
has Injured me, is such a Mortification as no Religion obliges us to. This is
in effect to Betray our Innocence, and Sign away the Justice of our Cause; and
own that we have deserved all that hard Usage which has been put upon us; so
that it is easy to imagine what an unconquerable Aversion the Spirit of Princes
must needs have to such an Unnatural Penance. In short, when the Forts and
Revenue were thus disposed of; when the Papists were to be Disbanded, and the
Protestants could not be trusted; when the Nation was under such general, and
violent Dissatisfactions; when the King, in case of a Rupture, (which was not
unlikely) had nothing upon the Matter but his single Person to oppose against
the Prince's Arms, and those of his own Subjects; when his Mortal Enemies, and
those were under the highest Forfeitures to his Majesty, were to sit Judges of
his Crown and Dignity, if no farther; when Affairs were in this Tempestuous
Condition, To say that a Free and Indifferent Parliament might be Chosen, with
relation to the King's Right, as well as the Peoples; and that His Majesty had
no just visible Cause to apprehend himself in Danger, is to out face the Sun,
and to trample upon the Understandings, and almost upon the Senses of the whole
Nation.

. 6. 2. It Is not improper to examine what doubty Reasons the Enquirer advances
to prove, the Kings coming from Feversham to Whitehal to be no return to his
People. The reason of his affirming this is apparent; He is sensible what
singular usage his Majesty met with, and therefore he would fain unking Him,
that it might the better suit with his Character. But, pray, what had the King
done to incur a Forfeiture by his First Retirement? Had he quitted the Realm?
If that was material, it cannot be alleged, for his Majesty was no farther off
than the Coast of Kent. Did he refuse to take Care of his people any longer,
when the Lords went down to Visit him to Whitehal? No: If he had, he would not
have come back when he was at his Liberty. His return, after some Assurances of
fair Treatment, is a plain discovery of the Motives of his withdrawing; and
that be came up with an intention to Govern. For, I believe, few People imagine
that his Majesty would take such a Journey, only to have Dutch Guards clapped
upon him; to be hurried out of his Palace, and carried Prisoner down the Thames
at Noonday. But the Seals never appeared. What time was there for them in 24
Hours? Besides there was an Order of Council with his Majesty at the Head of
it, for suppressing the Mobile, Dated December. 18. which was the next Day after
his Majesty's return. And when he was sent back to Rochester, he might plainly
perceive his Government was at an End for the present. For the Tower was
Garrisoned by Foreign Forces: The Lords published an Order by their own
Authority, to oblige the Papists to depart the Town: The City made an Address
to the Prince of Orange, which was a Virtual acknowledgment of his Power; and
Associations came up to to that purpose out of the Country; (Cambridgeshire
Address) not to admit that his Majesty was denied a small Sum of his own Gold
to Heal with; As if they had rather poor People should perish with Boyles and
Ulcers, than show common Justice and Humanity to their King. From all these
remarkable Circumstances, his Majesty might easily guess how they intended to
dispose of him: For no Man in his Senfes, who has treated a Prince so
Contemptuously in his own Kingdom, will ever permit him either Power, or
Liberty, for fear he should remember his former Usage. From what has been said,
it is most evident, that his Majesty had all imaginable reason to provide for
his own Security in some other Country.

. 7. And since his Majesty had sufficient reasons to withdraw, these can be no
pretense for an Abdication: For we are to observe, that to Abdicate an Office,
always supposes the Consent of him who Quits it. That this is the signification
of the Word Abdico, appears from Tully, Salust, and Livie; to which I shall
only add the Learned Grotius, De Jure Belli, etc. Libr. 1. Cap. 4. Sect. 9.
Where he makes Abdicating the Government, and plainly Giving it up, to be Terms
of the same importance.

. 8. And to prevent unreasonable Cavils, he adds, that a Neglect, or Omission
in the Administration of Government, is by no means to be Interpretated a
Renunciation of it. We have but two Instances with us which looks like an
Abdication since the Conquest; which are in the Reign of Edward II. and Richard
II. both which were unjustly Deposed by their Subjects. However they did not
renounce their Allegiance, and declare the Throne void, till they had a formal
Resignation under the Hands of both those unfortunate Princes. And hence it
appears how unlucky our Enquirer is at citing the Laws. For page 12. He tells
us, That since these Two Princes have been judged in Parliament for their Male
Administration, and since these Judgments have never been vacated by any
subsequent Parliaments; these Proceedings are part of our Law. From hence I
observe,

. 9. 1. That our Author contradicts himself. For here he owns that Male
Administration is sufficient to warrant Deposition, and Resistance. But in his
Enquiry into the Measures of Submission, etc. (For both these Papers are
generally supposed to come from the same Hand) Page 5. Par. 14. He is much
kinder to the Crown; for there he asserts, That it is not Lawful to resist the
King upon any pretense of Ill Administration, and that nothing less than
subverting the Fundamentals of Government will justify an Opposition. Now I am
much mistaken, if Deposing of Kings is not Resisting them with a Witness. But
besides his self Contradiction; the case is not to his purpose: For,

. 10. 1. These Parliaments were called in Tumultuous times, when the Subjects
were so hardy as to put their Kings under Confinement. Now if it is against the
Constitution of Parliaments to Menace the Two Houses out of their Liberty of
Voting freely, then certainly Kings ought not to be overawed by Armies, and
Prisons. These Parliaments therefore are very improper to make Precedents of.

. 11. 2. Those Princes were wrought upon so far, as to resign their Crowns,
which each of them did, though unwillingly; Let this Enquirer produce such a
Resignation from His Majesty, and he says something.

. 12. 3. He is much mistaken in saying these Judgments, as he calls them, have
not been vacated by subsequent Praliaments. For all those subsequent
Parliaments, which declare it Unlawful to take up Arms against the King, do by
necessary implication condemn these Deposing Precedents; for it is impossible
for Subjects to Depose their Princes without Resisting them.

13. 2. By Act of Parliament the First of Edw. 4. yet remaining at large upon
the Parliament Rolls, and for the greater part recited verbatim in the
Pleadings in Baggett's Case, in the Year Books (Trin. Term. 9. Edw. 4.) The
Title of Edw. 4. by Descent, and Inheritance, and is set forth very
particularly; And that upon the Decease of Rich. 2. the Crown by Law, Custom,
and Conscience, Descended and Belonged to Edmund, Earl of March, under whom
King Edw. 4. claimed.

14. It is likewise further declared, That Hen. 4. against Law, Conscience, and
Custom of the Realm of England, Usurped upon the Crown and Lordship thereof,
and Hen. 5. and Hen. 6. occupied the said Realm by Unrighteous Intrusion, and
Usurpation, and no otherwise.

. 15. And in 39. Hen. 6. Rot. Parl. when Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York,
laid claim to the Crown, as belonging to him by right of Succession it was.

. 16. 1. Objected in behalf of Hen. 6. that Hen. 4. took the Crown upon him as
next Heir in Blood to Hen. 3. not as Conqueror.

. 17. To this it was Answered, That the pretense of Right as next Heir to Hen.
3. was false, and only made use of as a Cloak to shadow the violent Usurpations
of Hen. 4.

. 18. 2. It was Objected against the Duke of York, That the Crown was by Act of
Parliament Entailed upon Hen. 4. and the Heirs of his Body, from whom King Hen.
6. did Lineally Descend. The which Act (say they, as it is in the Record) is of
Authority to defeat any manner of Title. To which the Duke of York replied;
That if Hen. 4. might have obtained, and enjoyed the Crowns of England and
France by Title of Inheritance, Descent, or Succession, he neither needed, nor
would have desired, or made them to be granted to him in such wise, as they be
by the said Act, the which takes no Place, nor is of any Force or Effect,
against him that is right Inheritor of the said Crowns; as it accords with
Gods Laws; and all Natural Laws. Which Claim and Answer of the Duke of York; is
expressly acknowledged and recognized, by this Parliament, to be Good, True,
Just, Lawful and Sufficient. Cotton's Abridgment. Fol. 665, 666.

. 19. From these Recognitions it plainly follows,

1. That the Succession cannot be interrupted by an Act of Parliament,
especially when the Royal Assent is given by a King De Facto, and not De Jure.

2. The Act 9. of Edw. 4. by declaring the Crown to Descend upon Edmund, Earl
of March, by the Decease of Rich. 2. does evidently imply, that the said
Richard was rightful King, during his Life, and consequently that his
Deposition was Null, and Unlawful.

If it is demanded, Why his Majesty did not leave Seals and Commissioners to
supply his Absence? This Question brings me to the Second Point, viz. to show,

That the leaving sufficient Representatives was impracticable at this
Juncture. For

1. When the Nation was so much embroiled, and the King's Interest reduced to
such an unfortunate Ebb; It would have been very difficult, if not impossible,
to have found Persons who would have undertaken such a dangerous Charge. That
Man must have had a Resolution of an extraordinary Size who would venture upon
Representing a Prince who had been so much disrepected in his own Person; whose
Authority had been set aside, and his Ambassador clapped up at Windsor, when he
carried not only an inoffensive, but an obliging Letter. But granting such a
Representation had been engaged in; the Commissions must either have extended
to the Calling of Parliaments, or not; if not, they would neither have been
Satisfactory, nor absolutely necessary. Not Satisfactory, For the want of a
Parliament was that which was accounted the great Grievance of the Nation, as
appears from the Prince of Orange's Declaration. Where he says expressly, That
his Expedition is intended for no other Design but to have a Free and Lawful
Parliament assembled, as soon as is possible. Declar. P. 12.

. 21. Secondly, This Expedient was not absolutely Necessary; for the
Administration of Justice might have proceeded Regularly, without any such
Deputation, by Virtue of those Commissions which the Popish Judges and Justices
of the Peace had already from the King. This I shall prove,

. 22. 1. From a parallel Instance; King Charles the I. took a Journey into
Scotland in 41. during the Session of Parliament at Westminster; where, though
he appointed Five Lords to sign Bills in his Name, (The Continuation of Bak.
Chron.) yet the Judges and Justices Acted by virtue of their former
Commissions, without any new Authority from any Representatives of His Majesty.
Now Scotland is as much a distinct Kingdom from England, as France; and France
as much His Majesty's Dominions as Scotland: And therefore if Commissions will
hold in the King's Absence in one Place, why not in the other?

. 23. Secondly, The present Judges met in January last at Westminster, to
dispatch, some Business in order to keep the Term but were forbidden to proceed
by the Prince of Orange's Secretary: So that it is plain, it was the Opinion of
these Reverend Judges, that their Commissions from His Majesty were still in
Force. But in the next place,

. 24. If His Majesty had deputed any Persons to Represent him in Parliament,
this Method would have been attended with new and insuperable Difficulties. For,

. 25. 1. If they had been Limited they would not have given Satisfaction: For
it being impossible to foresee the Business and Votes of a Parliament at a
distance; If they had been restrained to certain Points, in all probability
they would have wanted Power to have passed all the Bills, and and so their
Deputation would not have Answered the Desire of the Houses, and the greatest
part of their Grievances might have been counted unredressed. If it is said that
the Parliament might have requested an Enlargement of their Commission from His
Majesty. To this I Answer. That the Convention may send to His Majesty for an
Expedient now if they please. And, I hope, they will; for I hear his Majesty
has been so gracious as to send to them. But,

2. If these Commissioners were unlimited, it would be in their Power to do a
great many things prejudicial to the Crown; In such a Case they might alter the
Monarchy into a Commonwealth, or Sign the Deposing of his Majesty, if such
Bills should happen to be offered. And though there may be many Persons of
Honor, and Conscience enough, to lodge such a Trust with: Yet in regard his
Majesty has been lately mistaken in some, of whose Fidelity he had so great and
Assurance, he has small encouragement to be over confideing for the Future.
Indeed no Wise Prince will Trust so vast a Concern, as a Kingdom, with the
Honesty of another, especially when many of his Subjects are disaffected, and
in a Ferment. So that nothing can be more unreasonable than to expect such
Plenipotentiary and Absolute Commissioners.

. 26. 3. I shall prove in the last place, That we have no Grounds, either from
the Laws of the Realm, or from those of Nature, to pronounce the Throne void,
upon such a Retreat of a Prince as we have before us.

1. To begin with the Laws of the Realm, which are either Acts of Parliament,
or those we call Common Laws. Now there is no Statute, so much as pretended, to
support this Deserting Doctrine; and if there was, it is certain no such can be
produced. Indeed a Prince must be very weary of Governing, and void of the
common Inclinations of Mankind; who would sign a Bill of this Nature, and give
his Subjects such a dangerous Advantage against himself, and his Posterity.

Neither has this Opinion any better Countenance from Common Law: For Common
Law is nothing but Ancient Usage, and Immemorial Custom. Now Custom supposes
Precedents and Parallel Cases: But it is granted of all Hands, That the Crown of
England was never judged to be Demifed, by the withdrawing of the Prince before
now. And, therefore it follows, by undeniable Consequence, that this Opinion
can have no Foundation in the Common Law, because there is not so much as one
Ruled Case to prove it by. Nay, our Laws are not only silent in the maintenance
of this Paradox, but against it, as I shall make good by Two Precedents.

. 27. 1. From the Case of Edward the IV. who having not sufficient Force to
Encounter the Earl of Warick, who had raised an Army for King Henry, was
obliged to fly the Kingdom; but that he deputed any Persons to Represent him,
our Histories don't give us the least Intimation: Neither was it Objected at
his return, that he had Abdicated the Government, by omitting to Constitute a
Regent. Neither is it material to Object, that all Disputes of this Nature were
overruled by his Victorous Army; For if it had been the known Law of this
Realm, that a Prince had ipso facto forfeited his Crown by going beyond Sea,
without leaving a Deputation, though his Departure should happen to be
Involuntary: If this, I say, had been the Law of the Kingdom, it would not only
have been a great advantage to Henry the VI. and made the Nation ring of it,
(of which there is altum Silentium;) but we may be well assured, King Edward
would not have conferred Honor, worn the Crown, and taken the State and
Authority of the King upon him, till he had been Re-Established by Parliaments.
But that he did Exercise all Acts of Sovereignty before the calling of a
Parliament, appears from Daniel, Stow, and Baker. And when the Parliament was
Convened, those who had taken up Arms against him were found Guilty of Treason,
and his Adherents were restored to Blood and Estate (Daniel.) But there was no
Confirmation, or Resisting or his Title, which is a Demonstration there was no
need of it; and that this Abdicating Doctrine was perfectly unknown to that Age.

. 28. 2. To come nearer our own Times, what Seals, or Commissioners did Charles
the II. leave behind him after Worcester Fight? And yet, I believe, no Mortal
ever urged this as an Argument against his Restoration. If it be Answered,
that there was much more danger in this case, than in that before us. To this I
reply, that if we Examine the matter more narrowly, we shall find the disparity
very inconsiderable. For was there not a numerous Army of Foreigners and
Subjects in the Field, against his present Majesty at his retiring? What Power
or Authority, or so much as Liberty was there left him? And I am afraid that at
that time he had fewer Friends to stand by him, than his Brother after that
unfortunate Battle in 51.

. 29. And since this pretended Dereliction has no manner of Protection from the
Constitution, it has no other refuge but the Laws of Nature to fly to; but a
very little Storming will serve to drive it from this last Retrenchment.

. 30. For the Law of Nature is nothing but the Reason of the Thing. Now
impartial Reason has always a regard to the Circumstances of Action, and makes
Allowances for Surprise, for Straitness of Time, for Resentment upon
extraordinary provocation; and never takes advantage of an Omission, which may
be fairly Interpreted, from any or all of these Causes. I mention this not that
the present Case needs any such Allowance, but to show that the Law of Nature
would admit it, if Occasion required. It Is true, written Laws, either through
the ambiguity of the Words, or the defectiveness of the Sense, are often abused
by ill Men, and wrested contrary to the Design of the Legislators: But the Law
of Nature is not tied up to the Alphabet, nor bound to determine by the
Imperfections of former Ages. Therefore this Principle will give the Enquirer
no just Advantages against his Majesty; for Equity has no Quirk, in it, nor
ever lies at Catch. Reason is always Just and Generous, it never makes
Misfortune an Accusation, nor judges in favor of Violence. Indeed, what can be
more Unrighteous (though the Case was private and inferior) than that any one
should Suffer for being Injured, and be barred his Right for the Faults of
others? If a Man should forfeit his House to those who set it on Fire, only
because he quitted it without giving some formal Directions to the Servants;
and be obliged to lose his Estate, for endeavoring to preserve his Life. I
believe it would be thought an incomprehensible sort of Justice. If to proceed
in this manner be not to establish Wickedness by a Law, I have done. If Princes
may be thus roughly treated, their Birth is a Misfortune to them; and, we may
say, they are Crowned rather for Sacrifice than Empire. At this rate, the
People must even Govern themselves, for the Throne will be a Place of too much
Danger to sit on any longer. We have an Excellent Church, and we do well to
take due Care to continue its Establishment; but to dispossess our Prince, upon
this Score, has as little Divinity as Law in it. To endeavor to preserve our
Religion by such Methods will make it more Fatal to us in the event than
Atheism it self. It Is a mistake to think the World was made for none but
Protestants; and if Dominion was founded in Grace, I am afraid our share would
not be great in the Division.

. 31. If it is Objected, That his Majesty's not sending to his People upon his
Removal, is an Argument that he intended to govern them no longer. To this I
Answer,

1. That I am pretty well assured, That no Man, who makes this Objection,
believes the truth of it; and therefore I might safely leave it to his own
Conscience to confute him.

Secondly, His Majesty was scarcely Landed in France before the Administration
was conferred upon the Prince of Orange; which Action might very well
discourage his Majesty from sending any Messages so soon as he intended: But
since, it is known, his Majesty has sent Letters (if not to the Privy Council,
as some affirm, yet) to the Convention.

. 33. Thirdly, Those who were the Occasion of his Majesty's Departure should
(one would think) have waited on him, and invited him back. For without
Question the injuring Person ought to make the first step toward an
Accommodation, especially when Wrong is done to his own Prince. Now whether his
Majesty has been well used in this Revolution, or not, I leave the World to
judge now, but God will do it afterward.

Thus (SIR) I have ventured to give you my Thoughts upon this Subject; and am

Affectionately Yours.

AN Answer to the Desertion Discussed.
HAving thus as truly and as shortly as I can from the Papers I have Collected,
stated the matter of Fact, without which it is impossible to pass any judgment
upon the merits of the case; I come now in the next place to consider the small
Piece which has necessitated me to take all this pains.

The Author of it is my acquaintance, and a person for whom I have a great
esteem, both on the account of his Profession, and of his personal worth,
learning and sobriety, so that I cannot believe he had any ill design either in
the writing or publishing of it; his zeal for the Church of England's Loyalty,
and the difficulty and unusualness of the present case having been the
occasions if not the causes of his mistake, and therefore I will endeavor to
show him and the world his error, with as much candor and sweetness as he
himself can wish, because I have the same design for the main that he had, viz.
the Honor of the Church of England, and the safety of Government, and
especially our Monarchy.

It begins thus, Sir, I don't wonder to find a Person of your sense and
integrity so much surprised at the report of the Thrones being declared vacant,
by the Lower House of the Convention: for how (say you) can the Seat of the
Government be empty, whilst the King, who all grant had an unquestionable
Title, is still living, and his absence forced and involuntary? I thought our
Laws as well as our Religion had been against the Deposing Doctrine; therefore
I desire you would expound this State Riddle to me, and give me the Grounds of
this late extraordinary Revolution. Sect. 1. In Answer to which he tells his
Country Gentleman, That the Gentlemen of the Lower House of Convention lay the
main stress of their opinion upon his Majesty's withdrawing himself, etc.

Now that the King was de facto gone is not to be disputed, but the Question
is, Whether his absence was truly forced and involuntary or no, and by whom he
was forced. Our Author is for the affirmative, and afterward proposes his
Reasons, which I shall examine And this Question being well stated, the
business of the Deposing Doctrine will appear nothing to the purpose.

Now before our Author could regularly enter upon this Question, he ought first
to have considered what the causes of this force was, and what had been done by
the King on his part, and then have come to the other, Whether the absenting
himself was a fault or a misfortune.

So that to begin at the right end of the Question we must enquire what were
the causes of this Revolution, who were the Parties concerned, how things were
managed on both sides, and then come in the last place to the Question he
begins with.

Now, Sir, are the Prince of Orange's Declaration, and the Bishops Ten
Proposals as to the things complained of true or false? Are they justifiable or
not by the Laws of England? For if the King had done nothing which he could not
fairly justify his Title was unquestionable, and therefore he ought not to
have been disturbed either by his own Subjects, or his Neighbors, during his
life. But then, Sir, I think he had no right to govern us as he did, and he had
as little reason to expect (whatever we did) that his Neighbors would sit
still and suffer him to do what he pleased to them and us to the Ruin of Europe.

The King of England, says the Prince of Orange in his Declaration, have given
the greatest credit to those Counselors who have overturned the Religion, Laws
and Liberties of his Realms: And subjected them in all things relating to their
Consciences, Liherties and Properties, to Arbitrary Government; and that not
only by secret and indirect ways, but in open and undisguised manner,.2. Page
10.. 17. he informs us, That both he and his dearest and most entirely beloved
Consort the Princess, have endeavored to signify in terms full of respect to
the King, the just and deep regret which all these proceedings have given us,
etc. But those evil Counselors have put such ill Constructions on these our
good intentions, that they have endeavored to alienate the King more and more
from us: as if we had designed to disturb the peace and happiness of the
Kingdom. Sect. 19. To crown all, there are great and violent presumptions
inducing us to believe, that these evil Counselors in order to the carrying on
their ill designs, and to the gaining to themselves the more time for the
effecting of them, for the encouraging of their Accomplices, and for the
discouraging of all good Subjects (they) have published that the Queen have
brought forth a Son, tho there have appeared, both during the Queens pretended
bigness, and in the manner in which the Birth was managed, so many just and
visible Grounds of suspicion, that not only we our selves, but all the good
Subjects of those Kingdoms, do vehemently suspect that the Pretended Prince of
Wales was not born by the Queen. And it is notoriously known to all the world,
that many both doubted of the Queens bigness, and of the Birth of the Child,
and yet there was not any one thing done to satisfy them, or to put an end to
their Doubts.

Things being in this state, He resolved to go over to England (Sect. 21.) and
to carry with him sufficient force to defend him from the violence of those
evil Counselors, and then he declares that this Expedition was intended for no
other design but to have a free and lawful Parliament assembled as soon as is
possible. (Sect. 25.) To the end that all the violences and disorders which
have overturned the whole Constitution of the English Government may be fully
redressed in a Free and Legal Parliament, to which he would also refer the
Enquiry into the Birth of the Pretended Prince of Wales, and all things
relating to it, and to the Right of Succession.

Now if all this is true (which no English man can deny) then had the Prince of
Orange the justest cause that ever man had to do what he did; and the King of
England was bound in justice to have Summoned a Parliament, and to have
referred the things in question to them, there being no other competent Judge on
Earth of the things in dispute; but if he would not suffer a Parliament to
meet, then the Sword must determine the Question between them, for they were
both Sovereign Princes, and had no Superior over them to decide it. The King
accordingly referred it to the Sword, for he refused to the last to suffer a
Parliament to meet till the Invasion was over, and the Prince had no reason to
take his word for it.

The Protestants of England had no reason to fight against this Prince, who
came to right their Cause, and offered to refer all to a Parliament of English
Nobility and Gentry, and the Papists alone were not able to resist the Prince's
Army, especially after many of the King's Army were gone over to the Prince, so
that the King was at last forced to call a Parliament in the manner I have set
forth, and he promised both the Nation and the Prince, the Parliament should
meet and act freely, but before this was possible to be brought about, without
any cause given or alleged, he disbanded his Army, sent away the Queen, the
Child, and the Seals, and then followed them himself, leaving the Nation in
Anarchy and confusion. Now I will refer this to the World whether this absence
was not voluntary, unforced, and criminal, after he had thus passed his word?

For supposing he had stayed on the Princes terms, and the Parliament had met,
no Act could have passed without his own consent, and if any thing had been
required that had not been just and legal, if then he had withdrawn, his case
would have been more justifiable, and perhaps he should have found enough to
have defended it, and so needed not to have withdrawn.

The Story of the French League, and the Prince of Wales, are not passed so
over (tho they are postponed) but we may hear more of them in due time; tho
when all is done, there will be no reason to expect that all the Prate of this
populous Town should be proved to be true, it will be sufficient if his now
Majesty justify his own Public Declarations, which I believe no man doubts
but he can, and has done, the Three Estates having in their Declaration
subscribed to the truth of all the main parts of his.

The King being thus gone, some way or other must be taken to bring us again to
a settlement, and that of a Convention of the Three Estates was taken as least
liable to Exception and Mistake; but then he tells us, Sect. 2. That the
Necessity alleged for their justification, is either of their own making, or
of their own submitting to, which is the same thing; and therefore ought not to
be pleaded in justification of their Proceedings. Now this is not True: The
King would never have left his people if he had not first lost their hearts by
the things charged upon his Counselors; nor then neither if he had not first
resolved never to do them right against those Counselors, because he had
reason to believe this would have satisfied them; so that his late Majesty was
not driven out of his Dominions by his Enemies (as he styled them) but by his
pretended Friends, who put him upon doing ill things, and then would not suffer
him to Redress them.

Well but If he had been invited back upon Honorable Terms, they needed not
have had recourse to these singular Methods.

Why how does he know that? The King had Honorable Terms offered him before he
went, and they would not stop him from going; and if they had sent more
Honorable Terms after him who can tell whether he would have accepted, or have
stood to them? He had passed his Word before, that a Parliament should meet,
yet he Burnt the Writs and withdrew.

Well, but however our Author is resolved the late Kings withdrawing himself is
no resigning of his Crown, or discharging of his Subjects of their Allegiance.
In order to which he undertakes to show that his late Majesty before his
withdrawing had sufficient Grounds to make him apprehensive of danger, and
therefore it cannot be called an Abdication. 2. That the leaving any
representative behind him was impracticable at this juncture. But there are two
other things which he has not mentioned, the first of which is, who gave the
occasion of these Dangers which he apprehended, and the Second, whether he had
no other way to avoid those Dangers but by withdrawing. Now it is plain that
the ill courses taken under his Government had brought upon him those Dangers,
and that if he would have suffered a Parliament to meet he needed not to have
withdrawn, and consequently his going away rather than submitting the things in
dispute to a Parliament was a voluntary Abdication.

Sect. 4. Our Author has a scruple whether the Kings going away signifies any
thing to Scotland and Ireland; now all this is no better than banter, for when
he left England he left them too, though the one was for sometime, and the other
still is under the Regular Administration of the Lord Lieutenant as he tells
us, but those that have since come from thence assure us there is nothing
Regular in his Administration, but the British Protestants are treated as
Enemies by this Minister of his; so that Ireland being an Appendage of England,
and thus treating our Brethren, ought by us to be taken for a Rebel and an
Enemy, let the pretense be what it will; Their Loyalty to the Late King not
excusing but Aggravating their Injuries to his Country men, who have done
nothing to deserve this usage, but it is to be hoped will find hands enough to
revenge it in due time.

Our Author in the 5 Sect. is to prove the late King had sufficient Grounds,
etc. omitting his Rhetoric, Had not his Majesty (faith he) great Reason to
Retire, to secure his Person and Honor, at his first withdrawing from
Whitchal? When he had met with so many unfortunate disappointments, with so
many surprising and unparalleled Accidents? etc. -- I say no, he ought to have
considered what was the Cause of all these Misfortunes, and to have applied
himself with so much the more Industry to the quieting of his people, which the
sitting of the Parliament would in all probability have effected. But what
could he promise himself by withdrawing, but the bare saving of his Life and
Liberty with the loss of his Crown, now his Life and Liberty were in no Danger
as is plain, for after he was brought back a Prisoner, and suffered to go away
again without any hinderance. There are many indiscreet things said in this
Paragraph which I could easily expose, but I would not make this Answer too
long, nor exasperate any body against the Author, and therefore I will pass
them over.

To be obliged (says he) to Pay a Foreign Army which came over to enable his
Subjects to drive him out of his Dominions, Looked as if there was a design to
reduce him as low in his Honor, as in his Fortune. The Prince says in his
Declaration Sect. 21. That he intended nothing but to have a Free and Lawful
Parliament Assembled as soon as was possible. And this might have been done
without driving the King out of his Kingdom, and it is very difficult to
imagine how he could at first propose more to himself, nor would it have been
any diminution of the Kings Honor to have paid the Dutch Army a few Weeks or
Months till things could have been settled.

When the Forts and Revenues were thus disposed off, when the Papists were to
be disbanded, And the Protestants could not be trusted, when the Nation was
under such violent and general dissatisfactions; when the King in case of a
Rupture (which was not unlikely) had nothing but his single Person to oppose
against the Princes Arms, and those of his own Subjects. -- Well what then? Why
it was time to be gone. No Sir it was time to be better Advised than he had
been by those that had brought him into this deplorable State. It was time to
despair of ever being able to Set up Popery and an Arbitrary Power in England,
to have reflected on the breach of his former Promises and Oaths which had so
Exasperated his Subjects against him, but by other measures might very easily
have been again appeased, and deserved after all rather to be trusted than
those Popish Soldiers he was so fond of to his Ruin, because he had formerly
had sufficient Experience of their Loyalty, till he had made it impossible for
them to serve him without destroying their Religion and their Civil Liberties.

When his Mortal Enemies, and those who were under the highest forfeitures to
his Majesty were to sit Judges of his Crown and Dignity, if no further, etc.
The Power of an heated Imagination! Why after all, these were the three Estates
of England whom he thus blackens, or a part of them, or rather the Church of
England Nobility and Gentry, the same men that were chosen, and for the most
part must be chosen again if we were to choose to morrow as to the Lower House,
and as to the Upper the Bishops and the Peers always are and must the be same:
Nor were they to sit Judges of his Crown and Dignity (for they must have Sworn
Allegiance to him again at their meeting) much less of his Life or Liberty; but
only of his former Actions, his Ministers, and of the Birth of the pretended
Prince of Wales. And he had Reason to have expected great Candor from them,
having had so great Experience of them before. When a Gentleman of the Church
of England could thus harangue it against his own Party, and Interest, we need
not wonder if that Unfortunate Prince found some Jesuits about him who would
persuade him rather to abandon his Crown, Kingdom and People, then the Glorious
design of forcing England once more to submit to the yoke of Rome.

Section 6. Our Author is at a loss to find the Reason why his coming from
Feversham to Whitehal is not allowed to be a return to his people; now if he
please to look into the former History he will find it was not voluntary but
forced (tho he was not then known) and in all probability the fear continued
upon him when the force was removed, for then he saw he could not go away
without the Prince's leave, and that was the true reason of his inviting the
Prince to London, when he could not keep him out if he would. Pray what had the
King done to incur a Forfeiture by his first retirement? had he quitted the
Realm? Yes, he had, and the Government too, and necessitated his own Menial
Servants to submit to the Prince by the Famous Address made at Guild Hall the
11th. of December. So that the Prince was now actually invested with the
Government, the whole Nation having submitted to him, and it was at his choice
whether he would treat him as a King now; nor had he any great reason to do so,
considering how lately he had broke his word to him and the Nation.

His return after some assurance of Fair Treatment, is a plain Discovery of the
Motives of his withdrawing; and of his intention to Govern. Had it been parely
Voluntary, I would have allowed the Consequence; but when he did, and said all
that he could to have got out of the hands of the Feversham men without
Discovering himself, and was at last brought up as Prisoner, and discovered by
those who knew him after he was Landed; for him, after all this to return to
White Hall, is no Argument of his intention to stay and Govern us. But admit it
were, What proof did he give that he would change his Measures? Was not
White Hall crowded with Irish and English Roman Catholics as before? Was there
any one step toward the Satisfying of his Protestant Subjects of his better
Intentions toward them? The only Order of Council he made after his return,
was apparently in favor of the Papists, so that by that we may guess what
would have followed. The rest of the Paragraph is either mistimed, mistaken or
nothing to the purpose, for I will grant him his Late Majesty had some cause,
as well as free leave to withdraw the second time.

So that after all, I Conclude just contrary to my Author, the first
withdrawing was causeless, and therefore Voluntary, and therefore in his own
Notion an Abdication.

From the VIIIth. Section to the XXth. Section, is spent in a Controversy with
the Author of the Present State of Affairs, about the Abdication or Deposing of
Richard II. and Edward II. and as I am no Friend to the Deposing Doctrine in
General, nor have any good Opinion of those Actions in particular nor those
Books by me now, which are absolutely necessary to the Discussing those
Questions, I shall leave the aforesaid Author to make his own defense if he
please, and go to his 20th. Section, where he proposes this Question.

If its Demanded, Why his Majesty did not leave Seals and Commissioners to
supply his Absence? It was Impracticable at this Juncture.

Now if this Answer is true; then it follows, that it was impossible his late
Majesty should reign any longer, for if he would not Govern us himself, and
either would not or could not find any other person or persons to supply his
place, and this was brought upon him by his own Act, then was his Government
and right at an end: Government supposes a Governor and Persons Governed, if
one of them fail, the other fails too, and the blame falls on the party that
gives the cause.

Nor was it possible for us to continue in a state of Anarchy, however it was
brought upon us, but after he was gone, it was absolutely necessary that we
should set up another in his place, or run into Confusion, and a state of War.
And when we had once taken this care for our selves considering how ill we had
been used, it was very probable we should not be very willing to return again
under his power, and therefore his late Majesty ought to have continued his
Post, what Difficulties soever he had struggled with, even to the hazard of his
Life and Liberty; or if he abandoned his people to have expected that they
would take care to provide for themselves as they did, which was to put his
Antagonist in the actual Possession of the Government, for we could then much
less than he find any other person or persons to set up. But let us hear his
Reasons.

When the Nation was so much embroiled, and the Kings interest reduced to such
an unfortunate Ebb; It would have been very difficult, if not impossible to
have found persons who would have undertaken such a dangerous Charge. Now this
must be understood of his first withdrawing, though he confounds it with the
second, for then I will grant it was not only difficult but Impossible. But
when he went first from White Hall doubtless this was well considered, and it
would put an end to all our disputes if we knew the true Reasons which were
then alleged for his going. The three Lords which were sent to treat with the
Prince, are said to have returned his Answer the Evening before the King went
away by an Express; but it is Notorious, he resolved to go before the Queen
went, and the next Paris Gazett told us he was expected every Tide in France,
so that it was no secret there; so that what so ever Answer the Prince made, he
was resolved to be gone: Yet he had promised the Nation and the Prince there
should be a Free Parliament, Now if the Nation was already so Imbroiled, and
the Kings Interest at so low an Ebb, his going away must needs reduce his
Kingdoms and Affairs into a much worse Estate. The result of all which is, that
having well considered all things he at last resolved rather than suffer a
Parliament to meet, and determine the differences between him, and his People,
and the Prince of Orange: He would abandon his People, when no body durst
undertake to supply his place by reason of the Difficulties; and this is a real
and true Abdication. For I will suppose after all that it was absolutely
necessary, that a Parliament should meet, and that we must have been absolutely
ruined one way or other, if one had not met, for if James the II. could have
resetled himself without one then. It is past all Controversy he would after
that never have suffered one to meet and act freely, who would abandon his
Kingdom rather than suffer a Parliament in this Extremity, when he had no other
way to save himself. And after he was gone nothing but a Meeting of the three
Estates could have sufficient Authority to Re-Establish our shattered
Government, and settle the Nation.

But (says my Author) Granting such a representation had been engaged in; The
Commissions must either have extended to the caling of a Parliament, or not, if
not they would neither have been satisfactory, nor absolutely necessary, nor
satisfactory, for the want of a Parliament was that which was accounted the
great Greivance of the Nation as appears from the Prince of Orang's Declaration
where he says expressly, That his expedition is intended for no other design
but to have a free and lawful Parliament assembled as soon as was posible.

Now here our Gentleman leaves us in the Dark, without telling us what he
thought, but. 25. He reassumes it and shows that if the Commissioners were
limited, the greatest part of the Grievances might have been counted
unredress'd, if unlimited, it would be in their Power to do a great many things
prejudicial to the Crown. -- And his Majesty having been lately mistaken in
some of whose fidelity he had had so great an assurance, he has small
encouragement to be over confiding for the future. That is, it is fit he should
trust no body so far. Now I think I have sufficiently proved that we were in
such circumstances, that if we had not had a Parliament we had been certainly
ruined; And therefore any Deputation without a Commission to hold a Parliament
would have signified nothing, and a Commission that had not extended to all
those Grievances which the Majority of the three Estates should have judged
necessary to be redressed would have signified as little, so that whatever the
difficulties or distrusts of the King were at that time he saw he must yield
the point after he had strugled as long as was possible; and now when he had
now passed his Word, it was too late to revoke it, and therefore there was that
necessity added to the other of holding one: Now Sr. if we had yielded this
point, there had been an End of the English Liberties for ever: If he had
yielded it, what inconvenience could have followed, which did not certainly
attend his Desertion of us; but if he had stayed, he might in all probability
have saved his main Stake, and have regained the Affections of his people
again, and so have ended his Days in Honor and Peace in his own Palace, and
amongst his good Subjects. At least there was so great a probability of all
this, that no man but he would have taken the other way. Nor he neither if he
had suffered this Question to have been debated in his Privy Council, and had
heard what all sides could have said for it.

Sect. 21. He tells us this expedient (the appointing of a representative) was
not absolutely necessary; for the Administration of Justice might have
proceeded regularly without any such Deputation, by virtue of those Commissions
which the Judges, and Justices of the Peace had already from the King. So that
here was no need of Seals or Commissioners tho the Nation was imbroiled to that
height, that no body durst have undertaken this dangerous Charge, as he tells
us the Section before, and the King was gone. Thus men loose themselves when
they meddle with what they do not understand. The Tumults which arose that very
day in London, and spread themselves (with the news of the Kings withdrawing)
all over the Nation, do sufficiently confute this airy Notion. And at this time
both the Judges and Justices of the Peace were at almost as Low an Ebb of
Authority and Credit with the People as their Master, by reason of the many
unqualified men which had been employed, and the things they had done contrary
to Law; he could not but know how the late Lord Chancellor, Sir Roger Lestrange
and many others were treated by the People, and yet he tells us the
Administration of Justice might have proceeded regularly, yes, we might have
lived without any King, Magistrates, or Execution of Justice at all, if all men
would have been quiet and minded their own business.

Section 22 We have a whimsey of a Journey of Charles the first into Scotland
and that five Lords were appointed by him to sign bills in his Name, but the
Judges and Justices acted by virtue of their former Commissions, without any
new Authority from these Representatives of his Majesty. Now to what end is all
this; why to prove that Commissions will hold tho the King is absent. Who ever
doubted this, for without this had been allowed, he could have had no
representative. But I thought he would have given us an instance of a King that
had Stole out of his Kingdom, and had left no body to have supplied his place
(which Charles I. did) and yet after he was gone no body knew whether, to
return no body knew when, his people had been Governed by his Judges, and
Justices of the Peace; and then this should have been an Example for England.

Henry the 3d. of France was first King of Poland and hearing of his brothers
Death stole away without Leaving any Deputy: But then the Kingdom of Poland
called a Diet and Judged it an Abdication, and proceeded to the Election of a
New King as if he had been Dead. The Instances of this nature must be very
rare, but who ever heard of a Prince that withdrew himself from his people, or
was forced away and yet no body was put in his place? Certainly James the 2d.
foresaw what would follow; and in some sort consented to it, rather than to the
setting of a Parliament.

26. He undertakes to prove in the last place that we have no Grounds either
from the Laws of the Realm; or from those of Nature to pronounce the Throne
void, upon such a retreat of a Prince as we have before us. This is bold and
very peremptory considering there had then a Vote passed for it in the Lower
house of the Convention; And that this Gentleman is a Clergyman and knows very
little of the Laws of England.

There is (said he) no Statute so much as pretended to support this Deserting
Doctrine, he might have better called it this right of providing for our
selves, when we had no body to take care off us. There is no Statute to enable
us to meet and chose a new King if the whole Royal Line should happen to be
extinct, yet this may very probably happen at one time or another. What shall
we therefore continue in a State of Anarchy for ever?

Neither has it any foundation in common Law: For common Law is nothing but
Ancient usage and Immemorial Custom. Now Custom Supposes Precedents and
Parallel Cases: But it is granted on all hands, that the Crown of England was
never judged to be demised, by the withdrawing of the Prince before. Such a
withdrawing as this I believe never happened in England before; nor ever will
again; and it is Stupendioutly wonderful that it happened now. There was
nothing asked of the King but what he ought to have granted freely (viz) the
calling of a Free and Lawful Parliament, which he said he was resolved to have
had tho the Prince had not entered England, and so soon as he was retired he
would hold such a Parliament, then he came further and promised to hold a
Parliament the 15th of January and sent thee Noblemen to the Prince to adjust
the Preliminaries, who had as good an Answer as they could expect, but before
it was possible the late King should know what it would be, whilst all men
rested secure under the Expectation of that meeting, The King for Reasons
wholly unknown to us, burns the Writs, sends away the Seals, withdraws himself,
and disbands his Army. Now if he can find a case Parallel to this Declaration
at Guild Hall.
in the History of the whole world. Erit mihi Magnus Apollo.

Nay says he our Laws are not only silent in the maintenance of this Paradox,
but against it as I shall make good by two Instances. The first of these is
that of Edward the Fourth who was forced to fly, without leaving any
representative yet returned, and regained the Crown. King Edward was surprised
under pretense of a Treaty and sent Prisoner to Warwick Castle, and made his
escape out of Custody; after this Henry the Sixth was again Crowned, and Edward
the Fourth declared a Traitor in Parliament, and an Usurper of the Crown, and
all his Estate confiscated; and the like Judgment passed against all his
Adherents, and all the Statutes made by him were revoked. After this Edward the
Fourth returned into England, and pretending to lay aside all Claim to the
Crown, and only to seek the recovery of his Lands which belonged to him, as
Duke of York, which he confirmed to the men of York by his Oath; being thus
received in the North, he won over his Brother Clarence, and hasted to London,
and there he took poor King Henry his Prisoner again; and in a Battle slew the
Earl of Warwick who came to rescue King Henry, and in another Battle defeated
Margaret the Wife of Henry the Sixth; took, and in cold blood murdered Prince
Edward the Eldest Son of Henry the Sixth, and not long after Henry the Sixth
himself.

Now what says our Letter-man to all this, If it had been a known Law of
England, that a Prince had Ipso facto forfeited his Crown by going beyond Sea,
without leaving a Deputation, tho his departure should happen to be
involuntary; it would have been a great Advantage to Henry the Sixth. Yes
doubtless his departure did facilitate the Recrowning of Henry the Sixth, for
he was not so well beloved as Edward the Fourth was, and it is apparent the
Nation swore Allegiance to Henry the Sixth, de novo, for that very cause, for
no body then questioned but that Edward's was the better Title, and the Crown
was Entailed to Henry and his Heirs Male, and for want of such Issue to George
Duke of Clarence, and his Heirs; and when Edward the Fourth after this came up
to London, every body forsook Henry the Sixth, and he was retaken and
imprisoned without any resistance. Now after two Victories what wonder was it
if Edward the Fourth exercised all Acts of Sovereignty, (and Tyranny too)
before the calling of a Parliament, and in it restored all his own party, and
attainted King Henry's. He might as well have proved it lawful to stab and
murder Kings and Princes, and to swear and forswear from the same story.

His next Instance is the flight of Charles the second from Worcester fight,
which was nothing to the purpose neither, for that Prince had done nothing to
forfeit his right, and was ready to have done any thing to assure his subjects
of theirs: But James the Second had as is confessed on all hands violated the
rights of his Subjects above any Prince that ever swayed this Scepter, and
would rather throw up the Government, than suffer a Parliament to meet to
redress their Grievances, and this was the only reason, why he, as our Author
says, Had fewer friends to stand by him than his Brother had after the
unfortunate Battle of Worcester in 1651.

The true Fountain of the Law that is to Determine this difficult and rare Case
is our Fundamental Constitution, and the General Laws and Practice of other
Nations in the like or simular Instances. And as there is an Analogy of Faith
in Theology, so there is an Analogy here too, for those who are sufficiently
Qualified to judge by; but then they must be no young smatterers in Law,
History or State Politics. Nor was this Question determined by such, but by
the whole three Estates upon Reasons altogether unknown (perhaps) to this
Gentleman, but which may be sufficient to satisfy all the Princes in
Christendom when they shall be laid before them. In the mean time the Judgment
of the States is conclusive to us, and though we know not all the Reasons they
might have, yet we now know enough to acquiess and be satisfied. But then this
has been so very well laid down, and pursued by the Author of the Case of
Allegiance in our present Circumstances considered in a Letter from a Minister
in the City, to a Minister in the Country; that I will rather refer my Reader
to that Book, than transcribe it to no purpose.

In the 29. Sect. He tells us the last refuge of the Case of Dereliction are
the Laws of Nature, but a very little storming will serve to drive it from this
last Retrenchment. Bold and like an Hero, considering whom he engages with.

For (says he) the Law of Nature is nothing but the reason of the thing, very
true. Now Impartial reason has always a regard to the circumstances of Action,
and makes allowances for Surprise, for streightness of time, for resentment
upon Extraordinary Provocation, and never takes Advantage of an Omission which
may be fairly Interpreted, from any, or all of these causes. Now tho he says
the present case needs not any such allowances; Yet I will be so fair as to
give all these Advantages and put it upon this fair Issue.

1. Was not the whole English constitution acknowledged by the Late King to be
so much in his favor, That he said in his First Speech to the Council, I have
been reported a Man for Arbitrary power, but that is not the first Story that
has been made of me And I shall make it my endeavor to preserve this Government
both in Church and State as it is now by Law Established. I know the Principles
of the Church of England are for Monarchy, and the Members of it have showed
themselves good and Loyal Subjects, Therefore I shall always take care to
defend and Support it: I know too that the Laws of England are Sufficient to
make the King as Great a Monarch as I can wish; and as I shall never Depart
from the Just rights and prerogatives of the Crown; So I shall never invade any
Man's Property: Yet after all this Look upon nine of the ten Proposals made by
the the Bishops, Look upon the Prince of Orange's Declaration, Look upon the
Declaration made by the Lords and Commons the 12th. of February last past and
you will soon be satisfied in how many instances he had violated the Laws and
Liberties of this Kingdom, and Sought the Ruin and utter Subversion of this
Loyal, Monarchical Church of England. This conduct Lasted to the very moment
they knew the Dutch preparations were made against him?

After this what could be done or said that was omitted, to obtain a Redress in
Parliament? Was there any other way to Secure us than that of a Parliament? Was
this granted before it became Impossible to hinder it? And when all men's Eyes
were upon this, did he not then Deliberately resolve to defeat our Expectations
and to withdraw and leave us in a State of Anarchy and Confusion? Here was no
Surprise, streightness of time, no just resentment, except he were angry that
we could not contribute to our own Ruin, and enslaving; that we would not cut
up our Laws, Liberties and Religion with our Swords, and Sacrifice our
Deliverers to our Oppressors.

Nor were these violations only personal Injuries, but they extended to the
whole Church and Kingdom, and to the whole Constitution and every branch of it;
nor were they such as would have ended with his Late Majesty's life; but were
to have been intailed upon us and our posterity for ever, for the Queen might
have brought forth every year at that rate the Pretended Prince of Wales his
birth is proved.

We have (says he) an excellent Church, and we do well to take due care to
continue its Establishment; but to dispossess our Prince, upon this score, has
as little Divinity as Law in it. I may answer this in the words of the Apostle.
But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. A Brother or a Sister is not
under bondage in such a case: but God has called us to Peace. 1. Cor. 7. 15.
We did not dispossess our Prince, but he deserted us because we would not give
up the Legal Establishment of our Church and our Civil Liberties to boot.

To endeavor to Preserve our Religion by such methods will make it more fatal
to us in the Event than Atheism it self.

That is, it were better to renounce the whole Apostles Creed and every article
of it, than to endeavor to preserve our Religion by a defection from a
Persecuting Prince. In truth this is Loyalty with a Vengeance.

It Is a mistake to think the World was made for none but Protestants; and if
Dominion was founded in Grace, I am afraid our share would not be great in the
Division. As to the first of these it is a silly insinuation, and concludes
nothing. For tho it be true the world was not made for any one fort of men, yet
I may assert that part of it which is fallen to my Lot against the Invasion of
the Jesuits and Roman Catholics who pretend that the whole world ought to be
Subject to the Vicar of Jesus Christ, St. Peter's Successor, and upon that
Score will suffer no body to Live in Peace by them who will not be Subject to
that old Gentleman and his Emissaries. And if Dominion were founded in grace,
we of the Protestant Religion should be able to maintain our possession of what
we have, against any Religion that should pretend to out us, if we were to be
tried by any other Christian Judge but the Infallible Gentleman at Rome. When I
first read these two passages I concluded the piece was written by a R. C. but
some of our own Brethren can sometimes speak as ill things of us as the worst
of our Enemies, so violent are the transports of a Friend when thoroughly
insensed.

If it be objected, that his Majesty not sending to his People upon his
removal, is an Argument that he intended to Govern them no Longer.

First, He Answers that the objecter does not believe it. In truth if any body
did ever think or say that he was weary of Reigning or quitted England with a
design to trouble himself no more about it, he must be very Ignorant of the
temper of the Late King, and of the managment of affairs in the Last Scene of
his Government. We were not so happy! he was resolved to be our Master when he
was most resolutely bent not to do us that Justice which we had so much right
to; his going to France, Added to that Expression in his Letter from Rochester,
Tho I have ventured my Life very frankly, on several occasions for the Good and
Honor of my Country, and am as free to do it again (and which I hope I shall
yet do, as old as I am, to redeem it from the Slavery it is like to fall under)
Yet I think it not Convenient to Expose my self to be secured as not to be at
Liberty to effect it; and for that reason do withdraw my self: These show
clearly he went away with a resolution to return and make a conquest of us, and
then we may conjecture at what rate we shall be redeemed from Slavery.

Secondly, That his Majesty was scarcely Landed in The Administration of
Affairs, was in truth conferred on the (...) Prince of Orange, the very day the
King left London; by the Declaration made at Guild hal And all that followed
till the 12th of February, was but a confirming that first Act, by after Acts.
France before the Administration was Conferred upon the Prince of Orange which
Action might very well discourage his Majesty from sending any message so scon
as he intended: But since it is Known his Majesty has sent Letters to, (If not
to the Privy Council, as some affirm) yet to the Convention.

There was in truth a Letter to the Privy Council, Two to the Convention of
England, which I am informed were sealed up in Covers and never opened; but
there has since been a pretended copy of it printed and spread about the Town,
and another Letter has since that been sent to the Convention of Scotland; and
they all of them as far as is Known confirm his resolution of attacking England.

Thirdly, They that were the occasion of his Majesty's Departure should (one
would think) have waited upon him, and invited him back. For without question
the injuring person ought to make the first step toward an Accommodation,
Especially when wrong is done to a Prince. Now whether his Majesty has been
well used in this Revolution, or not, I leave to the World to Judge now, but
God will do it afterward,

This Conclusion will serve me and him differently, And therefore I shall add
no more but this. The Author of this Letter wrote it in an heat before things
were well understood or at all Determined, and therefore deserves much
Compassion, much that I have said in Answer to it was not known to him, and I
am persuaded he himself will now see and acknowledge too the weakness of many
things which he then Advanced. In short I design nothing by this Answer but the
Service of their Majesty's, the Peace of England, And the Preservation of our
Religion our Laws and Ancient Government. And could these have been preserved
any otherways, the Memory of his Late Majesty should have been still sacred to
me notwithstanding his Mis-Government. Whilst this Piece was preparing to the
Press there was an Answer to his Paper printed in two sheets in Quarto, wherein
the Author has taken notice of some passages in this Letter which I thought fit
to omit as not being of any moment as to the main question depending; and
therefore if the reader is not satisfied without so minute an Answer he may
have recourse to that Paper.

FINIS

