CHRIST's IMPORTUNITY WITH SINNERS To accept of HIM.

By S. Bold, Rector of Steple, Dorset.

All day long have I stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying
People. Romans 10.21. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the
death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his way and live: Turn ye,
turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die? Ezekiel. 3.11. London, Printed
for Awnsham Churchill in Ave-Mary Lane, and are to be sold by William Churchill
Bookseller in Dorchester. 1687.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
THE Happiness and Glory of Heaven, and the Horror and Anguish of Hell, are
most certain, stable, and durable Estates. We have as great, as convincing, and
as satisfying Evidence, that wicked, ungodly, and impenitent Sinners, shall be
for ever inexpressibly and unconceivably miserable, as is fit for reasonable
Creatures to have in this World, and as Infinite Wisdom has thought meet to
afford. The Evidence is such, that whosoever would pretend to require more
suitable, more proper, and more powerful discoveries, were he put to invent
Methods of his own for his particular fatisfaction, would have as reasonable,
as just, and as good grounds, after his Humor and Fancy were gratified, to
continue an Infidel as before; see Luke 16.30, 31. He that thinks it a
disparagement to his Wit, or a blemish to his Courage, to acquiesce in the
Testimony of God, as delivered in our Bibles, might with greater assurance
refuse his assent to the Damned themselves, did he see them in Flames, and hear
their personal acknowledgments, that their Vices and Sins had wrought them all
that misery. For why should he heed and credit them who have not trick enough
to disguise, or obstinacy enough to deny their Guilt.

The subsequent Discourse was not designed for them whose unnatural
Immoralities, or studied Incredulity, has given them an elevation (as they
conceit) above conviction. If nothing but particular Experience, will assure
them of eternal and unsufferable Torments, I leave them (as Persons out of the
reach of Ratiocination and Discourse) to what will certainly overtake them, and
that before they are willing.

And therefore intending the following Discourse, especially for the plain and
ordinary sort, who have not lost all sense, I will briefly address to them in a
Style proportionable to the plainness and familiarity used in the Discourse it
self.

I entreat you, who retain any sparks of Humanity, who have a sense that your
Souls are Immortal, who acknowledge there is some difference between Good and
Evil, Virtue and Vice, and whom your general Profession do own that the
Scriptures are the Word of God; I say, I do beg, and most earnestly beseech
you, by all that should be dear and precious unto you, to think seriously a
little on the following Particulars. Be so just to your selves, so respectful
to your Maker, so civil and kind to them who do most passionately desire your
everlasting Happiness, as to allow a few sober thoughts about Matters which be
of most necessary and unspeakable importance unto you. Why should you rush upon
God's Wrath, precipita^e and heedlesly throw your selves headlong into
unquenchable Burnings, and grieve and wound the Hearts of those who incessantly
pray, and desire, and long, and wait, for your endless Good and Comfort. Be
prevailed with then to consider, with some sedateness and calmness, these few
Instances.

1. Though God made Man at first a very excellent, holy, upright, and
unblemished Creature, yet now we are all by Sin defiled, and made unholy, and
brought under Guilt. So that as long as we remain in our natural and
unregenerate Estate, we are obnoxious and liable to God's Curse, and have a
just right to all the terrible Discoveries, and most dreadful Effects of Divine
and Infinite Justice; see Romans 5.12. and 1.18. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. John 3.36.

2. God has not left us remedilesly in that sad and deplorable, and as to all
mere Creature-relief, helpless Estate, into which we are sunk by Sin^: But of
his abundant rich and free Grace, He has provided us an Alsufficient Savior
and Redeemer, and has opened unto us a Door of Hope. He has given his own Son
to assume our Nature, and to make Peace and Reconciliation for us. By and
through this Son of God, Pardon, Peace, and Mercy, deliverance from Sin Guilt,
Misery, and Eterna Damnation is to be obtained, and no other way; see Romans 5.8,
9, 10. 1 Timothy 1.15. Gal 4.4, 5. 1 John 2.1, 2. Act. 4.12.

3. The Lord Jesus Christ having accomplished all that Work he undertook, and
which was appointed him to finish upon Earth; and being entered into his
glorious Administration, does make most gracious Offers of himself, his Love,
his Mercy, his Spirit, and Benefits, unto poor Sinners, and is very importunate
with them to entertain and accept of the same; Ephesians. 4.7, to 14. Act. 13.26. 2
Cor. 5.19, to the end.

4. Multitudes who have the Gospel, and partake of the Ministry of the Word,
and make a profession of Religion, and have these gracious Offers made unto
them, do not suitably entertain, but despise and reject Christ and his
Benefits. They stubbornly refuse to submit to his Authority, to comply with his
Terms, and employ themselves in his Service. Nay, many offer him the greatest
abuses and contempt they can devise; see Mat. 22.1, 2, etc. Luke 19.14. John
5.40. Act. 13.46. And do not the Lives and Practices of multitudes professing
Christianity, demonstrate all this? Look into your Hearts, and examine the
ordinary course of your Conversations, Shall you not there find sufficient and
full proof, that hitherto you have rejected him? That yet he has no room in
your Hearts, no influences on your Practices! O, what Ignorance, what Rancor,
Malice, Revenge, Hatred, Wrath, unmortified powerful Lusts; what Covetousness,
Earthly-mindedness, Carnality, Pride, Hypocrisy; what backbiting, lying,
slandering, evilspeaking, profane and common Swearing, vain, frothy, foolish,
unedifying Words and Discourse; what common constant neglect of the Worship and
Service of God, in Families, and in Private. What sleighting and contemning
God's Word and Ordinances! nay, what ridiculing, and making a sport of all
serious Religion! what Drunkenness and Whoredom, Intemperance and Wantonness,
Oppression, Injustice, Violence, and innumerable other most notorious and
abominable wickednesses, may multitudes of pretended Christians every where
observe in, and justly charge themselves with? Now, are these the Fruits of
Christ's gracious and holy Presence! Was Christ of such a Mind! Did He do such
Things! Does he any where countenance and allow of such things? Can those
Hearts which cherish such Lusts, and from which such polluted streams, and
corrupt Fruits do proceed, be a Temple for the Holy Jesus to dwell in? Are not
these the Fruits of the Flesh, which shut the Heart against Christ, and exclude
those who cherish and practice them out of the Kingdom of Heaven? Gal. 5.19,
20, 21. Rev. 21.8. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Ephesians. 4.29, 31.

5. All those who enjoying the Gospel, do stubbornly and finally reject Christ,
and his gracious Offers, as their Guilt does unmeasurably exceed other Peoples,
who have not the Light and Means, the Calls and Offers they have, so they may
justly expect, that their Damnation, Misery, and Torment, will exceedingly
outweigh, and be increased beyond other Peoples. O, Sirs, who can think of your
Danger, your Misery, that dreadful Portion which is in store for you, without
Tears and Groans, without Trembling and Fainting of Heart and Soul? read with
attention Prove. 1.24, etc. Heb. 12.25. Matthew. 11.21, to 25.

6. Those who do truly receive and entertain Christ, and close with his
gracious Offers, are very much changed and altered from what they themselves
were, and all are by Nature. It is not a change of Name, or a change of
Opinion, or a change from a Party, or a change as to any thing which is purely
External, which will serve turn to prove, that you have indeed closed with
Christ. It must be a real change of the Heart, a change of Principles, of Ends,
and Purposes, a change of the whole bent and exercise of all the Faculties and
Powers of the Soul, and a change of Life, and course of Conversation. He that
truly receives Christ, loves him with all his Heart, gives him the pre-eminence
in every thing, delights in his Laws, resigns up himself entirely to his
Disposal and Government, depends and relies on his Merits, Alsufficiency, and
Faithfulness, rejoices in his Comforts, and acquiesces in a patient expectation
of his coming, and the accomplishment of his Promises: Gal. 6.14, 15. 2 Cor.
5.17. Romans 8.8, 9. Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. Tit. 3.4, to 9.

Now do you think on these things seriously, especially examine, search and
consider diligently the Scriptures you are referred unto, and apply them
faithfully and impartially to your own Consciences and Lives. Make no delay,
stand not out in opposing Christ any longer. Do not deceive and flatter your
own Souls. Remember that God is True, and Faithful, and Just. That the Blood,
and Love, and calls of Christ, will not be lost; but if they be not carefully
improved and closed with, they will bring Vengeance upon you to the uttermost.
Remember that Christ's Invitations and Entreaties will not be very much longer
continued unto you. It will not be long before you must lie down in the Dust,
'twill be but a little time more that you shall hear these Calls and
Entreaties. In a little while you will be past reading the Scriptures, hearing
Sermons, having Opportunities to cry and pray for Mercy and Grace with Hope. O,
how fearful will your Estate be, if you resist all Christ's Calls to accept of
Him and Grace, till he withdraws himself in anger, and resolves he will never
speak a word more of Peace or Encouragement unto you, or entertain a favorable
thought toward you? You must before long, quit all you set your Hearts on
here; Riches, Applause, carnal Delights, Sports and Merriments, will in short
time take their leave, and fly away from you. Alas, get what you can here, if
you are without Christ, you are miserable, comfortless, helpless. E're long you
will see Death, and Judgment, and Hell, plainly before you; now, what will
relieve and support you then? O what Trifles, what Torments will your Lusts,
and all worldly Enjoyments and Entertainments appear and be then? What will you
do, if you persist to deny Christ admittance, when the Lord Jesus shall come in
flaming Fire, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. O what a dreadful Spectacle will Christ
in Glory be, to all the obstinate Despisers, Contemners, and Sleighters of Him,
his Grace, his Spirit, his Word, his Ordinances, his People, his Messengers?
How full of horror, amazement, and terror, will the appearance of Christ be, to
all those against whom his Blood will rise, and plead for Vengeance? Press
these things on your own Hearts, show some love now at last to your own Souls.
Build not your Hopes and Confidence on your belonging to any Congregation or
Party, nor on the enjoyment of outward Gospel-priviledges; but hasten to Christ
indeed, and never be at rest till savingly united unto him. Do not only read
but practice good Books; Be not only hearers, but doers of the Word, lest you
deceive your own Souls, Jam. 1.22. If you get any good by this Discourse, give
God all the Praise and Glory. And when you have got an interest in Christ, make
use of it at the Throne of Grace; not only for your self, but to further the
spiritual Happiness, and eternal Salvation of him, who earnestly desires and
prays for your everlasting Walfare,

S. B.

REVEL. iii. 20. Behold, I stand at the Door, and knock: if any Man hear my
Voice, and open the Door, I will come into him, and will sup with him, and he
with me.
THE Condescension of our Blessed Savior to poor Sinners, is very
extraordinary and miraculous. That reiterated Affronts, and multiplied
Provocations, do (as it were) but only lengthen out his Patience, and add
warmth and earnestness to his Importunity, is indeed the highest demonstration
imaginable of astonishing Kindness, and a Love which cannot be paralleled.

But this is not to encourage our Obstinacy and Refractoriness; It should
overcome our Sturdiness, and conquer and master our Stubborness; it should
soften and make us tractable and compliant. O the hardness of that Heart, the
searedness of that Soul and Conscience, which will not be melted into a remorse
for Sin, and a joyful unfeigned closure, with the Offers of Salvation and
Mercy, at the earnest Entreaties, and passionate Courtings of the Eternal and
Almighty God! What shall we say then? shall we continue in Sin, because Grace
does abound? God forbid. (Romans 6.1, 2.) How shall we, who are thus solicited
from Heaven, thus importuned by the Blessed Jesus, live any longer in a
contradiction unto him?

The Love and Condescension of Christ is such, and does so eminently appear in
many Instances, especially in these mentioned in the Text, our Blessed Savior
himself seems to be almost transported at the consideration of the same. That
the Son of God, who thought it no robbery to be equal with God, should take
such notice of Enemies, forlorn, despicable Wretches, miserable Sinners (who at
best, whilst in their natural Estate, can lay claim to nothing but Wrath and
Damnation) as to stand before them, come unto them, and use all manner of
earnestness with them, to prevail with them to yield him admittance into their
Hearts; that by this means they may be advanced, and have Communion and
Fellowship with him, is so strange, so unheard of a piece of Condescension, so
wonderful, so surprising, so amazing an Instance of Love, our Savior himself,
at the mentioning of it, seems to be in a kind of rapture. He does Preface it
with a Note of Admiration. Behold!

If we should look upon it as a mighty Condescension in a great Prince or
Emperor, to descend from his Throne, and come personally to visit some poor
Subject, who has no habitation or place of Abode, but some small weather-beaten
crazy Cottage; nay, to visit some infamous Rebel, justly confined to a Dungeon,
covered with nastiness and filth; and there importune and entreat this
miserable Wretch to be reconciled unto him, that they may both dwell together,
and mutually rejoice in each others society; What ought we then to think of our
Blessed Savior's soliciting and entreating, with the greatest earnestness, for
admittance into our Hearts?

We may take notice of two general Parts in the words.

I. The main substance of the Verse, which consists of two parts. 1. Our
Savior's earnestness to be admitted into Sinner's Hearts; I stand at the Door
and knock, etc. 2. The Privileges and Satisfaction consequent upon our
receiving of him; I will come in to him, etc.

II. The way and manner how all this is commended to our consideration, Behold!

I intend to say but little of this latter; and therefore as it stands first in
the Text, so it shall immediately come under our consideration.

This word, Behold, notes, that something follows which is of weight, and
deserves to be observed. Indeed it would greatly become and profit us, to take
a particular and distinct notice of those places of the Holy Scripture, which
are thus solemnly recommended to our consideration. For God certainly best
knows what is of greatest use for us: And to suffer such Passages to slip our
observation, without a diligent heedful attendance to them, which he has set
such a Mark upon, and points out so carefully to our study, argues much
disregard to his Wisdom and Goodness, and that our Religion is very weak and
unoperative.

You may more particularly take notice, that this word, Behold, has three
special significations in the Holy Scriptures; or there are three several ends
and purposes why it is used in the Scriptures.

1. There is a Behold of Caution: To warn us to take heed of what will be
extremely hurtful and injurious to our Souls. John 5.14. Behold, thou art made
whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. God has done very much
for thee, and signally helped thee and delivered thee; take care thou do not
wilfully provoke him again, lest he afflict thee worse, lest thou be hardened
in thy Sins, and Divine Wrath come upon thee to the uttermost.

2. A Behold of Admiration! Which calls us to wonder and admire, with all the
Powers of our Soul, at the exceeding Riches of Divine Goodness and Grace. 1
John 3.1. Behold, what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the Sons of God!

3. A Behold, designed to excite and stir us up to take notice of some
important Matter speedily, and to improve it without delay. 2 Cor. 6.2. Behold,
now is the accepted time, behold, now is the day of Salvation.

This word, here in the Text, may have all these Significations attributed to
it.

1. As designed to admonish us against resisting Christ any longer, seeing he
has stood so long, and urged us to give him admittance, lest if we continue to
keep our Hearts locked and barred against him, he should depart from us in
displeasure, and never make us another offer of his Love and Grace. O how
fearful a thing is it to send Christ away grieved and enraged, because of our
final perverseness and stubborness, after he has been long woing and persuading
us to accept of him and his Benefits!

2. As representing to us how great, how wonderful, how unexpected an Instance
of Love Christ is pleased to vouchsafe us. What greater Love can Christ express
and show to you than this? He experienced and met with very hard and injurious
usage here on Earth; He underwent many afflicting grievous pains; He suffered a
very infamous tormenting kind of Death. He endured for Sinners infinitely more
than we can conceive, yet did not all this allay and cool his Affection, he
loves us still, with a Love as strong as ever. What Love is this! Love stronger
than Death, Love that the Floods cannot drown; Love, which neither Sufferings,
nor Death, nor Life, nor Glory, can overcome. Here is room indeed for our
admiration and wonder; cease then your wondering at other things, which seem
strange and unusual, they are all nothing, if compared with this Love of
Christ. Let all your admiration center here, on this fathomless, this infinite,
incomprehensible, and unsearchable Object of it. What can we justly wonder at,
besides the infinite Riches of our Savior's Love and Condescension, unless at
that horrible and astonishing Prodigy, that People should be so insensible,
sottish, and sturdy, as to slight, neglect, and despise all the exceeding
abundance of the Riches of Divine Grace and Kindness?

3. As exciting and stirring us up to take notice of our dear Savior; and with
what tenderness and condescension he carries himself toward us. Behold, thy
Savior does stand without, and has been long waiting on thee, and does still
entreat thee earnestly to give him admittance. O take notice how the King of
Glory is come to visit thee! and is desirous to have communion with thee!
Behold, Salvation is now come to thy House; and what! will thou deny reception
to, and shut thy Doors against such a Guest?

We may fairly enough furnish our selves with this Instruction from this word,
Behold, as used in this place, viz.

That the Lord Jesus Christ has wonderful Love to poor Sinners, is a Truth of
extraordinary importance, and should be carefully observed and attended to

But I design not to insist upon this any further, than by acquainting you
briefly with two things, which clear and confirm the Proposition.

1. The extraordinary usefulness of this Truth to us.

2. The extraordinary strangeness of the Thing it self.

1. The extraordinary usefulness of this Truth to us. What is neither excellent
in it self, nor useful to us, we justly overlook, and take no notice of; or if
we do, we therein betray our weakness and imprudence.

Now we have ordinarily many Interests and Designs on foot, but we readily
acknowledge, that we are bound on all accounts to pursue with most care,
earnestness and diligence, those things we are assured will most of all farther
our highest Interests, those Concernments we are most affected with, and prefer
and value above all the rest. If a Man have a Trial depending for his whole
Estate, or for his Life, and can hear of a certain Course he may take, which
will infallibly secure his Cause, he will attend unto this Business, before all
his other Affairs; and though there be other Matters he would be diligent and
industrious about, were this his principal Business well settled, yet he omits
and neglects them; he lays them aside at present, that he may follow his
greater and more important Affair, with greater freedom and less disturbance.
Now there is nothing so much concerns us, as to be truly and savingly
acquainted with the Riches of Divine Grace, to be sensible of the gracious
Visits Christ does make, and to embrace and close with his blessed Motions. You
may lose your Lands, be robbed of your Money, have your Houses and Goods all
burnt about your Ears, and yet not be undone, nor irreparably miserable. But if
you are ignorant of Christ, and regardless of his Visits, and destitute of an
Interest in his Love, you are poor, deluded, miserable, unhappy Wretches,
whatever Portion you have of the Wealth, and Honor, and Applause of this World.

Indeed, too many slight Christ, and make no account of his Love. People who
are sunk in their Lusts, whose Understandings Satan has blinded, in whom Satan
rules, and by whom they are hurried away headlong toward Hell, as the Gadarens
Swine were into the Deep. But, O! let us take heed we do not tread in their
Steps, lest we drink of their Cup, and partake of their Portion.

The Apostle tells you, It is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all acceptance,
that Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. What is it
then, that after all his Sufferings, and being ascended into Glory, he does
still continue to express and testify as great Love as ever to us? Shall we
despise the choicest offers of his Love? Shall we despise, or take no notice of
such a Truth as this, that Christ does stoop to visit us, and importunes our
acceptance of him? O, what vile, what unworthy, what ungrateful Persons shall
we then approve our selves! In how forlorn and deplorable a State are all the
stubborn and obstinate despisers and contemners of Christ! Heb. 2.3. O, Sirs!
did you understand the worth of those precious Souls you are entrusted with;
were you truly sensible of the sad and miserable Estate you are in by Nature,
(...) this Love expressed, but by Piety and Obedience? If ye love me, keep my
Commandments, John 14.15. Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you,
John 15.14. What an encouragement is it to a Holy Life, when we can truly say,
we are hereby testifying our Love to our dear Savior, in such a way as he does
most approve? Whom should we serve, whom should we obey, if not him who has,
and does love us still in so extraordinary a manner?

We are ('it is true) too prone to serve Satan and our Lusts; but what reason
have we to do so? Is Damnation and Hell so sweet and so obliging, we should
drudg and toil all our time for such a Purchase? Can you seriously think Satan
who tempts and sollicites you to Sin, has any love for you? And will you serve
him who seeks your eternal ruin so industriously, before the Lord Jesus Christ,
who has given you so many convincing Testimonies of his Love?

It is an amazing, and very sad thing to observe, how People do prefer the
drudgery and vassalage of Satan, before the liberty and freedom their Savior
has purchased for them. That notwithstanding Christ does love them so
affectionately, yet Satan should have so many to run violently after him to
Hell; and Christ should have so few to follow him to the Mansions of Bliss and
Glory.

It is a sad, but yet too just a representation of Man's Folly, Ingratitude,
and Wickedness, which St. Cyprian makes, when he brings in the Devil boasting
against Christ, and insulting over People in this manner; Ego pro istis nec
sanguinem fudi, etc. (Sermon. de Elymos) I have not shed one drop of Blood for
any of all these my Followers; I never took any pains to do them any good; my
study, and care, and diligence has ever been, and ever shall be, to bring them
to Death and Damnation; and yet notwithstanding all this, Tuos tales, demonstra
mihi, Christ. Show me, O Christ, so many, such busy, such painful, and such
dutiful Servants of thine any where, as I can show thee every where of mine.
Shall the Envy and Malice of Satan be more powerful with you, to draw you into
Damnation, than the prodigious Love of the Son of God, to win you unto Holiness
and Glory?

O! were we but duly affected with the Love Christ bears to us, we should not
be able to resist its Charms! O, what pious exemplary, praising Christians
would this make us? Who ever has a true and real sense of this Love in his
Heart, will be transformed by it into the likeness of him, who does thus love
him. The reason why we are no better, that we resemble Christ so little, is,
because we are ignorant of his Love; tho we may know somewhat of it notionally,
so as to tincture and adorn our Discourse, yet our Hearts are not touched with
it, and brought under its Efficacy and Power. Were our Hearts but melted with
the consideration and sense of this Love, O how powerfully would it engage us
in the Ways and Work of our Savior! With what vigor and delight should we be
carried through the whole course of Christian Duty, and new Obedience?

3. It is of exceeding great use, for our support and comfort under Trials,
Temptations, Sufferings and Troubles in the World; and when we are exercised
with deep apprehensions of our own sinfulness and vileness. Affliction does try
Friends. A Man whilst he does prosper and flourish in the World, shall have
many pretended Friends, who will fall from and disown him in Adversity. We are
subject to Trials and Temptations, under which all those things that flatter
our Senses, and which People court and labor for with all their might, will
either take their flight from us, or at best, lie by us, as insipid useless
things: Nothing but a sense of Christ's Love will then befriend us.

And I know not any sort of People more exposed to Trials and Assaults in the
World, than the People of God; nor are there any whom Satan does ordinarily set
upon with fiercer violence, than poor Sinners, when first beginning to look out
after, and listen unto Christ. And as these are liable to such Calamities, so
God provides for their support and comfort under them. If it be a great relief
to a Person under outward trouble, that he has a Friend to stand by him, and
counsel him, and appear for him, what is it to a true Believer to be assured of
the Love of Christ? That he has one on his side, who is alsufficient for him,
be his Circumstances what they will, and who will never fail him nor forsake
him?

What tho I be poor and miserable, and destitute and afflicted in the World?
What tho I be made as the filth and the offscouring of all things? Christ
loves me never the less for that. Nay, suppose I have great Doubts in my Mind,
and my Soul is full of heaviness for my Sins, and I am ready to cry out, O! my
Sins are not ordinary and usual Sins, they have been aggravated above measure!
I cannot see any thing in my self, but impurity, filth, and guilt. I do not
perceive how any thing but Damnation can belong to me! O my Misery! O my
Unhappiness! O my Guilt! I am so laden with Sin, my Guilt lies so heavy upon my
Spirit; Terror and amazement, fear and horror, do so prevail in my Soul, I am
not able to bear up under the same, my Heart fails me, and my Spirit is gone!
Why now, one glimps of Christ, one taste of his Goodness, a sense of his Love,
will revive and exhilerate the Soul, and disperse all these Clouds, these
Darknesses and Storms. There is no condition a Person can be in, but if Christ
will dart into him a Ray of his special Love, he will thence receive mighty,
even inexpressible support and comfort. The continued Love of Christ, is the
most sovereign Cordial in every Estate and Condition. We may go through Fire
and Water, we may adventure upon any suffering for the Name of Christ, being
assured of his Love. O! what an excellent chearing Scripture is that of the
Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 8. v. 35, to the end?

What would the Scripture be to us; how should we be effectually excited and
encouraged to a course of Piety? Or, what could support us under Burdens and
Troubles, if Christ did not continue his Love to Sinners?

2ly, In the second place we are to consider the extraordinary strangeness of
the thing it self. We commonly take as particular notice as we can, of strange
and unwonted Occurrences. How do People view and observe Comets and Blazing
Stars? How do they flock to see any strange sort of Beast, when exhibited to be
seen? We admire and wonder at things, which are considerable only by reason of
their strangeness and rarity; Things which are not of any great worth, nor
cannot produce us any profit and real advantage. O! therefore, let us be so
wise as to turn all our admiration unto that which is truly strange, and
equally advantageous and comfortable?

The Love of Christ to Sinners, is the strangest thing that ever was: Without
controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness: God was manifest in the Flesh,
justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the World, and received up into Glory, 1 Timothy 3.16. This is a thing so
strange, even in the first Instances of it, the blessed Angels stand amazed at
it, and desire to look into it, 1 Pet. 1.12.

If a Prince, the only Son of a King or Emperor, should condescend to take
notice of a mean traitorous Wretch, ready to have all the Torments and
Punishments his Treason deserved, inflicted on him, and plead for this Person;
yea, deny himself all the Pleasures, Honors, and Satisfactions in his Father's
Court; yea, submit himself to all manner of Indignities for many Years
together, to procure the other's Pardon. And being at last received to Court
again, and living in the greatest pomp and splendor, should come to this
Person whose Life he had saved at the forementioned rate, and entreat and
beseech, and court him to be reconciled to him; and that an intimate
familiarity and correspondence may be settled betwixt them, promising him all
the Entertainments and Satisfactions he does participate of himself, Would not
this be looked on by all as a most prodigious Instance of Affection and Love?

But alas! what is this to that we are now discoursing of? Here is the Son of
God, who is equal with God, God blessed for ever; who is the Brightness of his
Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Person; whose Name is Wonderful,
Counselor, The mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. This
is the Person who condescended to take on him our Nature; who lived for many
Years together a Life that was very mean, and to outward appearance very
contemptible. What Indignities did he suffer from Men! how deep did he drink of
the Cup of God's Wrath! when groaning, and praying, and sweating Blood in the
Garden! when expostulating so earnestly with his Father on the Cross! He
submitted to Death, yea, he became obedient to Death, even the Death of the
Cross: The most painful, the most lingering, the most ignominious and cursed
sort of Death then known in the World. And all this was to reconcile Sinners
and Enemies unto God, and to save them from that eternal Misery and Damnation
they could no other way be saved from. And after all this, having raised
himself to Life, and being received into Glory, he continues his Love to these
Sinners, and many ways importunes and sollicites them to accept of the Mercy
and Blessings which cost him so dear; and to yield themselves up into the Bonds
of Friendship, that a constant mutual correspondence may be maintained betwixt
them. Is not this an incomprehensible astonishing Prodigy of Love? what can be
compared unto it? What Heart so hard, such Condescension, such Love, such
passionate courting will not soften and overcome? What so strange, what so
obliging as this, that the Son of God should entreat and beseech Rebels to
accept of Pardon? should court and make so much ado, be so importunate, and
keep such a stir with us, who are only held by his Hand from falling into Hell,
to accept of Heaven! There is nothing so strange as this, unless it be that
cursed Heart, which is too obdurate and stubborn to be overcome and won, by so
kind, so winning, and so mighty a Force as this is.

Applic. What care now should we take to be thoroughly instructed and settled in
this great Truth? Do not labor only to be acquainted with it in the Theory,
but endeavor and pray that a saving Knowledge and Belief of it may be wrought
in you by the Spirit of God. This is a Matter concerns thee much, thy Salvation
depends upon it. If thou lose thy Soul, thou losest all: If thou art ignorant
of the Love of Christ, if this Love have no influence on thee, thou art
miserable indeed. All true Comfort is wrapped up in this. Acts 4.12. O study
this great Truth, and do not desist or leave off, till it have its proper
influence on thy Affections, Heart, and Life. Let the Love of Christ constrain
thee. Resolve to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Admire and
adore the Love of Christ: Improve the knowledge and consideration of it, to fix
and promote thy Faith, thy Love, thy Hope, thy Patience, and every other Grace.

But I will not insist any longer on this first word, which is introductory,
and should lead us attentively unto that which follows.

The rest of the Verse acquaints us with our blessed Savior's seeking for, and
endeavoring to get admittance with us: and the Privileges which shall accrue
to those who hearken to him, and receive him.

I shall confine my self now unto the first of these, which is represented to
us in these words, I stand at the Door and knock. Though in discoursing of
this, I shall have occasion to acquaint you with the main Importance of some of
the following words, viz. If any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door.

Our Savior's seeking and endeavoring to get admittance with us, is here
expressed by three words.

1. Standing. 2. Knocking. 3. The word Door.
The Person, or rather the Heart of the Person, because of its being the
principal Part of Man, and the Seat of the Affection, is often compared to, and
called a House, a Temple, a Habitation. God has a secret and real commerce
with the Soul of every true Believer. He communicates much of himself, and
imparts his Heavenly Graces unto every such Person; He sets up his Government
in that Soul, and he expresses his gracious Concernment with that Soul, by
dwelling in it, by making that Person his House and Habitation. Jesus answered
and said, If a Man love me, he will keep my Words, and my Father will love him;
and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him, Joh. 14.23. see Isa.
57.15.

The Lord Jesus makes very gracious Proposals to us; He offers us his
Blessings, his Graces, his Spirit, the Benefits of his Death and Passion,
Himself. And entreats and beseeches us to accept of these, and give them room
in our Hearts. His addressing of himself to us by way of instruction,
persuasion, and tendering of these to us, is called his knocking at the Door.
Our learning of him, accepting of, and closing with his Tenders, is called, our
hearing his Voice, and opening to him.

It may be proper here to take notice;

1. Of our Savior's Posture. 2. Of his Gesture.
1. His Posture. Behold, I stand. Which notes both his Patience; how long he
does wait to be gracious, and what danger we are in, if we do not make a good
use and improvement of his Patience and long-suffering, for he is in such a
Posture, as notes a readiness of departure if he be not admitted.

2. His Gesture. And knock. Which notes his earnestness and importunity. The
Lord Jesus, when he makes his visits unto the Soul, is not willing to depart,
without bestowing some Blessing. He seems resolved not to take a denial. He
will fasten some Good, some Blessing on thee, if there be any thing, either of
ingenuity or of modesty in thee.

The Phrase is taken, from what is ordinarily observed in the Visits which
People make to one another. As the Person which goes to see another, does
commonly stand before the Door of that House where the other's Abode is; and
desiring to have entrance, knocks, and makes a noise at the Door, till, if any
one be in the House, he be taken notice of; which argues, he has a desire to
have some discourse and converse with the Person he comes to visit. Thus Christ
sets forth his desire, and his earnestness, to have some commerce and
familiarity with poor Sinners. He waits, he knocks, he uses all kind of
importunity with them.

The Doctrine I design to insist on a little from these words, is this:

Doct.

The Lord Jesus Christ does wait long, and uses much importunity with Sinners,
to prevail with them to accept of him and his Benefits. He stands at the door
long, and knocks often, before we will take notice of him, and open unto him.
Indeed, his own People, and Servants, are too apt to forget him, and to suffer
him to wait and stay long, when he makes his after Addresses to them, before
they rise and let him in. We are too prone to turn a deaf Ear to him, and admit
any thing as an excuse for our not giving him so speedy and grateful a
reception as we owe him. How often do even Believers forget themselves, and
grow so remiss and drowsy, as to provoke him to withdraw himself, and deny them
the sense of his gracious Presence and Love! So that they must seek long, and
undergo much trouble, before he will be found of them again. This you may see
fully proved, if you seriously read and weigh the fifth Chapter of the Song of
Solomon, from v. 1st, to the 9th.

And if those who have in some measure understood their need of Christ, and
been affected with his Excellencies, and tasted how good the Lord is, may grow
so negligent and careless, it cannot be very much wondered at, if Christ, when
he makes his Addresses to others, who are still in their natural Estate, be not
presently hearkened unto, but must use importunity before he find admittance.
But yet the Sinner's either refusing or neglecting to hear him, and comply with
him, is a thing so ill, nothing can excuse it.

Now this shows the weakness of Grace in many who are already regenerated. And
what need the Best have to be always on their watch. And likewise, how
strangely stupid and stubborn People are, till by the operation of the Holy
Ghost, their Hearts are effectually wrought on and awakened. And, O how
wonderful is the Condescension of the Blessed Jesus, in that he takes so much
notice of, and does with such patience and earnestness court, and strive to
overcome such vile, such senseless, and such unworthy Creatures!

It is Christ that first takes notice of us, not we of him. We love him,
because he loved us first, 1 John 4.19. If Christ did never love and importune
us, we should never love him. Should not Christ come and knock at our Doors, we
should never think of, nor look after him in good earnest.

How should we stand amazed at this! It was when we were Enemies that Christ
died for us; and it is whilst we are in a state of Enmity, that he comes and
entreats us to be reconciled to him. God might easily and fully have glorified
his Justice in our eternal Damnation; and yet how earnest is he with us, to
accept of the happy Fruits of his Kindness? It is, whilst we lie wallowing in
our Blood, without pity, that he sets his Love upon us, and says unto us,
Live. It is Christ's Work to bring us to a compliance with himself. He loves us
first, he manifests his Love first, and he makes those discoveries of his Love
powerful, and of force to work upon our stubborn Natures, and hard Hearts,
before we will yield and acknowledge, either our own emptiness and need of him,
or his wonderful Love and Condescension toward us. It is Christ that says, I
will have Mercy upon her that had not obtained Mercy, and I will say to them
which were not my People, Thou art my People; and then they shall say, Thou art
my God, Hos. 2.23. You see Christ speaks first, before we acknowledge him. Lord,
what is Man that thou art mindful of him! or the Son of Man, that thou have
such regard unto him! What a Miracle of Condescension and Love is this, that
the Lord Jesus Christ, that the Great and Eternal God should thus court and
solicit Dust and Ashes! should represent himself so in love with sinful Worms!

In discoursing of this Truth, I shall endeavor,

I. To explain and illustrate this, of Christ's waiting to be gracious to
Sinners, and importuning them to accept of him. II. To show you what our
receiving of Christ does import. III. To enquire what are the main Instances
which hinder us from receiving of Christ into our Hearts. IV. To offer a Reason
or two, why Christ is thus importunate with Sinners. V. To make some
Application of the whole.
I. I shall say something concerning Christ's waiting to be gracious to
Sinners, and importuning them for admittance into their Hearts. These two
things are both implied in, and signified by these words, I stand at the Door,
and knock.

The one argues his Patience, and the stay he makes to be gracious unto us.
This is the word, Stand, I stand at the Door. Now, how long has Christ stood
at your Doors? how long and often has he been calling unto you for admittance,
and as yet to no purpose? Indeed, some receive him very early: Happy they who
bid so worthy, so desirable, so good a Guest, welcome betimes! They who are
from their early Years acquainted with Christ, with whom they constantly keep a
correspondence, and who has long reigned in their Hearts, are happy People
indeed. These are truly Heaven's Favorites.

But I am afraid the number of such is not very great. Alas! Christ is a great
while slighted and contemned, before he is in any tolerable measures taken tice
of, and hearkened unto in the World. O the Patience that Jesus Christ does
exercise toward Sinners! How many Days, and Weeks, yea Months, and Years, does
he stand waiting, before we will hear his Voice, and open unto him?

It is our great fault, and unhappiness too, that after we are in some measure
acquainted with Christ, we are prone to neglect our Watch, and suffer our love
to him to abate, and almost die: So that when he makes his fresh Approaches to
us, and calls for admittance into our Hearts, we are ready to make excuses,
till we force him to withdraw and hide himself from us, Cant. 5.2, 3.

But alas! how many Years together do many stand out and resist him, tho he use
never so many methods to win, and bring them to a compliance.

Nay, Christ does not only wait all this time, but he manifests extraordinary
patience on the account of their demeanor toward him. Were there any one who
had done us an injury, and we should go to, and promise him we will pass by the
wrong, and entreat him that we may be Friends; and that Party should refuse to
let us into his House, should set us at defiance, and revile and reproach us,
and do us greater Injuries than before, how would our Blood boil? how would our
Passions flame? how unreconcileable should we be to him for the future? But
Jesus Christ does otherwise to us; He comes to us when in a state of Rebellion
against him. He is ready to pardon us, pleads with us to accept his Favors,
and demonstrates how real and hearty he is. He does, as it were, lay before us
his Sufferings, and tell us, that all these Calamities, Pressures, and Sorrows
were undergone for our sakes: And tho all this prove unsuccesful, we still
refuse to hearken to him, and do proudly and contemptuously turn away from him,
he does not desist, but still stands and waits to see whether we will come to
our selves, whether we will become more calm, and wise, and at last accept of
the gracious Offers he does make us.

O! what a number of Affronts and Provocations does the Lord Jesus Christ
patiently bear and pass by, whilst waiting to be gracious to his Enemies! How
do Sinners set him at naught, and offer him the greatest contempt they can! and
still he bears all, and stands waiting at their Doors.

Sinner! Thou that live in known Sins, under the Ministry of the Gospel, and
a profession of the Faith of Christ; thou have had Christ waiting on thee a
long while. Thou have, as it were, heard him tell thee, It was Sin, even thy
Sins, that made him a Man of Sorrows, and occasioned his being reckoned amongst
Transgressors; that thy Sins contracted on him that load and burden, which
made him sweat drops of Blood under the weight of it: That thy Sins nailed him
to the Cross: That thy Drunkenness, thy Intemperance, thy Wantonness, thy
Profaneness, thy Swearing, thy Worldly-mindedness, thy Sabbath-breaking, and
thy other Sins, made him, when on the Cross, cry out, with so much apprehension
and earnestness, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And does Christ
after all this wait on thee, and importune thee to receive him; and will thou
dare, after all, to reject him? Thou can not (however) but acknowledge, that
if after all this he continues thee the tenders of his Love, that his Patience
is wonderful, thou must needs own, that to refuse him admittance, and despise
his Offers, is very disingenuous.

O! what stubbornness do many testify toward Christ, after he has been long
treating with them in this manner? Has not Christ told thee these things in his
Word? Has he not (as it were) come to thee, and said, Behold, Sinner, these
Hands, and these Feet, which were nailed to the Cross on thy account, to
testify my Love to thee? See how I was forsaken by all! what I suffered for thy
Sins! how I was treated! in what manner my extraordinary Grief did vent it
self! And now, behold, I come to thee, desiring to be received of thee, and
entreating thee to accept the Benefits I have purchased by all my grievous
Sufferings! And will thou still reject him? Will thou chide and rate thy
Savior away, after so many testimonies of incomprehensible Kindness, Patience,
and Love? Will thou, by thy carriage toward him, manifest that thou approvest
what the Jews did unto him? Will thou, by a continued repeating of thy old
Wickedness, discover how desirous thou art to crucify him again, and what
pleasure thou take in trampling his precious Blood under thy Feet? O, how
great then is thy Guilt! how is thy Wickedness aggravated? What may thou well
expect will become of thee? How dreadful is thy State! how great is thy Danger!
But now, if after all this, Christ does still wait, and make thee new tenders
of Mercy; how astonishing must thou needs acknowledge his Love and his Patience
to be?

The Patience of Christ does most signally appear, in bringing home at last
those Sinners who have been very notorious, and who have labored against him,
and stood out against, and resisted him a great while.

O! let this prevail with you all to yield up your selves speedily to Christ.
You have resisted him too long already; take heed of repeating your Affronts
against him, seeing he has born with you so patiently hitherto. Surely he has
waited long enough, O, delay him no longer. The Fruit and Effect may be
dreadful, if you resist any farther; the Lord will not always be trifled with.
Though the Offers of Grace may be long continued, they will not last for ever,
if you go on stubbornly to despise and reject them. Take heed of refusing to
receive and entertain Christ, once more, when he comes unto thee, lest thou
should provoke him to depart from thee, with resolution never to make thee a
gracious visit, or see thee with favor any more. Do not thou provoke him to
swear in his Wrath, thou shall never enter into his Rest. Can thou endure the
eternal Displeasure of Almighty God? Can thou bear up under the direful and
astonishing Punishments, which contemned Grace, and abused Patience and
Goodness expose to? Can thou dwell with everlasting Burnings? O, let the
Long-suffering, the Patience, and the Goodness of thy Savior, lead thee to
Repentance, and prevail with thee to accept of, and close with him and his
gracious Offers.

This shall serve at this time, concerning Christ's waiting to be gracious unto
Sinners. I proceed to say something,

II. In the second place, of his importuning Sinners for admittance. This is
noted by the word knock. Jesus Christ does not only wait long, but uses much
importunity, and is very earnest to get admittance with Sinners. He knocks, and
knocks again; he repeats his Entreaties, and often renews his earnest
Solicitations, that we will not reject and despise him, but admit him into our
Hearts, and bid him welcome. Now, what Condescension is this, that the Son of
God should court and persuade us with so much warmth and fervor? That he who
cannot receive any advantage from us, should thus importune us for our own
advantage!

Indeed, this does plainly manifest our baseness and stupidity, in that we are
so hard to be wrought on, and affected with our most important Interests. And
it does as certainly and fully display and upbraid our wilfulness and impiety,
when we stand out and finally resist Christ, as it does demonstrate the
unparalled condescension and kindness of our Savior.

O! what Demonstrations have we of the tenderness of Christ to Sinners? How do
his Bowels yearn over us, when we are inconsiderately ruining our selves? How
often does he knock and entreat us to yield to him, and accept of him and his
Benefits? O, how hard and stubborn are our Hearts! what, will not all the
Divine Methods and Artifices win us, and bring us into a compliance with him,
that loves us above Life and Death?

I need mention but two Generals to evidence more distinctly unto you, how
earnest and importunate the Lord Jesus is to be received by us.

1. The Arguments he does use to persuade us to accept of him. 2. The
Instruments he does imply about this Work, viz. to win us to comply with his
gracious Motions and offers.
1. The Arguments he does use to prevail with us to accept of Him. He urges
the strongest Arguments, and presses on us those Considerations, which carry
along with them the greatest force and weight imaginable. And these are managed
with all the heartiness and affectionateness that is possible. Arguments many,
strong, various, and such as are most proper to have an influence on our
Affections, Judgments; and Minds. Were any Motions urged, that had but the
thousandth part of the reason, the least of these has, to engage us to strike
in, and close with any thing for our secular Advantage, how effectual would
they prove! No Difficulties, no Straights, no Discouragements would affright or
dishearten us. But when the greatest and most weighing Instances, as the Divine
Wisdom can pitch upon, are urged by the Lord himself to engage us not to
forsake our own Mercies, to attend to and close with our only Happiness. Alas!
how unapprehensive, how unconcerned are we? We are then as little moved, as if
the Arguments had no weight in them, or we had no Souls to take care of, and be
saved.

If Satan has a mind to draw us unto any Sin, or engage us in some destructive
and damning course, how easily does he prevail? how soon does he gain our Ear,
our Hand, our Heart? How suddenly does he hurry us into what he pleases? Yea,
Men like our selves can easily work upon our Affections, and prevail with us to
do those things which will hasten our Misery, our Shame, our Destruction. But,
alas! Christ may stand, and call, and warn, and entreat us by ever so many
Considerations, and yet have no admittance amongst us. We deal with our
Savior, as the wanton and undutiful Child does, when he lets an Enemy into the
House at the first word. But when his Parent calls and knocks, he sits
unconcerned, turns a deaf Ear, and never takes any notice, though that Relation
knock never so loud, and be very importunate to be let in. We are ready to
follow Satan, and do what he would have us to do, if he do but promise us a
little Pleasure, or Wealth, etc. But Christ is shut out, and not hearkened unto,
though he is most importunate, and does urge the weightiest Arguments to
prevail with us to attend unto him.

The Arguments he does urge are very many: It shall suffice at present to name
a few of them, with a brief intimation of their worth and excellency.

1. He lays before us his own transcendent Excellencies and Perfections. The
Dignity of his Person, and how wonderful his Condescension is, in that he is
pleased to make such Vouchsafements unto us. He is the Brightness of the
Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Person; and he upholdeth all
things by the Word of his Power, Heb. 1.3. He is God over all, blessed for
ever-more, Romans 9.5. And what! shall the Eternal God be repulsed, when he makes
such importunate Addresses to most miserable Worms? Shall we deny admittance to
the high and lofty One who inhabiteth Eternity; whose Name is Holy, and
dwells in the high and holy Place; when he condescendeth to come to us, and
earnestly entreats us, to let him have his abode with us? He is not a mean
contemptible Person which makes Love to us, whose Favor we may lose and be
never the worse, whose Kindness and Love, if withdrawn, may be made up another
way, or by another Person. He is God, He is the Lord of Glory: The Angels adore
and reverence, glorify and worship him. He can and will make thee truly and
unspeakably blessed and happy, if thou hearken to his Voice and entertain him.
Thou must needs be unconceivably miserable without him; he has Power to make
thee happy or miserable. If thou receive him, he will conduct thee to Heaven,
and constitute thee perfect and unalterably blessed. But if thou stubbornly and
finally despisest him, and tramplest under thy Feet the offers of his Love and
Grace, he is able to punish thee for thy contempt, and he will cast thee into,
and burn thee in Hell to all Eternity.

2. He represents unto us the miserable and undone condition we are naturally
in. That whilst without him, we are Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, we
do not belong to the Society of those the Lord has chosen and set apart for
himself; we are Strangers from the Covenant of Promise, we have nothing to do
with those great and precious Privileges which are made over to them who are
interested in the Divine special Love. We have no hope, we are in a desperate
condition as to hereafter, without any true and solid ground to encourage our
selves to hope it shall be well with us. We are without God in the World, we
are destitute of true and sound Notions of God, and without an interest in him
as our reconciled God, Ephesians. 2.12. Now, what have such Persons to be proud of?
we who are dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. 2.1. What have we to be
conceited of, that we should refuse to accept of Christ's Offers, that we
should think scorn to entertain him? The discovery of our natural Estate,
should make us hasten to the Lord Jesus with all the speed we can. But alas, it
is our not being sensible of our Condition, our Infidelity, our not believing
that we are so worthless, unclean, and miserable, as indeed we are, that makes
us slight Christ, and refuse his gracious Offers.

3. He makes known how real and extraordinary his Love is to us. He does not
complement us with words, but has a Heart for us. O, what demonstrations of
Love has he given us? He has done as much to approve the sincerity of his
Love to us, as can be desired or imagined. Sinner, there is no ground for thee
to question the truth of his Love. He has vindicated and cleared his sincerity
beyond all possibility of suspicion and doubt. He pleads with the Sinner,
protests his Love to him, and argues the matter with him. Behold, I have loved
thee so long already with a transcendent Love; And what is it thou would or
can desire, to make it appear my Love is hearty and real? Do thou expect I
should approve my Love, by suffering some great hardships for thy sake? Behold,
I have done that, and more, I have been scorned and contemned, I have been
abused and laughed at; I have been derided, and mocked, and spit upon; nay, I
have sweat Blood for thee, I have undergone inexpressible Agonies in my Mind,
such troubles and griefs in my Soul, as no Tongue can explain, for thy sake. I
have endured the frowns, and born the displeasure of an angry God, and incensed
Father, to preserve and save thee. Here behold with thine own Eyes the Marks in
my Hands, and in my Feet, those Nails have made which fastened me to the Cross!
see the Scars on my Forehead, which were torn there by that Crown which was
violently and reproachfully thrust on my Head! Nay, I did lay down my Life for
thee! I waxed not weary in compassing thy Salvation, though the Pains and
Sufferings I endured were very many, very grievous and afflicting. Death it
self has not quenched nor conquered the Love I did bear unto thee. Now, who
can resist the Arguings of a Savior! Does Christ plead his Love and his
Sufferings with thee? does he conjure thee, by them, to accept of him? and will thou still stand out and reject him? O, how stubborn, how invincible an
Infidel, how vile and unpitiable a Wretch will thou prove thy self to be, if
thou will not be moved by the entreaties and courtings of a bleeding Savior!

4. He does urge his Authority over us, and the right he has unto us. I do not
mean only that which does accrue to him by Creation, or from our own particular
promise and resignation of our selves unto him: But that right he has to us by
purchase. We are not our own to dispose of; The Lord Jesus has bought us out
of the hands of our Enemies, and is become on that account our rightful Lord
and Master. And how can we refuse him when he comes unto us, but we must
contract on our selves the dreadful guilt of the most detestable Rebellion?
rebellion against Heaven, against the Lord of Love, of Mercy, of Life! Our
Hearts, our Souls, our Bodies, our whole Man, are purchased by him. He has
redeemed us unto himself, he has paid a sufficient price for us, and shall we
shut the Doors against him, when he comes to dwell in his own House, the
Habitation he himself has purchased? Should a Servant keep any of us out of a
House we have dearly bought, with what indignation should we resent such usage?
And what may we expect from Christ, if we will detain his own purchase from
him, and not admit him to have an abode with us? 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Luke 19.27.

It was a great Sin in the Jews, that they slighted and disowned Christ when he
came amongst them. And their Sin was very much aggrevated on this account, that
they rejected him, notwithstanding he had a peculiar and special right unto
them, John 1.11. O, what will our Sin appear to be, if after that Christ has
bought us with his most precious Blood, we will not accept of, and receive him
when he knocks and pleads with us?

5. He acquaints us with the necessity of our admitting him into our Hearts, in
order to our own happiness. What, shall we sin against our Lives and our
Blessedness! Shall we cast away our Souls, and all that is justly dear to us,
and have nothing to say for our selves in our own vindication and excuse? Is
there any thing of prudence or of reason in doing thus? Does not our Nature,
does not that Principle which differences us from Brutes, detest such a thing?
Why, if we would not be such Prodigals, it highly concerns us to accept of
Christ. He comes to us, and entreats us to accept of him for our own benefit.
He cannot receive any advantage or profit by it; he does not need us: It is for
our good he comes to us; he importunes us thus, because, without accepting of
him, we must be eternally ruined. We are in the way to Hell, Satan and Lust are
hurrying us apace to everlasting Misery, and we cannot be delivered and saved
any other way than by accepting of him, Acts 4.12.

6. He sets before us the Glory and Inheritance he has provided for us, and
will certainly bestow on us if we do receive him. The Things Christ has
treasured up for Believers, are not the little transitory Things of this World.
These Things he casts abroad with a seemingly indifferent hand; he never
designed to make up a Portion for his own People of these perishing Things. He
has greater and better Things to reward us with; even an Inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and which fades not away, but is reserved for us in
Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.4. He has taken possession of glorious Mansions, and will
come again and receive us unto himself, to be for ever where he is, John 14.2,
3.

We have no ground to question our Savior's Faithfulness or Bounty. It is
alleged as a strong and convincing Argument, that God will not deny any useful
thing unto his People, because he has given up his Son for them, Romans 8.32.
And can we imagine, that he who has suffered for us, and triumphed over all
our Enemies, and has made such glorious Promises as are recorded in his Word,
and does still testify such strong Affection and Love toward us, will, if we
accept of him, refuse to confer on us the great and the glorious Things he has
purchased for us by his bloody Sufferings? Our Blessed Savior, when he was on
Earth, prayed that his Servants might be with him where he should be, John
17.24. And he still intercedes now he is in Heaven for such, that they may be
with him, and will certainly conduct them to, and possess them for ever of that
Glory and Happiness which infinitely exceeds all Imagination, and which is
fully understood by no Creatures but those who do enjoy it. A Happiness which
is absolutely free from all evil, and unpleasant Mixture, and which is every
way complete, and full of every thing that is grateful, pleasant, and can
administer any satisfaction: A Happiness that is stable, sure, and certain,
which shall last to all Eternity, and never cease, decay, nor cloy, but always
entertain with raptures of Joy, ravishing Pleasures and Satisfactions, which
arise to uninterrupted and constant Ecstasies.

These are some of the Arguments which are strongly urged to prevail with
Sinners to accept of Christ. But his Importunity will yet further appear, if we
consider the Instruments he does employ and make use of about this Work. The
Instruments are many, which are employed to entreat and persuade, and move
Sinners to close with the gracious Tenders made them by the Son of God.

I will name but four.

1. The Holy Spirit is appointed to be Christ's Advocate, and is employed to
plead Christ's Cause with Sinners. This Holy Spirit has not only in a
miraculous way convinced the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment;
but he does plead often with particular Persons. Sometimes he works pious
Inclinations and desires in the Soul; sometimes he affects with a penetrating
apprehension of the wretchedness of a natural Estate. Sometimes he convinces
powerfully of a necessity of looking after Christ; sometimes he moves and
persuades the Soul to close with Christ, and accept him upon his own terms. The
Spirit of God works variously, secretly, and powerfully on the Heart; and does
often testify of Christ, even to those who do a long time, nay, it may be,
finally stand out and refuse to close heartily with him.

But it is a great aggravation of a Person's Sin to grieve the Spirit of God,
Ephesians. 4.30. and to quench the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. To take no notice of
Christ, but stubbornly oppose and resist him, when he comes to us, and pleads
with us, and entreats us by his Spirit to accept of him.

O, to what a height does our Guilt ascend, when Christ sends his Spirit to
treat with us, and we despise, or take no notice of the workings and
witnessings of this Holy Spirit! What a heightened Crime and Wickedness is this,
to contemn and make light of Christ, after that the Holy Spirit has been
treating with us, and explaining to us, the Dignity of Christ, his unvaluable
transcendent Excellencies, and the necessity of a Savior!

This is certainly a very great proof and demonstration of our Savior's
earnestness to be admitted by us; that he pleads with us by such an one, and
employs his Holy Spirit to transact and manage this Business with us.

2. He sends his Ministers on this Errand. The Ministers of the Gospel are
appointed to be the Preachers of Reconciliation unto the World. They are
entrusted by the Lord Jesus to plead with Sinners, and endeavor to prevail
with them to receive Christ, and yield up themselves to him. And therefore, as
you hear, or refuse to hear them, so Christ interprets your readiness or
unwillingness to receive him, Luke 10.16.

The great Work and Business of the Ministry is, to beseech you, in the Name of
Christ, to lay down your Enmity, which you have unjustly conceived against him,
and hearken unto his wholesome saving Advice and Counsel, even to accept of him,
that he may dwell with you, and you with him. Now then we are Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be
ye reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5.20. Now, how often, and with how much
earnestness have you been entreated this way, to embrace Christ and his
Gracious Offers! Were not Christ very importunate for admittance, what need
would there be, that a particular sort of People should be appointed and set
apart for this very Business, to invite, and persuade, and entreat People to
accept of Christ, and his Benefits? Ephesians. 4.11, etc.

3. Jesus Christ does importune you by his Word. When you read or hear the Holy
Scriptures, what urgings and entreatings have you there from Christ to accept
of him! It is Peoples great Sin, that they slight the Scriptures, as they do
Ministers and Ordinances, and are not willing to observe Christ speaking in
them. But, O what a zeal and earnestness does Christ manifest there, in
beseeching and calling Sinners to embrace and accept of him?

Consider and weigh these few Particulars, amongst the many you may meet with,
in reading the Word of God; which plainly show how much Christ is concerned for
your closing with his gracious Tenders.

1. His free and solemn Invitations. What frank and liberal Promises does he
make to all who will but comply with his Call! Come unto me all ye that are
weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Matthew. 11.28. Ho, every one
that thirsts, come ye to the Waters; and he that has no Money, come ye, buy
and eat, yea, come, buy Wine and Milk without Money and without Price. Wherefore
do ye spend Money for that which is not Bread? and your Labor for that which
satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and
let your Soul delight it self in Fatness. Incline your Ear, and come unto me:
hear, and your Soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with
you, even the sure Mercies of David. Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. You see here, that he
excepts none, and that he assures of the best, the most useful, the choicest,
and most valuable Blessings.

2. His vehement and affectionate Protestations. He swears by Himself, that his
Love is cordial and sincere. He importunes us often, and condescends to argue
and expostulate with us. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in
the death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his way and live; turn
ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O house of Israel? Ezekiel.
33.11. Cast away from you all your Transgressions whereby ye have transgressed,
and make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit: for why will ye die, O House of
Israel? For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord
God: wherefore turn your selves and live ye. Ezekiel. 18.31, 32.

3. His passionate Lamentation over those who do stubbornly reject him, and
will not accept of him, notwithstanding he pleads with them thus earnestly. He
wept over them of Jerusalem, after he had long importuned them in vain. How
does he express, by groans and sighs, his mournful sorrowful Resentments, on
the account of the destruction they were wilfully drawing on themselves? O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which
are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy Children together, even
as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not? Matthew. 23.37.

4. Christ does importune us for admittance by every Mercy and Judgment. How
often are we brought to some sense of our need of Christ, and to some kind of
resolutions to yield and open to him, by the straights, and exigencies, and
sufferings we are involved in? though it is our very great Fault, that we are
apt to forget all, as soon as our pain is over: But what is the true end of
every Affliction, but to make us see more of the Excellencies of Christ, and to
endear him unto our Souls? O happy Sufferings! might they all have such an
influence on us!

And what is the end of all God's Mercies, but to lead us to Repentance, and
bring us to Christ? Why are you thus long preserved out of Hell? Why are you
not at this time tormented and frying in eternal Burnings? Is any reason to be
assigned why you should enjoy the Gospel, yea, the common Mercies of your
Lives, but only this, that Christ is still waiting to be gracious to you, and
that by these means he is inviting and importuning you to accept of him, and
fly from that Damnation which does not slumber, but is hastening apace upon the
whole World of ungodly Sinners? God could as easily have dismissed you to the
Regions of Darkness, the Places of most dreadful and insupportable Horror, many
Years ago, as any others who are now in Torments. All the Mercies, and all the
time you have had in the World, were the Fruits of Christ's Love, Testimonies
of his Patience, and Instances of his pleading with you to accept of him, and
not ruin and undo your selves.

How small a thing would it be, for Christ to send thee to Hell? to say unto
thee, Go thou cursed? Alas, one frown from him would immediately sink thee into
the Earth, into the bottomless Pit! And what is it that preserves thee, but the
tenderness of thy Savior? And for what end does he express so much regard unto
thee, but to try whether his Patience and Lenity, and his allowing thee so much
time, strength, and so many Mercies, will prevail with thee to prize and
receive thy Savior!

II. I am now in the second place to show you, what our receiving Christ into
our Hearts does import.

But before I speak positively to this, I will take notice of two or three
things, with which People do too commonly falsely please, and satisfy, and
consequently deceive themselves. We should observe these, as Mariners do the
Rocks and Shelves where others have suffered Shipwreck before them.

1. This receiving Christ, does not consist in a bare notional knowledge of him.
A Man may, by common instruction, and ordinary diligence and study, acquire
from the Holy Scriptures such Notions concerning Christ, as Men do usually
obtain by study and diligence in any Point of Philosophy. But this is only such
a knowledge as does float in the Head, and may be in that Person who has not
any love and affection to Christ: Such may have a knowledge of Christ, so as to
give a plain account of the common sense, or ancient use of the Words, wherein
the Doctrines concerning Christ are communicated and conveyed unto People.
They may give an account of the Grammatical meaning and sense of the words, as
well as any others; and yet these People may not entertain Christ. They may not
understand, nor cannot dive into the Spiritual meaning of those Doctrines, 1
Cor. 2.14. Julian knew a great deal concerning Christ, and so did Colsus, but
they were great Enemies to Christ.

The only Principle which enableth a Man for the right judging and discerning
of Heavenly Things, is the Grace of God's Spirit, which the natural Man
wants; and hence it follows, that as a Man cannot live without a Soul, nor
see without an Eye, nor hear without an Ear, because these are the Grounds and
Principles from which Life, and Sight, and Hearing do flow: So no Man can know
and serve God aright, without God's Spirit enlightening and enabling him by his
Grace, because this is the Principle from which all both spiritual Actions and
Abilities do spring. Mason of Hearing and Doing, p. 328.

2. It does not consist in an outward professing to own the Faith of Christ.
Alas! how many make a general Profession of Christianity, and of embracing the
particular Doctrines of the Gospel, who take no care to depart from Iniquity!
The very Devils have made as honorable a Profession of Christ's being the Son
of God, as any mere words we can devise will amount unto, Luke 4.41.

3. It does not consist in a bare performance of some Duties, in the Name of
Christ. Performing Duties in the Name of Christ, and speaking honorably and
much of Christ, are very good and commendable, when they proceed from a right
Principle, and spring from a real and very ardent Affection to Christ. But we
must take heed lest we content our selves with these things, whilst they may
have a false Original, or are used to improper Ends. However, we must be sure
we do not stay here, without proceeding further. People have used the Name of
Christ to very ill purposes, Acts 19.13. Many pretend to perform Duties with
earnestness, in his Name, for whom he has no respect, and who did never truly
bid him welcome into their Hearts, Mat. 7.22, 23.

Indeed, where Christ is received aright, there will be all these things in
some degree and measure, but these will not be all which will be there. There
must be some knowledge of Christ, tho not that which does only soar aloft in the
Head, and evaporate, and manifest it self only at the Mouth; but such as will
influence the Heart and Life. Many who receive Christ aright, may not be able
to express and discover their knowledge to others in such apposite, free, and
voluble Expressions, as some others can, who have nothing of the true Spiritual
sense of Divine Truths, or the saving Knowledge of Christ. The one sort are more
beholden to their natural or acquired Abilities, the other to the inward and
effectual workings of the Holy Spirit. Every Person who has a true sense, and
firm persuasion of Spiritual Matters, has not the Gift of Utterance. There is
no necessity a true and sound Believer should be eloquent, or have a voluble
Tongue. Much Knowledge, and Memory, and Utterance, and lively Affection, (as a
worthy reverend Person has said) are all very desirable; but you must judge
your Estate by none of those, for they are all uncertain.

And who-ever truly receives Christ, will acknowledge and profess his owning of
Christ. For as Men believe with the Heart, so with the Mouth confession is made
unto Salvation, Romans 10.10.

But now I come to speak more positively to this Point. Our receiving of Christ
is expressed in my Text by these words; If any Man hear my Voice, and open the
Door. So that two things are required to, and imported, by our receiving of
Christ, according to the express Letter of the Text;

1st, Hearing his Voice. 2dly, Opening unto him.
But before I speak particularly to these things, let me observe to you, from
the general indefinite Expression here used, That Jesus Christ does not exclude
any one Person from enjoying Him, and the Benefits of his Death and gracious
Presence, provided he will but comply with Him, and accept of his gracious
Offers. He is willing to come to, and dwell with any Person who will but
hearken to his Voice, and give Him admittance. He will not refuse you for any
personal unworthiness, or because you have been very grievous and notorious
Transgressors. He would have all Men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of
the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. He invites all without exception, Isa. 55.1, 2. If any
Man hear my Voice; any Man, though ever so poor or miserable in the Eye of the
World; nay, notwithstanding he has been ever so violent and fierce against me,
though his Sins be never so many, never so great, never so hainou^, yet if he
will but hear my Voice, obey my Call, and open unto me, I will accept of him, I
will be his Guest, and impart unto him my Self, my Merits, and the Comforts,
Satisfactions, and Benefits arising therefrom. We have very signal Evidences of
this in the Holy Scriptures. Peter after his most detestable denial of Christ,
is received into Favor. Paul, though he had been such an outrageous
Persecutor, finds Mercy, and is made a most excellent and useful Apostle.

The general Doctrine of the Scripture does confirm this Truth, That Christ is
ready and willing to communicate Himself, and the Benefits of his Death and
Passion, to any that will accept of him. Christ has put no Bar, no Impediment,
no Hindrance in any Man's way. If we do not accept of Him, if we reap not the
Benefits of his Death, the fault is our own, even because we would not receive
Him when he came unto us, and entreated for admittance. He comes to, and seeks
after the most unworthy, Mark 2.17. He came to save Sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. He
came to seek and to save the Lost. He excepts none, if they renounce their
Wickednesses and Sins, Isa. 55.7.

The Terms he proposes to us, in order to our reaping all this Advantage, are
but hearing his Voice, and opening the Door.

1st, Hearing his Voice. This imports two things.

1. Attending to, and taking notice of those Arguments he does urge to obtain
admittance. I have given you before a short account of these Arguments. But
this instructs us, that an heedful attentive frame of Spirit, is ordinarily
requisite to a due receiving of Christ into our Hearts. An unruly froward
temper, that is impatient of Spiritual Advice, Instruction, Reproof, etc. and
fumes and chafes on all such occasions, and applies to any sort of courses to
divert from serious considerations, is a very dangerous and unhappy Temper.

But this is not all that hearing Christ's Voice does import. People may attend
to Matters of this nature, and design no more than to obtain some
embellishments in their Discourse; or they may have some design not truly
useful and commendable. Indeed, God may make his Word to fasten, and prove
effectual to those who have none of the best purposes in harkening to the Word
of Christ; and therefore I dare not discourage any Man absolutely from
attending, whatever he may propose to himself in so doing, because the Word may
take hold of him beyond expectation.

Mr. Bilney reports of himself, that he bought and read the New Testament, not
because it was the Word of God, but because Erasmus had translated it into
excellent Latin; yet it pleased God, when he read 1 Timothy 1.15. that his Mind
was particularly fixed on those words; so that God made them effectual for his
Conversion and Reformation.

But such Instances are something out of the usual and common road; therefore
we have reason to conclude, that harkening to the Voice of Christ, does note
something more than bare attendance to his Voice.

2. It does note the Influence the Arguments our Savior does use, have on our
Affections and Hearts. Attention is a very useful Expedient for the making of
those things which are proposed unto us, to have some efficacy on us. When we
diligently attend to any thing that is spoken, we have Impressions ordinarily
made on our Minds, which bear some proportion with what has been discoursed.
And this seems to be imported here by hearing Christ's Voice; those
Impressions, which the serious considering what he has proposed, occasion to
be fastened on our Hearts and Minds, the Affections and Dispositions of Soul,
which do result from our harkening to his Voice. Which is something betwixt
bare hearing his Voice, and opening unto him. It is the Result, Fruit, and
Consequent of the former, and a good and proper Preparative to the latter.

2dly, Opening the Door. This is the other Expression in the Text, to note our
receiving of Christ. And it does import our compliance with him, our free and
sincere resignation of our selves unto him. As a Person, who being in an House,
when another who is the right owner of it, comes and knocks at the Door, and
declares to the Party within his claim to that House, and makes it appear he is
the true owner of that House, and has Authority to require the Possession to be
delivered up unto him; the Party within harkening to what he has to say, and
being convinced, and fully satisfied of his Right and Authority to make that
Demand, he opens the Door to him, and admits him into the House; not only in
point of common civility, but so as owning his Propriety, and delivering up the
Possession to him. Thus opening to Christ, does note our giving up our Hearts
to him, and owning him for the only, true, lawful Sovereign, Owner, and
Governor of them. Our receiving Christ is not right, till we arrive at this
Point. People may give attendance to Christ's Voice, and have their Affections
and Hearts in some measure moved and influenced by the same, and yet Corruption
may prevail and keep them from resigning up the Possession to him. Nay, it
falls out too often thus with the truly Godly, that they do not immediately,
upon some affection and sense begot in them, upon their hearing the Voice of
their Savior, resign up themselves, and comply with his Demands as they
should. The Spouse, Cant. 5.2, 4, etc. heard the Voice of her Beloved; she knew
it to be his Voice, and seemed to attend to what he said, verse. 2. And though
she made several Excuses, yet we may easily perceive his Voice had some
influence on her. Ver. 4. My Bowels were moved for him. Yet notwithstanding all
this, she did not open unto him. He was provoked to withdraw, and went his way,
verse. 6.

But I will not confine my self strictly to a minute enquiry into the extent of
these Phrases used in the Text. I shall give you my sense of what our receiving
Christ does import, in a few Particulars, where you will have the Substance of
what is contained in, or implied by these Expressions in the Text.

1. Our receiving of Christ, does imply our having a deep and affectionate
sense of the Danger, Evil, and Filth of Sin, and in what an undone condition we
are naturally. We are not fit to receive Christ into our Hearts, till we have
an entire, hearty, and invincible detestation and abhorrence of Sin, which is
so contrary to Christ, settled in our Souls. We cannot prize and value Christ
aright, till we are sensible how hateful and destructive Sin is. Christ and Sin
cannot reign together, nay, they cannot amicably lodge together in the same
Soul. We cannot serve God and Mammon. If we do not see our selves lost and
undone without Christ, we cannot bid him truly welcome. The Physician is not
looked after, nor regarded, till we perceive our Distemper, and are sensible
how weak and uneasy it makes us, Mat. 9.12. Paul sees himself the greatest
Sinner, before he observes and takes comfort in the loveliness of Christ, 1 Timothy 1.15. Those whom Christ calls and incourageth to come to him, are they who
are pressed and grieved with the weight and burden of their Sins, Mat. 11.28.

Now, do you try and examine your selves, whether you are duly affected with
the evil and silth of Sin, with your deplorable and lost Estate whilst out of
Christ? Do you really think that there is nothing in the World near so
pernicious, evil, and hateful, as Sin? Is Sin more hateful to you than Hell?
Can you truly choose the greatest Suffering and Misery, rather than commit the
least Sin knowingly against God and Christ? Are you brought to this Point, to
say in sincerity, All for Christ? Have thou such a sense of Sin, as makes thee
cry out in holy Resignation; Lord, what will thou have me to do? What shall I
do to be saved?

2. Our receiving of Christ, does import a firm belief of his Divinity, and the
alsufficiency of his Merits and Satisfaction. A sinful Creature, who is lost
and undone in himself, and apprehends his own Estate, would catch at every
thing, but knows not where to fix, till he be endued with a truly Divine Faith,
and thereby has his Mind thoroughly satisfied, that the Lord Jesus Christ, the
only begotten Son of God, is appointed by the Father, to be a Propitiation for
the Sins of the World; and that he having obeyed and suffered, according to the
Agreement betwixt Him and the Father, is alsufficient for the saving of all
those who do believingly close with him. A mere customary assent to what is
said of Christ in Scripture, will not serve our turn. Satan will easily baffle
and overcome such a Faith. It must be such an inward assent and consent, as
carries all the Powers of the Soul along with them; such a Faith as is
impregnated and confirmed in us by the Power of the Holy Ghost. The Heart must
be firmly persuaded of Christ's being the Son of God; that he has made full
satisfaction to God's Justice, and that in him there is a complete and absolute
fullness for us, Heb. 7.25.

Do you therefore examine your selves concerning your present Estate, and
enquire whether you have a sure and firm Belief wrought in you, that Christ is
God, and that he is a complete and perfect Savior, that in him dwells all
Fullness; and that notwithstanding your own personal unworthiness, yet you may
and shall, if you believingly and obediently depend on him, be accepted, for
his Merits and Worthiness? I do not speak of a superficial Assent, a mere
notional Belief, but such a Faith as is a living active Principle in us, which
undermines and supplants our Lusts, and mortifieth them daily in us, and puts
us with vigor and earnestness on all Acts of Holy Obedience, and faithfully
endeavor to please God. Are you firmly persuaded, on Scripture-Grounds, that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God; That there is no other Name given under Heaven,
by which you can be saved; and that in him there is such a redundancy, that of
his Fullness you may receive Grace for Grace?

3. Our receiving Christ does import, our laying on him the great and only
stress of our Salvation; our looking up to him, and depending on him alone for
Pardon, Life, and Happiness. If we will receive Christ, we must deny, not only
our sinful worldly Lusts, but we must deny our selves, as to our best and most
religious Duties, Works, and Performances. We must not desist from, and break
off from these Performances, but we must deny them, so as not to depend and
rely on them, as if by the Worthiness and Merit of these, we could purchase
Life and Salvation to our selves. Though it is our duty to work and labor in
the Service of God, with such earnestness and diligence, as if we were to get
Heaven by our own pains; yet when we have done all, we must rely wholly on the
Satisfaction, Righteousness, and Merits of Christ. A true Believer will have
his Eye on Christ, when at Duty, to engage his Fervency and Diligence; and
after he has done all he can, he will rely only upon him for acceptance. When
we have done all we can, we must acknowledge our selves unprofitable Servants,
Luke 17.10.

Now, have thou learned to deny thy self? Do thou not please thy self, that
because thou art not as profane and loose as many others are, that for this
cause thou shall be accepted and saved? Alas, bare Morality will lodge People
far short of Heaven. Do thou not conclude thy Condition good and safe
enough, because thou prayest often, read the Scriptures, hear the Word
preached, and partakest of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, as occasion
offers? Alas, if thou reliest on these things, thou will find thy self but in
the state of Hypocrites, and of those spoken of in Mat. 7.21, 22, 23.

Do thou not think thou must needs go to Heaven, for thy pious Services, thy
good Works, and thy Charity in relieving the Poor? If so, read what the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. He that receives Christ into his Heart, goes wholly
out of himself to Christ. He lays no stress on any thing he can do. He labors
after the greatest conformity he can attain to, the Will of God, and does this
out of obedience to God; but when he has prayed with the greatest fervency he
can, and has expressed the greatest Zeal for God and Religion he can reach
unto; when he has done all within his Power, he renounces all thoughts of
Merit in himself, and flies only to Christ for favor and acceptance. He is
sensible of his own Imperfections and Infirmities, and cries out against
himself, Unclean, unclean! my best Righteousnesses are but as filthy Rags; I am
but an unprofitable Servant. He hastneth to Christ to undertake for him; and
cries out, Blessed Jesus, let thy Merits and Satisfaction obtain acceptance and
favor for me. Lord, I throw my self into the Arms of thy Grace; O, reject me
not, but grant I may be found in thee, and may have thy Righteousness to
commend me.

4. Our receiving Christ does note, our complying with his Terms. Most would be
willing to be saved at last, provided they might have liberty to live as they
list at present. But Christ must be accepted on his own Terms; He calls us to
Repentance, Faith, and new Obedience. If we will conclude on good ground, that
we have received Christ, we must see to it, that we sincerely forsake our
former Lusts and Sins, which so long separated betwixt us and our God, and for
which Christ did undergo and suffer such pressing and astonishing Sorrows and
Punishments. Let the Wicked forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man his
Thoughts, etc. Isa. 55.7. We must believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, that he is
the Son of God; that out of pure Love he did assume our Nature; that he has
performed all that is necessary to put us into a capacity of Salvation, and to
reconcile us unto God, that he is the only Author of Eternal Life and
Salvation. And we must rely and depend upon him only for Mercy and Salvation.
We must devote our selves to live godly, righteously, and soberly, and make
Conscience of attending to, and walking in all Christ's Commandments. And we
must take care to get all this cleared and evidenced to our selves from
Scripture-Grounds.

Art thou truly willing to part with all thy Lust! to mortify thy corrupt
Affections, and to die every day more and more to sin! to be crucified to the
World, and to oppose and resist all that fights against thy Soul? Do thou
labor to exercise Faith vigorously? is it thy Business to eye Christ
continually? do thou fetch all thy Strength and Supplies from Him? are all
thy Hopes and Expectations laid up in him? do thou, without any reservation,
give up thy self to Christ! is it thy heartiest desire, study, care, and
endeavor, continually to imitate and please Christ?

5. Our receiving Christ does import, our submitting to him in all his
Relations. It was a great Reflection on some who followed Christ, when he was
here upon Earth, that they followed him for the Loaves with which he fed them,
and not for the Miracles which they saw him work; whereby his Divinity was
attested, and the Truth of the Doctrines he taught, undeniably evidenced and
confirmed. And it would be as severe a Reflection upon us, should Christ lay it
to our Charge, that though we pretend to submit to Him in one Relation, yet we
refuse to own and acknowledge Him in his other Relations. That we are willing to
admit him to be our Priest, to suffer for us, but will not have any thing to do
with his Yoke, but do resolutely cast his Laws behind our back, and determine
that we will not have him to reign over us.

But it is our Duty to be ready and willing, for his sake, to take up the
Cross, as well as to wear the Crown; to submit to do his Work, as well as to
expect and receive the Recompenses and Wages he does bestow. We must take him
as our King, as our Husband, as our Lord, and as our Owner, and perform to him
all those Duties which concern us, as we are his Subjects, his Spouse, his
Servants and People, in whom he has an undeniable property.

We should complain to Christ of our hard and inflexible Hearts, our unruly and
tumultuous Affections, of those Lusts and Wickednesses which we find strongest
in us, we should be earnest with him in desiring his powerful governing
Presence in and with us, that our Lusts may be conquered, our Affections tamed,
made moderate and sanctified; and that our stubborn Hearts may be made soft and
pliable.

We must take him for our Priest, expecting nothing but Wrath, as what is due
to what we can do of our selves, and therefore relying wholly on Christ. We
must not look for any Pardon, but what Christ's Blood has purchased, nor any
fellowship and communion with God, but what Christ does by his intercession
obtain for us.

We must take him for our Prophet, to teach, direct, and guide us, and to
advise and counsel us. We are naturally ignorant of God, and our selves, and
the things which most of all concern us; and we cannot get a sound and perfect
knowledge of them, but by his instruction, who is the great Revealer of them,
even Jesus Christ as Prophet. Those who will receive Christ aright, must learn
to know and understand his Voice and Dialect, that whenever they hear it,
they may follow him, John 10.4. Christ is the Truth, the Way, and the Life; and
there is no coming to, or knowing of the Father, but by him, John 14.6. We must
take him for our great Teacher; we must be willing to learn whatever he shall
instruct us in, and embrace and receive every direction he shall give us.

Consider therefore with your selves, whether it be thus with you: Whether you
have sincerely given up your selves to his Government, do willingly submit to
his Laws, do cheerfully consent that he should rule over you? Do you depend
only on his Sacrifice and Merits? and do you rejoice in his Light? Do you
receive him as a Master, a Father, a Brother, a Friend? etc. And do you demean
your selves to him in all the Duties and Offices of your Relations, as by the
Obligations arising from such Relations, you are bound unto? Mal. 1.6.

6. Our receiving Christ into our Hearts, does import our having a transcendent
and extraordinary love for Christ. No Man is worthy to follow Christ, or be
owned by him, that cannot deny himself, and take up his Cross for his sake.
Christ will not take up his abode in that Heart, which is not entirely given up
and resigned to him. Our loving other things, either with an equal or a greater
Love than what we have for Christ, renders us wholly unfit to enjoy him, and
deprives us of those special Communications he would otherwise vouchsafe unto
us. When Christ comes to us, and calls for admittance, he comes not like a
Stranger to stay for a little while, but as a Friend, nay an Owner, to take up
his fixed residence, and make his constant abode with us. A little outward
Ceremony, and common Courtesy, does suffice for the entertainment of such as
make Visits accidentally, or for whom there is no very great respect. But Love
is necessary, that there may be a personal constant abode, and a mutual
friendly converse together. Christ must have our whole Hearts, he cannot endure
a Rival. If we love other things, it must be for his sake, and in subordination
to him, or else this will exclude him, and evidence that we refuse to receive
him.

Call your selves now to an account, and see whether your Hearts are free, and
disengaged from all other things; or whether you are willing to receive Christ,
according to this sense of the Phrase. Can you say, in sincerity, Blessed
Jesus, my only and most beloved Savior, here is my whole Heart, I resign it
entirely unto thee? I desire no greater, nor no other happiness, than that thou will be pleased to make it thy Temple, the place of thy gracious Residence: It
is my earnest request, and shall be my diligent endeavor, to have it cleansed
and made pure, from every Affection and Inclination, which is any way contrary
to thy Purity and Holiness. O, do thou be pleased to give in thy assistance!
dispose and prepare my Soul to thy own mind! and, blessed Lord, take full
possession of me, dwell in my Heart, and rule over my whole Man! Can thou
truly say; Lord, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth I
desire besides thee, Psalm. 73.25. Do thou not desire to know any thing but
Jesus Christ and him crucified? 1 Cor. 2.2. Do thou love Christ more than
all the World? more than all thy Relations? more than all those things which
are commonly esteemed the great Endearments of this World, yea, more than Life
it self? Luke 14.26. Jesus Christ is very precious unto them who believe, 1
Pet. 2.7. Now, can thou, for the sake of Christ, deny thy Lusts, thy Self,
thy best and most religious Performances? Can thou live for Christ, and can
thou suffer, yea, die for Christ? and is Christ above all in thy Heart?

Thus you have some little account what kind of reception it is the Lord Jesus
does call for, or what our receiving Christ does import. It would be too great
a digression here, to insist on such Considerations as are proper to evince it
to be our Interest, and that we are under indispensible Obligations to yield up
our selves in this manner unto him. Much might be said to this purpose, from
the Excellencies of our Savior, how precious he is in himself, how wonderful
in his Condescension unto us, and what unvaluable Benefits and Advantages do
accrue unto Believers from Christ, etc. But having on other Occasions
discoursed of these Matters more distinctly, I wave the consideration of them
now, hastening to what I promised to take notice of in the third place: Only by
the way we may observe, there is not any thing impli'd in what I have said
concerning our receiving of Christ, which can in the least countenance our
refusal, or justly discourage us from complying with his Calls and Entreaties.
And what shall the Eternal God, our only Savior, importune us with all
earnestness, and we harden our selves against him, resist and reject him! in
doing so, we shall be uncivil, ungrateful, to the highest degree impious
against God, inhumane and barbarous to our power against Christ, and actually
so to our own Souls; we shall be guilty of all that is Evil, of all that can
deserve an hateful, an ignominious, reproachful Name.

Indeed, if Men's ordinary practices did not fully and undeniably evidence, that
they have no real value for Christ, and that they do stubbornly refuse to close
with his Calls, we might, when meditating on this Subject, be very apt to
imagine and conclude, that none could be so undutiful, or so forgetful of
themselves, or so foolish, so distractedly-fond and ambitious of Damnation, as
to purchase it, by a stubborn hardening themselves against the powerful
affectionate persuasions of the Son of God, and a contemptuous despiteful
throwing the gracious Offers, the very Blood and tenderest Mercies of a loving,
compassionate, Divine Savior, back into his own Face.

But alas! People every where, give too many and too frequent Demonstrations,
in the course of their Lives, of their disaffection to Christ, and how little
influence his Love has on them. For this is certain, where Jesus Christ does
reside by his gracious Presence, there will be a vigorous and active Principle
of Grace and Holiness, which will manifest it self in the outward Conversation.
When Christ is received into the Heart, does settle his Abode there, and does
command and govern there, that Person with whom it is thus, will be possessed
with such a lively working Principle of Purity, Righteousness, and Goodness, as
will have a most powerful influence on all the parts of his Life.

It is indeed a very deplorable thing, that amongst so many pretenders to
Christianity, with which the World does abound, is even thronged and crowded,
there should be so few who give any serious, real attendance to the Voice of
Christ, who give any tolerable discovery, that they have opened their Hearts to
receive him.

III. Let us now therefore, in the third place, enquire after some of those
lets and hindrances, which keep our Hearts shut against Christ. Many might be
mentioned, but I will only take a brief notice of these few.

1. Carnal Pride, and Spiritual Self-conceitedness. People are generally very
unwilling to believe their condition so bad and helpless as naturally it is. It
goes against Men's Spirits and Stomachs, to think so meanly of themselves, as
not to be able to do any thing to recover, secure, and save themselves. They
would fain find some prop or other in themselves to lean upon. Indeed they
would be their own Physicians, and their own Saviors; and are very difficultly
driven out of their carnal selfish Confidence. They will either please
themselves with an opinion that they have no Wound; or if they must own that,
they will find a Plaster for it at Home, they cannot in this case endure to go
abroad for help. Corrupt Nature is very proud; we are hardly brought to deny
our Selves, and to think so meanly of our Selves, our Works, our Performances,
our religious Duties, as to be willing to be saved purely by free Grace. We
would fain have some share in this great Work our selves, we would have our own
Wings to carry us to Heaven; At least, we would have our own Works, and
Religious Performances, to have some portion of the Glory. Men would be
contented to have Christ's Hand and Arm to help them out of the Ditch, provided
they may come out with some credit; that though there was a fall, and some dirt
in the case, yet vigor and strength continued, and they were able, with a very
little help, to recover themselves. Their Power (as they will have it) was
sufficient, they only wanted a Staff or Cord to hold by, that so they might
exert that ability and strength they had in themselves.

As Pride did at first put Man upon aspiring to be as God, so now it does tempt
him to usurp the Honor belonging to the Son of God. Man would be his own
Savior, yea, his own God. He cannot endure to stoop, to drink of the Waters of
Life. But as God and Mammon, Light and Darkness, so Christ and carnal proud
Self cannot dwell and agree together.

When the Gospel was first preached about in the World, it was pride and
selfishness which did most oppose it, and resist Christ, Romans 10.3. They were
all for establishing their own Righteousness. When the Christian Religion was
first recovered from the Superstitions and Darknesses which had long overspread
it, the Reformation began in rectifying Men's Judgments and Minds about this
Matter, of the insufficiency of our own Works, and the absolute necessity of
the Righteousness and Merits of Jesus Christ.

The high and lofty God, will dwell with none but those who are of humble and
contrite Spirits, Isa. 57.15. As long as we please our selves with fancying we
have no need of Christ, we have a sufficiency in our selves, and can do well
enough without him, we shall never attend with due care to his Voice, nor
faithfully receive him into our Hearts. We are apt to think our selves rich and
increased with Goods, and that we have no need of any thing without us, and are
very difficultly persuaded, that we are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked, and therefore we slight Christ, and shut him out of our
Hearts, Rev. 3.17. There is no room for Christ, in a proud self-conceited Heart.

2. Infidelity or Unbelief, does keep the Heart shut against Christ. Herein
consists our non-acceptance of Christ. Notwithstanding the Lord Jesus has so
many Witnesses, and explains himself to us so fully, yet do we slight and
reject him. And whence is all this, but from our not diligently attending to
his Instruction, nor understanding and conceiving aright of what he does
propose to us; not weighing and considering seriously the Evidence of things
recommended to us; not truly and really assenting to the Truths of Christ?
People content themselves with empty Notions, and a fashionable Profession,
without any real, firm persuasion of the Particulars they pretend to own. Did
we really and firmly assent to, or believe the Doctrines concerning Christ, his
Person, Natures, Offices, Promises, Laws, etc. contained in the New Testament,
we should be thereby influenced to a holy, faithful, entire recumbency of Soul
on Christ, and to a vigorous active conformity to his Laws, and following of
his Example. If there be no difference betwixt us, and Turks or Heathens, but
only that we call our selves by another Name, and in word pretend to another
Religion, we do not really believe: For Faith, if real, will influence our
Affections and Lives, proportionably to the Degree of our Assent, the Nature
and Tendency of the Truths we do believe, and the Sense we have of our
concernment in them.

It is the great Fault of People pretending to Religion, and enjoying means of
Instruction, that they do not take a becoming care to get their Minds possessed
with right and sound Notions of the Truths and Doctrines they profess to own.
They do not consider what Grounds and Evidences they have, for their yielding
assent to the Doctrines they profess; they do not labor and endeavor, and
strive to get the Characters of Divine Truths deeply imprinted with their full
Light and Power on their Hearts. And how can it otherwise be expected then, but
that multitudes should prove mere Hypocrites and Formalists? It is Unbelief
that blinds our Minds, that we see no beauty or loveliness in Christ; it is
this that turns away our Hearts from Christ, renders us incapable of receiving
any saving benefit from Christ, which hardens and sears our Consciences, makes
them unsensible, and locks and bolts our Hearts against Christ. See Isa. 53.2,
3. Heb. 3.12. John 1.11, 12. Mat. 13.58. Romans 11.20, 22, 23.

3. Worldly-mindedness keeps the Heart shut against Christ. When we expect too
much from the World, and these lower Enjoyments, do set our Hearts excessively
on them, press after, pursue and seek for earthly Things, with too much
vehemence and earnestness, we, of course, grow unmindful of, and unconcerned
for Christ and our Souls, Heaven and Spiritual Matters. The Things of the World
do devour our Strength, and drink up all our Spirits: yea, they beget in us,
not only a regardlesness of Spiritual Things, but a contempt of, and opposition
against them. Know ye not, that the Friendship of the World is Enmity with God:
whosoever therefore will be a Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God, Jam.
4.4. see 1 John 2.15. Alas! when Men's Hearts are set upon the World, what will
they not venture for it? They venture Christ, and Heaven, and Soul, and all
that is truly precious. This worldly-mindedness, makes the Word and Truths of
Christ to be of no esteem and value with us, this makes them of no use to us,
makes us that we reap no benefit from them, Matthew. 13.22. How many who have
made a fair show in the Flesh, have seemed to make fair Offers for Christ, have
fallen off as soon as ever they have been tried as to this Point! see Matthew.
19.22. The love of this present World, choked and destroyed Demas, 2 Timothy
4.10. What a cursed influence had the love of the World on Judas, when he
adventured on that villainous piece of Treachery, to betray and sell his Lord
and Master, the Son of God, for thirty pieces of Silver!

4. Love of carnal sensual Pleasures. We read of some who are lovers of
Pleasures more than lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3.4. Of some who make their Belly
their God, Phil. 3.19. Now, such as have devoted themselves to their Lusts, and
are wholly enslaved to their Pleasures and sensual Delights, are wholly
indisposed and unfit to bid Christ welcome. There must be a great change
wrought in them, before they can receive and entertain Christ. It is not meet
to bring a Person of Honor and Quality into a Room that is full of Vomit and
loathsome filthiness and stench: Such a Person will not be entertained and
treated in a Swine-stye: and the Heart of him that wallows in his sinful
Pleasures is no better. That Soul where Christ will dwell, must be cleansed
from all those fleshly Lusts which war against the Soul, Romans 13.14. And as
such a Heart is very unfit for Christ, so there is much malignity in it against
Christ. Who greater Enemies to Christ, and who so bitter against his Ways, his
Laws, his Word, his Government, than those who do wholly addict themselves to
the sensual gratifying of all their carnal Appetites, Desires, and
Inclinations! If they may not enjoy their swinish Lusts, without any
molestation and reproof from Christ and his Word, they will either, with the
Gadarens, desire them to be gone, or else more rudely attempt to thrust and
force them out of their Quarters.

5. Cherishing any particular Lust or Sin in our Hearts, and suffering it to
have a predominant reigning Power over us. Though we seem to reject and cast
from us many of our former Vices, and to deny our selves in several Instances,
in which we did before allow our selves a greater liberty, yet if we yield up
our selves Subjects to any one Sin, though we do it never so cunningly and
secretly, we do thereby bid Christ defiance, and renounce his Rule and
Government over us. If a Man make his Addresses to one he desires to have a
conjugal friendship and familiarity with; if that Party have preingaged her
self faithfully to another Person, this is a more effectual Impediment to his
admission, than if he had a multitude of Rivals. If we cherish any one Lust in
our Bosom, and suffer it to rule there, it will as certainly keep Christ out of
our Hearts, as if we did allow our selves in a greater number of Sins. If we
were only haunted by Sin, beleaguered and set upon, courted and solicited,
though by hundreds of Lusts, the case would not be desperate; we might, it may
be, sooner listen to Christ, than to any of them: but when we close with any
Lust, submit our selves to its Power, take it into our Heart, and enthrone and
crown it there, choosing and preferring it before Christ, then is our case
dangerous indeed, though we seem to reject and offer some indignity to those
other Lusts and Vices that were suing for entertainment, but did not suit so
well with our Humor and Fancy, as that did which we have surrendered our selves
unto.

Too many do pretend to receive Christ, and yet exclude him this way. They are
described, Zeph. 1.5. That swear by the Lord, and that swear by Malcham; that
is, they profess friendship, and subjection, and obedience unto God; and bind
themselves hereunto, by the strongest ties that can be devised, swearing to be
true and faithful to him alone, and yet underhand they swear to Malcham; i.e.
they swear in the same manner, and devote themselves by Oath to be true to
Moloch. Take heed you do not entertain, indulge, or set up any Lust in your
Hearts, though never so privately, for if you do, this will keep Christ out,
and you will be as guilty before him, as those who did swear by Malcham.

IV. We are now, in the fourth place, to enquire why Jesus Christ does use so
much importunity with Sinners to accept of him?

1. Christ does not use this earnestness with us, as though he stood in any
need of us. It is not to acquire any advantage or benefit to himself from us,
but for our sakes, and for our good, that we may reap those Satisfactions which
spring from Peoples enjoying of him. He is absolutely perfect, and does not
need any thing from us. As he is God, he was eternally blessed before we were
in being. And if we consider him as Man, the humane Nature is unconceivably
blessed, in that personal Union it is admitted unto with the Divine. Those
glorious Discoveries which are made to him, those blessed Communications which
are imparted to the humane Nature, and that unintelligible intimacy there is
betwixt the two Natures, do enrich him as Man, with incomprehensible
satisfactions and felicities.

Indeed, if we consider Christ with reference to the Relation he bears to
Believers, and the number of God's Elect, and how his Mystical Body is not
complete, till the whole number be effectually called and brought together unto
him, we may perceive something there which may somewhat illustrate his
earnestness in importuning Sinners to comply with his gracious Offers, for
herein we take notice of him in the execution of his Office. And for this very
end it is, amongst others, that he has appointed several Offices in his
Church, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. But what we are chiefly to refer his earnestness
and importunity, unto what we may impute it to, with greatest safety and
assurance, is divine, free, and undeserved Love.

2. He does not use this earnestness with Sinners, as though he could not
procure himself admittance without their concurrence. God ordinarily requires
our concurrence, even as to those Instances wherein he does most wonderfully
display and magnify the Riches of his Grace toward us; not as if we our selves
were to have the greatest hand in the Work, or that it could not be effected,
unless we did exert our strength for that purpose. But because he will deal
with us as with rational Creatures. He will not force and drive Men into Heaven
and Happiness aginst their wills. He proceeds in such a way as is most proper
to work upon our reasonable Faculties; and he makes use of them for the
perfecting of what he designs. He does ordinarily make use of rational
Expedients with Men; and if these prove unsuccesful, those Persons are for
their inexcusable obstinacy and stubbornness, justly rejected, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11,
12.

The Lord Jesus Christ has the Koy of David, he opens and no Man shuts,
Rev. 3.7. He has power over all Hearts, and can command admittance when he
pleases, but he thinks fit to use importunity, and to proceed in such a way as
is most suitable unto our Natures. And he does thus;

1. To testify, with the greater force and evidence, his wonderful great Love
to Sinners, how ready and willing he is to save them; He might say to Sinners,
at the first repulse they give him, Let the filthy be filthy still, and let the
unclean be unclean still. But when he puts up many denials and affronts, and
still renews his earnest Solicitations, and still condescends to argue and
plead with Sinners, his Love must be acknowledged on all hands, by all sorts of
Persons, to be extraordinary great, and fit to win and constrain our Hearts to
submit to, and close with his Tenders. O, what refractory, helpless, and even
unpitiable Wretches are they, who will hurry themselves to Hell in despite of
all his Love! Miserable and wilful Wretch, what can thou propose to thy self,
in rejecting and flying from the tenders of thy Savior's Love? Can thou
think to sweeten and indear Damnation to thee, by preferring it before Life?
The whole Work of Redemption and Salvation is founded on, and springs from
Love; every Passage belonging to it, is a most great and pregnant demonstration
of Love. And in a very particular, even sensible manner, does our Blessed
Savior discover, manifest, and approve the exceeding Riches and Greatness of
his Love, in being so earnest and importunate with Sinners for admittance.

2. That all obstinate and impenitent rejecters of Christ, and Grace, may be at
last without any excuse. He that stubbornly stands out against all the Divine
Courtings, and loves his Lusts so immoderately, that he will not be prevailed
with by Christ, nor all his entreaties to renounce and forsake them, must needs
be in a very forlorn and dreadful state. When the Lord Jesus shall come to
Judgment, what will that miserable Wretch do? Sinner! thou will not have one
word to say in thy own defense: Thou must stand astonished, full of shame and
confusion, silent and dumb, without any Apology and Excuse. Nay, how loudly
will thou then complain against, and upbraid and reproach thy self, for thy
past contempt, and mad refusing of offered Grace and Mercy! How unmercifully
and cruelly, to thy own unspeakable vexation, will thou then roar forth thy
sense of thy approaching just Damnation?

Some may think to make Apologies for themselves, and pretend they were
ignorant, they had not the Means, the Helps, the Opportunities others had,
otherwise they would not have done as they did. But thou stubborn refuser of
Christ, whosoever thou art, know thou for a certainty, thy Mouth will be
stopped. The Lord Jesus will tell thee to thy Face, before Angels, Men, and
Devils, that thou art that wickeed Wretch with whom he was treating so long,
and with so much earnestness, but all in vain. Ungrateful contemptuous Sinner!
I did not only shed my Blood, and pour out my Soul unto death for thee, but I
condescended to treat more particularly with thy self; I tendered thee all this
Happiness and Glory; I did entreat and persuade, and beseech thee to entertain
me, and accept of the Benefits, and Privileges, and Mercies, the Graces,
Felicities, and Inheritances, purchased by my spotless and precious Blood; I
pleaded many Arguments with thee; I urged such and such Considerations to thy
Soul and Conscience; I did thus, not once, or twice, but for so many Years
together, so often, so earnestly, by so many and such various means, but thou
would not hear my Voice, thou did not open the Door to me, thou did
finally resolve to keep thy Heart shut against me. If thou had hearkened to
me, and received me into thy Heart, I would have made all my Promises good to
thee, thou should have been for ever in this Blessed and Holy Society,
inheriting that Glory and Happiness, those who did receive me are entered into.
But what, thou ungrateful wicked Sinner, Self-destroying wilful Wretch, can
thou now expect at my Hands! Have thou any thing to object why I should not
denounce and make good my formerly declared Threatenings against thee! O poor,
miserable, confounded Creature, how silent will thou stand! Whither will thou
sink under all the horrible misgivings of thy own Soul, and the insupportable
terrifying Accusations, Reprimands, and Lashes of thy enraged guilty
Conscience! and the weight and terror of all that fearful Destruction, and
dreadful Condemnation which is just coming upon thee! How will the
Righteousness and Justice of the Sentence which shall be past upon thee, be
approved, owned, and witnessed unto, by all that shall be there Spectators,
both Angels, Men, and Devils!

The Lord Jesus will remove out of the way, all show and appearance of excuse.
His pleading with us at present, if we receive him not, will be a dreadful
Witness, and will make extraordinarily against us at the last Day. If I had not
come, and spoken unto them, they had not had Sin; but now they have no Cloak
for their Sin, John 15.22.

V. Lastly, We are, in the last place, to make some Application of what has
been discoursed. And,

1. We hence learn where Men must charge their own Destruction. You see how
willing and ready God and Christ are, that you should be saved. How earnestly
they entreat you to accept of Life, to fly from Wrath, and escape Damnation;
read Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. Ezekiel. 33.11. 1 Timothy 2.4. It is your own wilfulness and
obstinacy which must bear the blame. Men would fain charge God, or Christ, or
any thing with their destruction, but themselves. But alas! their Guilt will
not be so easily shifted off, they themselves are the most, if not only,
faulty. God and Christ, do as much as we can modestly, as we can reasonably
desire for our welfare. They do not take any pleasure in our ruin; they offer
Mercy, and entreat us to accept it. Angels they are ready to minister for our
good; good Ministers, and good People, desire and labor all they can to
prevent our Condemnation. Alas! none but wicked Men and Devils are pleased
with, or dare knowingly help forward our Ruin and Damnation. But we our selves
are the principal Causes and Authors of our own eternal unhappiness, Hos. 13.9.
We keep Christ out of our Hearts, we will not listen to his Calls, nor attend
unto his Voice; we will not go to him that we may have Life; nor, we will not
entertain him, when he comes himself unto us and offers us Life. We resist his
Motions, and oppose him in all the Instances of his Love. And what can we then
expect, but that he should finally reject and disown us?

2. We may hence observe the great senslesness and stupidity Men are generally
involved in. O! how hard and insensible is Man's Heart naturally! how do People
live, even under the Administration of the Gospel, as if they had no Souls, nor
any Concerns relating to another World to attend unto! They mind not Christ,
nor do they take any care to have their Hearts prepared for him. People are
soon apprehensive of temporal, corporal Dangers; but tho their Souls are every
minute in danger, and Christ is calling to, and warning them, setting before
them their hazard, and counselling them to come to him, that they may be safe
and secure, how idely and unconcernedly do they sit, and take no notice at all
of what is said? O how hard must those Hearts needs be, which will not, by all
the Rhetoric, Eloquence, Affection, and Earnestness of the Son of God, be
wrought on, prevailed with, or won over to a serious consideration of another
state!

3. This should encourage the Ministers of Jesus Christ, to hold on patiently
in the discharge of their Work, in earnest importunate beseeching Sinners to be
reconciled unto God, and accept of Christ. It is indeed a great discouragement,
when a Man labors for naught, and when for his earnestness and heartiness in
his Work, he is slighted, reproached, and abused in the World. And indeed,
Ministers find it hard to keep up their Spirits, and go on unweariedly in an
uninterrupted renewing of their affectionate Entreaties, when they long
perceive the Word trampled under-foot, and the most serious testimonies of
spiritual, fervent desire of Men's Salvation, despised and nicknamed. Ministers
are too prone to despond, and to be dejected, when their Labors and Endeavors
continue long without Success, when they see Men remain as stubborn, and as
violent opposers of Christ, after Instruction, Warnings, and multiplied
vehement Entreaties and Persuasions, as they were before. It is heartless, nay,
it is afflicting, and exceeding grievous to the Soul and Spirit of a true
Gospel-Minister, to have occasion to cry out, Who has believed our Report? and
to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? Isa. 53.1. But this should not
discourage, or make us desist one jot from our most vigorous Importunity. For
besides that, Our Judgment is with the Lord, and our Work, or Recompense, is
with our God, Isa. 49.4.

We have much encouragement, and obligation too, to persist, from the Example
of our Blessed Master. If Christ himself does wait long, and uses one Argument
after another with Sinners, should not we, who are but his Servants and
Messengers, sent to plead his Cause with Sinners, imitate him both in Patience
and Importunity?

4. This may justly encourage poor Sinners to come to Christ, and to be earnest
and importunate in their Addresses to the Throne of Grace. If the Lord Jesus
Christ do condescend thus to entreat and beseech Sinners to receive him, no
doubt but he will very graciously accept of, and receive those who do come unto
him; consult Mat. 11.28. Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. Hos. 14.1, 2.

A returning Sinner, is the welcomest Guest to Jesus Christ. What joy does such
an one occasion in Heaven! with what satisfaction did the Father receive and
entertain the returning Prodigal! how do the glorious and blessed Spirits above
rejoice, and sing for gladness, when a Sinner forsakes his unrighteous Courses,
seeks after, and returns unto his Savior, and sincerely closes with and
embraces him? Luke 15.7.

And as Christ is importunate with us, so he would have us to be importunate in
our Applications unto him. He is very much pleased with our importunity at the
Throne of Grace. When we insist on what he has done and suffered, when we
plead his Office, and his Promises, and become so earnest and vigorous in our
Prayers and Wrestlings, that we resolve we will not let him go till he blesses
us. He sometimes hides his Face, and seems to withhold his Ears from our Cries;
but it is, that hereby he may awaken us from our chilliness and deadness in the
Duty, try our Love to himself, and quicken and engage us to a greater fervency
in our Addresses. Nay, he seems to make this a necessary Requisite to our
coming to him acceptably, Mat. 11.12.

5. Is the Lord Jesus Christ very importunate with Sinners to receive and
entertain him; then let us all be hence persuaded, and prevailed with to
embrace and close with his Motions. Do not resist and oppose him any longer, do
not delay to open unto him, and give him that reception he calls for. Are you
in love with Death! will you resolve to court Damnation as sollicitously, and
with as much fervency, as you are entreated to accept of Christ and Salvation?
What have thou, Sinner, to except against Christ? Why will thou add this, of
sturdy, inexcusable, and most hideous frustrating the highest design of Love,
in refusing to accept of, and comply with an earnest importunate Savior, to
all thy other Provocations? Art thou afraid thou shall not sink low enough into
the bottomless Pit, nor find sorrow and torment enough in Hell, unless thy
contempt of Grace, and despising of Christ, may add weight to thy former Guilt,
and make the unquenchable infernal Flames more scorching, and to prey on thee
with greater vehemence and fury! Sinner, Hell will be direfully black and
terrible, the infernal Torments will insupportably afflict and macerate; the
loss of Heaven, and the gracious presence of the Divine Majesty, will be
inexpressibly dreadful and confounding, will fill with unsufferable remorse and
horror, when they shall appear to be the Fruits of Men's wilfulness and choice.
Exercise reason therefore once in thy Life, and hearken to Advice; Do not be
ambitious to plunge thy self into the utmost depth of Divine Indignation and
Fury, by offering the most provoking contemptuous Affront to the Riches of
God's Grace and Love: for, fancy thou, thy Patience, Strength, and Courage, to
be never so great and invincible, yet the least measure of Damnation will
presently baffle and triumph over them: It will soon weary thee out, fill thee
with such horrors, and extort and force from thee such dreadful howlings and
shreiks, as will fully manifest thy Impatience is boundless, and thy Misery
remediless.

Sinner! why will thou reject the gracious Offers which thy Savior makes thee?
Why will thou deny him admittance, when he tenders thee Himself, and all his
Benefits? What better, what more desirable Guest can thou have? Whether do
thou think it better, thy Heart should be full of filthy diabolical
Suggestions, and noisome Lusts; or that thy Soul should be the Temple of God,
and be beautified and enriched with all sorts of Graces and Divine Dispositions?

What is it then that keeps Christ out of thy Heart? What is it that makes thee
unwilling to yield to thy Savior's Importunity? produce thy shadowy vain
pretenses, and see how thou deludest thy self! Can thou value the Wealth and
Riches of the World, more than the Son of God, who prized thee at such a rate,
as to lay down his Life for thee! certainly thou do esteem them much above
their worth, and unless thou rectify this Mistake in a little time, thou will
make a very foolish bargain for thy self.

O stupid Sinner! awake, rouse up thy self, shame thy self out of thy
incogitancy, folly, falseness and ingratitude! Are the transitory, empty,
counterfeited pleasures of Sin, of greater value, and more precious to thee,
than those Rivers, those Oceans of real transcendent satisfactions and delights
which are in God's presence, and at his right Hand! Can a perishing uncertain
World, assure thee of better and more splendid entertainment than he can, who
is over all, God blessed for ever, of whose fullness we all receive, and who
fills all in all! Are not the transports and raptures of Saints and Angels to
be preferred before all those gross and fulsome Diversions, carnal and foolish
Men do so madly dote on? Can thou think it better, and more rationally
desirable, to be a Beast on Earth, than to be like one of the shining glorious
Seraphims, in the Regions of Light, and Peace, and Joy?

Have thou any thing to except against the Terms thy Savior does propound?
Does he invite thee to any thing that is unreasonable? does he lay any burden
on thee, which is insupportable, or unto which he will not administer strength
proportionable? Thou can not pretend any thing of all this; what he requires,
is almost obviously reasonable, just, good, and equal. And does the Lord Jesus
call and importune thee to attend to the sweetest Voice, and the most heavenly
and ravishing News that was ever made known: Does he, who dwells in the
highest Heavens, condescend to entreat for an abode with thee, that he may
communicate Himself, and his Riches and Benefits to thee, in the freest and
most friendly manner, and will thou yet reject him? O, how great must thy Guilt
needs be! what an aggravation will this be, both of thy Sin, and Folly, and
Damnation!

But to help thee a little more to quicken, and to make some impression on thy
Affections, let me propose these few Questions, and do thou perform thy Duty
faithfully in answering them to thy own Conscience sincerely, and urging them
impartially on thy own Soul.

Quest. 1. What art thou without Christ? O, Sinner, whilst thou art in thy
Sins, thou art no better than an Enemy to the great God of Heaven and Earth; a
very Firebrand of Hell, Ephesians. 2.12. If thou had the Plague broke on thee,
or were under any desperate Distemper, how welcome would a Physician be to
thee, who could infallibly cure and heal thee? Nay, what speed would thou
make in enquiring and searching out for such an one, if thou could hear of
him? And what, shall thy Soul be under the worst of Plagues, even the dominion
of thy Lusts and Sins? Is thy condition such, that thou art every minute in
danger of having all the Vials of God's Wrath poured out upon thee, and will thou still reject thy Savior, and sturdily refuse his help, when he only can
administer proper Remedies, and effect thy Cure and Deliverance?

Quest. 2. What have thou to trust to, whilst without Christ? Alas! all things
but Christ, are broken, perishing, afflicting Reeds; such Props, as if trusted
to, will but deceive us, and make our fall the greater and more ruinous. Alas,
Sinner! if thou had all the World, its Power, its Wealth, its Glory; yea, if
thou had all the cunning and artifice of Hell too, these will not yield thee
one jot of comfort or supply, when thy Want shall be greatest and most urgent.
O how sad was it with that poor Soul, that having long slighted Christ, and
despised Grace, being at last brought under the Lashes and Accusations of an
awakened condemning Conscience, could take no rest, receive no comfort, but was
full of horror and black despair; when his Friends and Attendants spoke to him
of, applauded him for, and presented before him the Honors and Preferments he
had obtained in the World, the Wealth and Estate he was master of, and
remembered him of his past Pleasures, the things he was wont to be most
delighted with, and endeavored to divert him by Music, and other
Entertainments; all these proved insipid, nay, vexatious. O, said he, these I
loved too much heretofore, they have been my bane, these wound and torment me!
These are not Christ! for these I ventured and fold my Soul, I preferred them
above Christ. These inflame my grief, these wound me to the Heart, these
imbitter and make my Life a burden to me; these kindle Hell in my Soul, these
weigh and sink me down into the bottomless Pit! I have no support at all,
nothing to trust to. There is none but Christ can do me good, or yield me help;
and it is him I have despised and slighted, whose Wounds, and whose Love, cry
for Vengeance against me.

Quest. 3. What will thou be able to say for thy self at last, if thou art
without Christ? Come, Sinner! thou can talk, and be as unconcerned at present
as any Man. Thou dare, it may be now, to scorn Christ, ridicule and make
sport at his most solemn and affectionate Entreaties, and revile those his
Messengers, who would persuade thee to close with his gracious Offers. But this
is not the way to Heaven: When thou shall appear before the great Tribunal of
the most Just and Holy God, thou will not dare to repeat any of thy opprobrious
reproachful Expressions, thou will not be able to justify thy contemning of
Christ. Their state and condition will be very dreadful, who shall be left to
plead their own Cause at the great Day of Judgment. Be as great and daring as
thou will at present, know thou, that more potent and valiant Persons than thy
self, will then be covered with shame, be full of consternation and horror, and
not dare to open their Mouths in their own vindication. Did thou never read
nor hear of those great and powerful, wealthy and honorable, courageous and
valiant Ones, who shall call to the Mountains to fall on them, and the Hills to
cover them, from the Face and Wrath of the Lamb? Rev. 6.15, 16, 17.

Quest. 4. What will thou think of Christ, and what will thou be willing to
give for an Interest in Christ, at the approach of Death, and when thou must
come before the Judgment of the Great God? If Christ will be precious and
desirable when thou see Death and Hell naked before thee, certainly he ought
to be precious to thee at present. Thou do not know how soon Death may arrest
thee, how soon thou may lie under its stroke; within how few Days or Hours
God may say to thee, Come, Sinner, give up thy Account! O, Sinner, whoever thou
art, be thy Thoughts what they will at present, yet if thou had Worlds, yea,
thousands of Worlds at thy disposal, thou would gladly and freely give and
part with them all at the great Day of Judgment, for the least saving Interest
in Christ. O, Sinner! do thou know what it is to leave the World with Sin and
Guilt cleaving to thy Soul? Do thou know what it is to die, and enter into
Eternity, without having thy Peace made with God? Do thou know what it is to
stand before the Tribunal of an unreconciled God, and to have Christ appear
against thee, demanding full Justice against thee, for thy stubborn,
refractory, contemptuous despising of Him, and his often tendered rich Grace?

Quest. 5. What Reflections have those who are now in Hell, on their having
slighted Christ, and stubbornly stood out against all his Entreaties? Do any of
those things which they preferred above Christ, when they were on Earth, afford
them any real comfort? Have they any abatement of their Pain and Torment, by
remembering that they purchased such Pleasures, or amassed to themselves such
Treasures, etc. by rejecting and refusing to comply with the gracious Offers
the Son of God did make to them? Alas, their remembering of these things, does
inflame Hell the more; this makes Damnation more than ordinarily terrible; this
makes the sight of God and Christ amazing and dreadful to the utmost degree. To
consider they sold God and Christ, their Souls, and Heaven, and Happiness, for
such Trifles, such perishing and unsatisfying things, is beyond all imagination
penetrating and afflicting. O! could thou see the Damned in their Chains, and
did thou hear their shreiks and howlings; or would thou but consider how
their misery and unhappiness is heightened and increased by their despising and
making light of Christ? What thoughts would thou entertain! how dreadful
would thou apprehend the rejecting of Christ to be, when he makes his
gracious Visits, and pleads and expostulates with Sinners for admittance? What
thoughts would thou have, did thou hear those miserable and helpless
Wretches crying out, O the Savior that we did slight! O the Salvation we did
neglect! O the Offers of Grace and Mercy we did wickedly and contemptuously
cast behind our backs! O the many, the earnest, the importunate, the
affectionate and loving entreaties and courtings of the Son of God, which we
did stubbornly resist, and offer the most unexcusable and wicked despite unto!
O, it is this, this, that makes our Damnation thus out of measure, to exceed
and transcend theirs, who were never in a capacity of sinning at our rate! It Is
this that makes Hell so hot and glowing to us, that sinks us so much below all
others in this bottomless Pit! O, what would these do, might they have the
Offers which thou refusest to accept of? How would they rejoice, how speedily,
gladly, and heartily would they close with Christ, might they have an offer of
Grace, Pardon, and Mercy made once more to them!

Quest. 6. Do thou think that any of those who have received Christ in
sincerity, did ever repent of their so doing? It is our ignorance of Christ,
and unacquaintedness with him, that makes us think so lightly of him. Did we
but taste and know how good the Lord is; had we but the same sense, experience,
and knowledge of his Excellencies they have, who do indeed admit him into their
Hearts, we should have the like Love, Zeal, and Affection for him which they
have. Those who have received him, do rejoice in and love him: They account him
the only Joy of their Hearts, they esteem him their Portion, their All, and
their only Good. Have not those who, for the sake of Christ, have been exposed
to all kind of Sufferings, Hardships, and ill Usages in the World rejoiced in
the same? Have not they found the satisfactions accruing to them, from the
Faithfulness and Love of Christ, so exceeding great, and full of inexpressible
sweetness and comfort, they have almost overlooked, they have really thought
all the Sufferings of this Life very little and inconsiderable, especially when
Faith in Christ has mounted and carried their Souls to take a view and
prospect of what Christ will hereafter advance them unto? Romans 8.18. Gold and
Silver, Crowns, and Earthly Kingdoms, are of no value, more vile and
contemptible than the Dung and Mire of the Streets, when made use of to bribe
and hire one that has received Christ into his Heart, to fall off from him and
reject him. I have served Christ (said Polycarp) fourscore and six Years, and
he never did me any harm; and do you think (said he to those who would have
bribed and persuaded him to renounce Christ) that now I will renounce and
blaspheme, and dishonor my King and Savior? Do you think the glorified Saints
are sorry they chose and received Christ? Why, they can every jot as easily be
weary of Heaven, as repent of their entertaining such a Guest.

Now do thou exercise thy Thoughts about these things with the greatest
seriousness, and answer these Questions distinctly and impartially unto thy
Conscience, and press on thy Soul such Considerations as thou find have the
greatest tendency to startle, to awaken and move thee, that thou may not
continue under the dreadful guilt of slighting Christ, and rejecting the
gracious Motions he does make thee of his Love. And, O that I knew what Words
would excite thy drowsy Soul, and what Arguments would influence and make some
kind of impressions on thy Mind, Affections, and Heart? I would urge them for
thy good, with all the life and fervency that is possible. Consider, Sinner,
does the Son of God condescend to plead and argue with thee for thy Benefit and
Comfort? This is a very wonderful thing indeed; the Heavens may well be called
to attend, and the Earth to give ear; such a prodigy of Love may make
impressions on the very Mountains and Rocks. And what, will thou still resist
his Courtings, and be the more contemptuous, by how much the more importunate
he is with thee? O, how justly may we call to the Heavens to be astonished, and
the Earth to be horribly afraid, at the manifestation of such stupidity and
ingratitude? How will all the Creatures, inanimate, and senseless things,
upbraid such sottish sturdiness! and finally bear witness, and give in evidence
against it?

But, alas, after all, what signifies the Discourse of a poor Mortal?
Melancthon found, by experience, that he had reason to say, The old Man, in the
Hearts of Sinners, was too strong for young Melancthon. It is not in the
Minister's Power to reach the Heart. But Glorious, Almighty, and most Gracious
God, thou art above all, and thou can speak to the Conscience, and overcome
the most perverse and stubborn Heart; thou can, and do ordinarily make thy
Strength and power to appear, in the weakness of thy meanest Servants: Lord, to
thee we turn, and of thee we beg, that that Power and Plenty of thy good Spirit
may be sent forth, that poor Sinners may not walk in darkness, and be held any
longer in bondage by Satan and their Lusts, but that they now may cast away
from them their Idols, may yield up themselves to Christ in the sincerity of
their Hearts, and not oppose and resist him any longer. Lord, do thou look down
in thy Power and Strength; and do thou mightily persuade and prevail on the
Hearts of those who have hitherto stood out against the Calls and Entreaties of
their Savior! exert thy Power, stretch forth thy mighty Arm, descend in the
abundance of thy Grace, and bring thy Word and Exhortations to Peoples Souls
and Consciences, with thy special Efficacy, and then shall People hear thy
Son's Voice, and knock, and open unto him.

Now, Sinner, if thou art at all affected with any of these Considerations, and
do truly desire to receive Christ into thy Heart; I will conclude all I have
at this time to say unto thee, by proposing a few Directions for thy help, and
assistance.

I. Labor to get a deep affectionate sense of thy own insufficiency,
emptiness, and misery without Christ. Study the Law of God, how strict and
punctual it is! How many Duties are commanded, how many Sins forbid; what
Curses and Judgments threatened; how weak and impotent thou art; how far the Law
is from either communicating Strength, or providing thee a Pardon: How powerful
and severe infinite Justice is; how liable thou art, and this upon innumerable
accounts, to all the Vengeance and Horror infinite Justice can inflict: How
dreadful, how miserable, how helpless thy state is without a Mediator! Think on
these things till thou art thoroughly sensible of thy need of Christ; and how
impossible it is for thee to escape any other way than by Christ. We need
Christ to present our best Services to God, and obtain them acceptance with the
Father. O, what need have we then of Christ, to save us from our manifold Sins,
and from the direful Punishments they deserve, Rev. 3.18. Luke 15.21. Christ
will be welcome indeed, when we truly see our need of him.

II. Strive to get thy Heart cleansed from every thing which is contrary to
Christ, and has a tendency to keep him out of thy Heart. Get every Sin
imbittered to thy Soul, that thou may hate every thing which is an Enemy to
Christ. Oppose Christ to every Lust, and sinful stirring of Heart; harbor no
Lust nor Sin in thy Heart, fight against Temptations; learn to overcome
Temptations and Sins, by reviving in thy Mind the opposition and enmity there
is betwixt Christ and Sin; curb and check, mortify and subdue every sinful
Inclination, by alleging against it, Thou art an Enemy to my Savior! to
allow and entertain thee, would be to fight against Christ. O, I will not for a
World do any thing that may offend and displease the Son of God.

III. Pray earnestly that the Spirit of God may mould and form thy Heart into a
right frame and temper for Christ. When a Prince comes to take up his residence
at any Place, or House, it is not only necessary that the Luggage, and Lumber,
and Filth, be removed and cast out of Doors, but that all places be righted up,
and have their proper Furniture: So when Christ comes to take up his abode with
us, we are not only to cast away our Lusts and Sins, but our Hearts must be
fitted and disposed to receive him, by the powerful Operation of his Holy
Spirit, beautifying and enriching them with Divine and Heavenly Qualifications.
And therefore it will concern us to be earnest in our Prayers, that the good
Spirit of God may come down upon us, and make our Hearts and Souls meet Temples
for the Son of God to dwell in.

IV. Go forth unto Christ, by the actings of Faith upon all occasions. Let
Christ dwell in your Hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3.17. according to every
alteration in your condition; and according to all the diversities of
Providence do you look unto Christ, exercise Faith on him, and by Faith fetch
supplies of Grace from him.

V. Meditate much and often on the Love of Christ to Sinners. Read over the
Gospel, the several Apostolical Epistles, and the many Prophecies concerning
Christ, especially Isa. 63. take notice of the many remarkable Passages there,
relating to Christ, declaring his Condescension and Love, weigh them seriously,
and press them upon thy own Soul and Conscience, dwell on these Matters in thy
Thoughts, and expostulate with thy self about them. What, has the Son of God
taken my Nature! has the King of Glory condescended to live here in the form of
a Servant! did he patiently undergo all the unjust Affronts and Contempts of
lewd and profane People! did he bear the weight of God's Wrath, and actually
lay down his Life in the most open, scandalous, cursed, linguering, and painful
kind of Death then known in the World, and was all this for my sake! O,
incomprehensible Love! What shall I return unto my Savior for all this? I can
never love Christ enough; may I never cease admiring the many Instances wherein
his Love has broke forth unto me; may I so wonder at, and be affected with all
these things, that love to Christ may shine through all the passages of my
Life: May I never be at rest, till I do arrive at the full enjoyment of my
Savior in his own Kingdom. What, has the Lord Jesus Christ done so much for
me! has he revealed such Truths, made such Promises, suffered such Sorrows,
submitted to such a Death, as are recorded in the Holy Scriptures? are so many
glorious and wonderful Things related concerning him? Does he now reign in
Heaven, and has he purchased such blessed Inheritance, and satisfying
Treasures for poor Sinners? Nay, does he still importune and entreat me to
accept of Him and his Benefits! God forbid that I should oppose his Motions,
and resist his Love any longer. Shall the King of Glory be slighted and
excluded still by me? Shall I wilfully cast away my own Soul, and stubbornly
neglect this great Salvation? God forbid. Shall it be writ on my Grave, Here
lies the sturdy ungrateful Wretch, that did wilfully resist Jesus Christ; the
Wretch that resolved to force his way to Hell, through all the Impediments and
Discouragements, infinite Justice, and infinite Mercy had laid in his way? that
vile unpitiable Miscreant, that would damn himself in spite of Love it self?

VI. Converse much with those who are experienced Christians, and have much
acquaintance with Christ. He that walks with wise Men, shall be wise; but a
Companion of Fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13.20. Such People will very much
assist thee in thy closing with Christ, by their Discourses, Exhortations, and
Practice. They can tell thee such things concerning Christ, from their own
experience, as will warm and melt thy Heart, and inflame thy Affections. They
will contribute much to thy help by their advice and counsel, by the accounts
they can give thee off their own experiences, by their watchfulness over thee,
and by their fervent effectual Prayers for thee.

VII. Labor to be acquainted with, and to observe all the Motions and Workings
of Christ toward Sinners, and close with, and improve every one of them, when
he is pleased to exert any of them toward thy self. Take notice of the Calls
he does give thee in his Word, and the awakening visits he does make thee by
his providential Occurrences, and improve these to put thee on a more diligent
search, and close walking after him; and to excite and quicken in thee more
fervent desires after Communion with him.

VIII. Conscientiously frequent those Ordinances wherein Christ has promised
his more especial Presence. Prepare thy self carefully to meet thy Lord, and
come with passionate Desires, and confident Expectations, grounded on his
Faithfulness, Word, and Promise, that he will exhibit himself unto those Souls,
that sincerely long and wait for him.

IX. Lastly; Faithfully resign and give up thy self to Christ. When thy Heart
is affected truly with a sense of Christ's Love, then desire him, by fervent
Prayer, that he will be pleased to take thee into Covenant with himself, and
make a hearty, faithful, entire resignation of thy self unto him. O, Blessed
Jesus, most Holy Savior! I am unworthy I acknowledge to make use of thy Name; I
have often resisted and sinned against thy constraining Love, but I am heartily
sorry now that ever I did so! O, compassionate and tenderhearted Savior,
reject not an humble, returning, mourning Penitent; embrace me, the unworthiest
of all others in the Arms of thy Mercy, and admit me into thy favor; the more
stubborn, and headstrong, and wilful I have been, the more abundantly let thy
Grace be manifested toward me, and bring me under the more powerful influences
of thy Love. Lord, seize, by the Power of thy Grace, and take possession of
this Soul: Gracious Savior, whose Bowels have ever yearned over the miserable,
and who have been always compassionate and gracious to the unworthy, favorably
accept of this poor Oblation: Lord, it is the purchase of thy own Blood; O,
reject not, despise not, cast not away what thou have bought at so dear a rate.
Lord, here is my Soul, my Body, my Heart, my Affections, my Mind, my Judgment,
my Will: Lord, here is all that I have; Lord, I resign up all unto thee,
without any reservation; do with all, as pleases thee best, only accept of
them: O Lord, I love thee above all, I desire, with my whole Soul, to love thee
every Day more and more. Lord, dwell in my Heart, rule over my whole Man, bring
all my Powers unto a true and sound subjection unto, and compliance with thee
in every thing: May my Soul always admire thee, my Heart love thee, my Tongue
praise thee, my Lips speak of thy Glory and Goodness: May my Life glorify thee;
may I in every part of my practice, serve and honor thee; may all my Faculties
and Members be ready and faithful Servants for, and unto thee. Lord, I long to
be with thee, my Soul pants after thee. For me to live is Christ, and to die
is gain, Phil. 1.21.

FINIS.

