A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION To the End of the COUNCIL OF
TRENT, In the Year 1563.

Collected and Written by E. B. Esquire

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.

A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION.
BOOK I.
The CONTENTS.
The Introduction. The Revolt of Transylvania. The Siege and brave Defense of
Sigeth, a Town in Hungary. Charles V, resigns the Empire: He goes to Spain.
John Sleidan 's Death and Character. Paul III, a Furious Prince: The War
between him and King Philip in Italy: The Peace between them. The Affairs of
England. The Diet of Ratisbonne. The Death of Ignatius Loyola, the Founder of
the Order of Jesuits: And of Albert Marquess of Brandenburg. The unsuccessful
Conference at Wormds, between the Romish and Protestant Divines. The War
between France and Spain. The Siege, Battle and Taking of S. Quintin. Charles
V, his Letter to his Son. The Spanish Army disperse, and the French increase. A
Persecution in France. The Siege and Loss of Calais: The Situation and Form of
that Town. Guines taken. A Turkish Fleet land in many Places in Italy, and
carry many into Captivity. The Dauphin Married to Mary Queen of Scotland. The
first Overtures for a Peace between the Kings of France and Spain. Andelot
Marshal of France ruined by the Arts of the Duke of Guise. Thionville Besieged
and Taken by the French. The Defeat of the French near Graveling. An
unsuccessful Expedition of the English against France. The Treaty of Cambray
began. The Parliament of England meet; and Queen Mary Dies. The German Affairs,
the Death and Character of Charles V. The Succession of Queen Elizabeth. The
Scotch Affairs, and the first settling of the Reformation in that Kingdom.

IT was the Misfortune of this Great Man, John Sleidan, to die in that nick of
Time, when the Fates of the two contending Religions, and of all Christendom,
were just upon the settling: It is true, The Introduction.
he lived to see the Augustane Confession settled in the Diet of Ausburg, and
perhaps he might hear of the Resignation of the Empire by Charles V, to his
Brother Ferdinand; but then Death surprised him before he could give any
account of it; for with it he designed to have begun the next Book, in all
probability, and to have filled up this with some other Accidents; such as a
large account of the Revolt of Transylvania, and the Siege of Sigeth would have
afforded him. But then had he lived till the Year 1563, he should have seen the
Death of Queen Mary, Henry II of France, and Charles V, and the settling of the
Roman Catholic Religion, by the Determination of the Council of Trent,
contrary to the Expectation of all Men; which seems to be the first Period of
the Reformation, and absolutely necessary to give the Reader a clear Prospect
and full View of the first Joint of this great Revolution. I have therefore
persuaded the Stationer to add a Suppliment to this Version, for that purpose;
and because I am a Member of the Religion by Law established, and not willing
to offend them of the other Persuasions, I resolve to advance nothing in it but
from Authors, who lived and dyed in the Communion of the Church of Rome,
showing the matter of Fact with great Brevity, and making few or no Reflections
of my own: That so the Reader may be left entirely to himself, to think what he
Please, and God shall direct him.

I will begin with the Business of Transylvania: John the last King of Hungary,
dyed of Joy for the birth of his Son, The Revolt of Transylvania.
his Mother the Queen Regent, put him under the Protection of Solomon, Emperor
of the Turks, to secure him from the Violence of Ferdinand, who claimed that
Kingdom; and thereupon a sharp War ensued, which ended in the advancement of
the Turkish Interest, and the loss of both those Princes, the Turk taking
Quinque Ecclesiae, Gran and Albaregalis, in the Year 1544; Temeswar, Lippa, and
some others in the Year 1548: Whereupon Ferdinand finding himself too weak to
deal with that potent warlike Prince, in the Year 1549 offered him 30000 Ducats
of yearly Tribute for Transylvania: But this Design failing, in the Year 1551,
he forced the Queen of Hungary to resign Transylvania, to whom in lieu of it he
gave Cassovia, and a Pension of 100000 Ducats yearly. And in the Year 1552, he
made Stephen Dobus, who had performed great Services for him against the Turks
this Year in the Defense of Agria, Vaivode of Transylvania: He continued
quietly in the Possession of it, till the Year 1556; and then another
Disturbance arose in this Principality, which is shortly hinted at by King
Ferdinand, in his Letter to the Diet at Ratisbonne. Among other things,
Ferdinand had promised, That he would not burden Transylvania with any
Garrisons of Foreigners; But whether out of Necessity, or for fear of the
Turks, he had kept a strong Guard of Spanish Soldiers there, who had done great
Injuries to the Inhabitants; whereupon one Peter Petrowic, underhand, dealt
with Solomon for supplies, and began a Revolt in favor of one John, whose
Family is not known, who then aspired to this miserable Principality, and hoped
by drawing the Turks into Hungary, to gain the greatest part of that Kingdom
for himself, and had called a Diet at Thorda, in March, 1555, which was
disappointed by the Spaniards. The Turks were not without their Complaints too,
for though Ferdinand had sent Ambassadors to treat a Peace, yet Solomon being
engaged in a War with the Persians, he was not at leisure, or perhaps not much
inclined to make a Peace with Ferdinand, but kept his Ambassadors two Years at
Constantinople, to little or no Purpose; and Ferdinand being thus held in
Suspense, was forced to keep great Garrisons in his Frontier Towns, and among
them the Heyducks were employed, who having no Pay, made frequent inroads into
the Turkish Quarters toward Quinque Ecclesiae, and often surprised the Turkish
Boats, as they passed upon the Rivers; nor was it in Ferdinand's power to
restrain them, as things then stood. Hereupon the Turks began a War with the
Town of Kaposwar, which was treacherously resigned to them by the Garrison, and
after it Babotz, and passing on, they attempted Sigeth, and came within
Cannonshot of it; but Ladislaus Kerezen, the Governor, gave them such a warm
Entertainment, that the Bassa's Tent being pierced with a Cannon-shot, he was
forced to remove farther off, and three hundred of his Men being slain in two
Sallies, and Winter coming on, he was fain to Withdraw. This passed in the Year
1555.

In the beginning of the next Year, Sigeth besieged and most bravely defended
by the Germans.
Solomon sent Haly an Albanian, whom he had recalled from the Wars of Persia,
to be Vizier of Buda; but with a Command not to enter that City, till he had
taken Sigeth: He coming to Sirmish, sent a Messenger to demand Sigeth of
Ferdinand, who replied, He had Ambassadors at the Port, treating of a Peace;
he had done no Injury, and therefore desired he might receive none, but was
resolved to defend himself if he were attacked. Whereupon the Bassa comes on,
and finds Mark Horwatch Governor of the Town, who had sworn the Garrison,
consisting of two thousand Foot, and one hundred and eighty Horse, to defend
the Town to the utmost. The Situation of Sigeth.
It is seated in a marshy Plain, and on the North it has Dikes, which bring the
Waters of the River Alme into the three Ditches, which strengthen the Town; On
the East it has a strong Castle, which had two Bastions, and the nature of the
Site made it impossible to make use of Mines against it; and it was then a very
Populous Place. Haly came before it the tenth of June, and finding nothing but
Force could take it, the thirteenth he raised a Battery of nine Canon on the
South side: Whilst this was battering the Town on that Side, he played his
Grenades on all the other, which burnt most of the Houses, and a part of the
Walls, which were made of Clay and Straw; the twentieth of June, the Turks took
the Counterscharpe, and the next Night they filled the second Dike with
Faggots, and built another Battery on the West Side of the Town, which the
Defendants were not able to destroy. The next day, a great Breach being made in
the second Wall, though the Town had burnt ten thousand Loads of Wood, which had
been thrown in to fill the Dike, yet the Turks, after four furious Assaults,
which succeeded not, took the Town at the fifth, and the Garrison retreated
into the Castle. The Turks drew a Trench between the Castle and the Town, to
secure themselves; but the Townsmen and Soldiers finding themselves too much
penned up for want of Room, made so furious a Sally upon the Turks, that they
slew eighty of them, and recovered the Town. The next day, which was the
twelfth of July, Haly renewed the Battery on the West Side, and that Night
erected a third Battery against a Tower called Haney, and a Gate near it, and
drew a Trench round the Town to drain the Dikes, which he endeavored to fill
under the new Battery, and in this Work he spent five Days. When by this means
he had drained the Dikes, he raised a fourth Battery over against the Castle,
and began to play it with great Fury against the Castle, twenty thousand Carts
being employed, in the mean time, to fill the Dikes, on the East Side with
Wood; but the Defendants fired that too, and under the Cover of the Smoke, made
a furious Sally on the Turks, who were laboring to put the Fire out, and slew
seven hundred of them. They made the same Attempt of filling up the Dikes, and
with the same Success, on the West Side, the Wood being burnt, and four hundred
Turks cut off by a Sally. Haly by this time began to find his Hopes of
prevailing by Force abated, so he fell to fawning and Flattery, and made them
very kind and obliging Promises, if they would surrender; but this was to no
purpose, so he fell to fill the Dikes with Sacks of Earth, and to raise Works
with Skeps to beat off the Defendants. The twelfth of July he raised another
Platform against the Castle, and battered it with that fury for five Days, that
the Town was almost reduced to Desperation, and sent a Messenger to King
Ferdinand, to beg Relief; but considering how long they must stay for it, they
reassumed their wonted Courage, and made a brave Irruption, in which they
fired all the Wood that had been thrown into the Dikes. This abated the Fury of
Haly so effectually, that he lay only pelting the Town with his Cannon to the
twenty first of July, and then was glad of an Opportunity to draw off to
succor Babots, which was assaulted by one Nadasad, Babotz besieged.
who fought this Army, and made a great slaughter among them: And after this,
the Christians retreating toward Canisa lost two hundred of their Men, and
among them a Brother of Nadasad's. Upon this small Advantage Haly returned to
the Siege of Sigeth, but was entertained with Scorn and Laughter. He began
another Battery against the Castle, and used all the Arts and Wheedling and
Terror to persuade the Garrison to yield; but the Besieged returned his
Courtship with military Sallies, and slew a great many of his Men, and in one
of them they maintained a Fight eight Hours against all the Turkish Forces, so
that though the Town was above half ruined, yet the Turkish General was forced
the twenty ninth of July to draw off to Quinque Ecclesiae; after he had sent
away his Cannon and Baggage, he spent above two thousand of his best Men in
this Seige, and yet he slew not above one hundred and sixteen of the
Defendants; but then he satiated his Fury on the smaller Places. This Haly was
an Eunuch of small Stature, but very Corpulent, The Character of Haly, the
Turks General.
Tawny Complexioned, of a Sour Countenance, fierce Eyes, broad Shouldered,
short Necked, and having two Fore-teeth like a Bore's Tusks, so that a more
ugly contemptible Personage was never seen; but he was a Man of great Courage
and Subtlety. Whilst he lay before Sigeth, the Germans surprised Gran by
Scalado; Gran surprised by Scalado.
a poor Turk came to give him an account of this Loss with so much
Consternation in his Looks, that Haly clapped his Hand between his Thighs, and
said in scorn, This was the dreadful Loss when I was deprived of my Virilities.
He was not long after forced, with great shame and Dishonor, to enter his
Government of Buda, where he dyed of Rage and Discontent. I have insisted the
longer upon this, because it was one of the most memorable Sieges in that Age.

Our Author has already given an account of the Resignation of the Kingdom,
Charles V, resigns the Netherlands and Spain to his Son.
of Naples and the Dukedom of Milan by Charles V, to his Son Philip, soon after
his Marriage to Queen Mary; and this Summer he resigned the Netherlands and
Spain to him; so that he had nothing left but the Empire. This great Prince
stripping himself by degrees of all his Greatness and External Majesty, and
feeling a great Pleasure in the lightning his Burden, being then at Sudbury in
Zealand, and just ready to imbark for Spain, he made a Resignation of the
Empire to his Brother Ferdinand the seventh of September, in this form.
CHARLES, by the Divine Clemency, And the Empire to his Brother Ferdinand.
Emperor of the Romans, August, etc. to all and every the Electoral Princes,
as well Ecclesiastical as Secular, the Prelates, Counts, Barons, Knights,
Nobles, Captains, Viscounts, Governors, Lieutenants, Magistrates, Judges,
Burgomasters, Consuls, Citizens and Commonalties, and all other the Subjects of
the said Empire, our Faithful and beloved People, of what State, Dignity or
Condition soever, We wish Friendship, Grace, and every Good Thing. We being
admonished by many and great Reasons, and very much burdened with Our great
Age, and with continual Annoyance of our Infirmities, which has almost
overpowered Our Natural Strength, and rendered Our Body infirm, which makes Us
unfit for Business; and having long since determined, That Our Kingdom of Spain
should go to the most Serene Prince, Philip Our Son, King of Spain and England:
And having thereupon abandoned Our usual Palace, We have removed with Our Court
hither, in order with the first good Wind to embark for Spain, all things being
now ready for that purpose, so that Our Voyage can be hindered by none but God:
Wherefore by this Our Absence, the Government of the Sacred Empire belongs to
the most Serene and Potent Prince, Ferdinand King of the Romans, Hungary and
Bohemia, and Our dearest Brother, as being lawfully elected King of the Romans,
and the next uncontestable Successor after Us; the which Government has even
already many Years since, by our Assent, been managed by him, in our Name, with
great Affection, he having born the Weight of of it (for us) with a true
brotherly and kind Solicitude. That therefore the Christian Commonwealth, and
especially the Sacred Empire, may sustain no Damage (which God prevent) whilst
We are afar off; and that Our said Brother, the King of the Romans may transact
all Affairs with the greater Authority, We have resolved and declared, That as
King of the Romans, he shall have Power absolutely of himself, without Our
Concurrence to do, treat, and command all those things, which to him shall seem
necessary and convenient, to the Dignity, Profit and Increase of the sacred
Empire; in the same manner as We could have done the same as Emperor of the
Romans. In truth there is nothing which We desired so much, as to have been
present in Person in your Diet, before this Our Voyage, which is now assembled
at Ratisbonne, one of our Imperial Cities, and to have brought the Public
Affairs to their desired End, by your Advice, and then to have committed the
Government to Our Brother, the King of the Romans in it, in our stead, whereby
we might have admonished you, to pay him that Obedience, which is due to him.
But Our Indisposition of Body, which is known to all, would not suffer Us to
take so long a Journey, and especially by Land. Besides, We consider, that the
Slipping this favorable Season for Sailing, is a thing of great Consideration
-- Wherefore, we being not able personally to come to the Diet, as We desired
and determined to do; nor to bring Our Designs to their Effect: Yet We were
desirous to make known Our Affection and Devotion to you all by this Edict, and
discovery of our Mind; and thereby expressly to command all and every of you, by
the tenor of these Letters, and by the Imperial Authority, under Pain of our
greatest Indignation, That ye, as has been often said, yield to the said King
of the Romans Fidelity, Obedience and Reverence, in Our Name, and stead in all
his Edicts, Commands and Actions, and that ye do not resist or disobey him in
any thing, but observe him in all things, as You ought to do to us, if we were
present in the Empire; lest by doing otherwise, or suffering your selves to be
persuaded to the contrary, you do excite and procure Our greatest Indignation.
And this is Our express and last Will. Given under our Seal at Sudbury in
Zealand, the seventh Day of September, in the Year of our Lord 1556, and in the
thirty sixth Year of our Empire. I have sought up and transcribed this rare
Piece from the Italian Copy, in Alfonso Volla, in his Life of Charles V. It was
penned in Latin, but I could no where find the Latin Copy, and perhaps it was
never printed, at least I am sure it is very scarce; and not likely to be ever
used again by any Prince, till Time shall be no more.

The Emperor knew very well, The Emperor's Ambassadors to the Electoral
Princes.
says Thuanus, that next to God, the Right of Electing and Receiving the
Resignation or Surrender of the Empire, was in the seven Electoral Princes, and
that without their Consent and Authority this could not be done; and to dispose
them to approve and allow this Act of his, he had appointed William of Nassaw
Prince of Orange, George Sigismond, Seldius Vice Chancellor of the Empire, and
Wolfang Haler, one of his Secretaries of State, to be his Ambassadors to them:
But a War soon after breaking out between the King of France and his Son King
Philip, by the breach of the late Truce, it was two Years ere that Command of
his took its effect.

In the mean time John Archbishop of Trier, of the Family of the Counts of
Isemburg, died, and John Laien succeeded him; and Adolph Archbishop of Cologne
was succeeded by Anthony his Brother.

The Emperor set sail the fifteenth of September, with a Fleet of sixteen
Spanish, The Emperor sets sail for Spain.
and twenty Flemmish Ships, all Men of War, besides the Admiral, in which he
and his two Sisters went. At Portsmouth seven English Ships joined him, and at
the Isle of Wight seven more. He arrived safely at Laredo, a Port in Biscaye,
where he was entertained by a great concourse of the Nobility, and Deputies of
the Cities of the Kingdom of Spain. So soon as ever he set his Foot upon the
Shore, he prostrated himself upon the Earth, and kissing it he said, Hail my
beloved Mother, His Speech at his landing.
naked came I out of my Mother's Womb, and now I return naked to thee again, as
to another Mother; and here I consecrate and give to thee my Body and my Bones,
which is all the Acknowledgment I can give for all thy numerous Benefits
bestowed upon me. His next care was to make a formal and a public Renunciation
of the Kingdom of Spain to his Son Philip, in this great Assembly. After this
he spent two Days at Valladolid with his Grandson Don Carolo, instructing that
unfortunate Prince in the Rules of Glory and Virtue; and doubtless it was a
noble Lecture which so great a Prince, like another Patriarch, made to his
supposed Heir.

From hence this Glorious Prince retired to a Place he had chosen, The
description of the Place in which he lived.
to spend the remainder of his Life, being a Valley in the Borders of Spain and
Portugal; equally Delightful for the Temper of the Air, and the Pleasant Crown
of Hills which incircled it, and supposed to be the Place where the famous
Sertorius was basely murdered. It is well watered with Springs and Rivolets,
and rarely Fruitful, and lies about eight Spanish Miles from Placentia, a City
of the Kingdom of Leon, by the Town of Scaradilla; this Place he had remarked
in Hunting, and had ordered a small Apartment of seven Rooms, fourteen Foot
square to be built for him; and here he lived with twelve Servants, and one
Horse for his own use, having reserved an hundred thousand Crowns for his
Subsistence, which was not over well paid neither, spending his Time in the
innocent Arts of Grafting, Gardning, and Reconciling the Differences of his
Clocks, which yet he could never make to strike together; and therefore ceased
to wonder, He had not been able to make Men agree in the Nicities of Religion.

Here he first heard of the breach of Truce between his Son and the King of
France; and though he was something concerned at it, Thuanus.
yet he concluded the Rashness of the Old doting Pope, and the Perfidy of the
Caraffa's would end in the Ruin of the Prosperity of France, as it came
afterward to pass.

The last Day of October (says the great Thuanus) John Sleidan, John Sleidan's
Death and Character.
when he had brought down his History to that time, with an exact Faith and
Diligence, dyed of the Plague at Strasburg, in the one and fiftieth Year of his
Age. He was born at Sleidan, a Town in the Dukedom of Juliers, near Dueren, and
from thence he took his Name; a Person, who for his Learning and great
Experience in Affairs was much esteemed by that Age: He had spent the greatest
part of his Youth in France; and being entertained in the Family of Bellay, had
both learned and done great things in the Service of Cardinal John Du Bellay;
but a sharp Persecution arising in France against those that were suspected of
Lutheranisme, he went and lived at Strasburg, and served that Free City, and
being by his own Employments much informed of the Carriage of Affairs, he added
to what he had seen, what he had learned from Men worthy of Credit, and wrote
his Book of Commentaries.

Paul IV had succeeded Marcellus, a short lived Pope, the twenty sixth of May,
Natura iracundus and pene implacabilis. Natalis Comes. Paul IV a furious
Harebrained Prince.
in the Year 1555, as John Sleidan has set forth in his last Book; he was a Man
of a Furious and unquiet temper, and made it his great Design to raise the Sea
of Rome to its former Greatness and Authority; but not considering the present
state of things, mistook his Measures: The Submission of England had raised in
him extravagant Hopes of Reducing Germany too, under his Obedience; but then
the Peace of Religion appeared so contrary to that Design, that it irritated
him to the utmost, and he threatened the King of the Romans and the Emperor,
That in a short time he would make them know, to their Sorrow, how much they
had offended him, if they did not prevent it by revoking and disallowing the
things they had granted. That he might have no occasion to proceed as he
intended to do, not only against the Lutherans, but even against them too, as
Abettors of them. But all this Ranting Zeal missing its due Effect he began his
Revenges on King Philip, the Son of the Emperor, who was the best Friend that
See had then in Christendom, by denying to admit him to the Kingdom of Naples.

Marc Antony Colonna, a Favorite of Philip King of Spain, had about this time
dispossessed Ascanius his Father, who was a Subject of the Popes, but had a
great Estate in the Kingdom of Naples, of all that lay in that Kingdom upon
pretense that he was infected with Heresy, that he favored the French
Interest against the Emperor, and that he lived a dissolute Life: And the
Accusation had been countenanced and encouraged by King Philip to that height,
that the Father, as much as in him lay, at his Death disinherited his Son,
giving his Estates in the Papacy to the Sea of Rome, and those in the Kingdom
of Naples to Victoria his Daughter, the Wife of Garzia de Toledo. This was made
the Pretense of the ensuing War between the Pope and the King of Spain, into
which the French and English were drawn too, and all Christendom almost
imbroiled again.

The Pope however, considering that he was not able to deal alone with so
Potent a Prince as King Philip, under pretense of sending Cardinal Caraffa into
France, to congratulate the five Years Truce, employed his Interest with the
King of France, to persuade him to break his Faith so lately given, and to
renew the War with Philip. The Pope had before, upon several Pretenses, clapped
up the leading Cardinals, and great Men of the Spanish Faction: And when the
King, with all the Respect his Zeal for that See could inspire him with, by his
Ambassador, desired the Discharge of these Prisoners, and the Restitution of
Marc Antony Colonna to his Fathers Estate and Castles in the Papacy, the angry
Pope Replied, That he had Authority and Right to punish his Subjects for their
Offenses. And commanded his Ambassador to write to his Master, not to meddle
with what did not belong to him, and that he should permit him as Pope, to
exercise his Sovereignty freely on his own Subjects. And accordingly he seized
all Colonna's Castles and Estates in the Dominions of the Church, pretending to
revenge the Wrongs he had done to Ascanius his innocent Father, with the
consent of his Mother, who was also severely treated by the Pope; and not
contented with all this, he declared the Kingdom of Naples forfeited to the Sea
of Rome, because King Philip had neglected the Payment of eight thousand Crowns
due as a yearly Tribute for that Kingdom, He annexes the Kingdom of Naples to
the Sea of Rome.
and now many Years in Arrear; whereupon his Holiness published an Edict, by
which he annexed that Kingdom, as forfeited to the Sea of Rome; and began to
fortify Paliano a City of Champagna di Roma, thirty miles from Rome to the
East, and put a thousand French into it for a Garrison, which the more
exasperated the King of Spain.

The Duke de Alva, who was then Viceroy of Naples, did all that was possible
to mitigate the Pope; The Duke de Alva begins a a War upon the Papacy.
but his Submissions and Protestations more incensed him, his Flatterers
persuading him they proceeded more from Fear than a Reverence of the Holy See,
which he so much pretended. Whereupon the Viceroy raised twelve thousand Foot
and fifteen hundred Horse, and entering the Popes Territories, he took Ponte
Corvo, upon the River Garigliano, one of the Pope's Towns, in the Borders of
Terra di Lavoro, without resistance, and after that Frusilione, the Pope's
Forces flying out of it in the Night. Hereupon the Pope also levied ten
thousand Italian Foot and seven hundred Horse, to which he added two thousand
Gascoigners, which were old Soldiers, sent him by the King of France; and
imprisoned one Lofredo, who was sent by the Duke de Alva to persuade the Pope
to a Peace, before the War was begun, and staid at Rome for the Pope's Answer.

The Duke de Alva, hearing this, presently marched to Anagni, another City in
the same Province, Anagni taken.
which the Pope had made his Magazine; but here meeting some Resistance, he sat
down before it, and sent the Duke of Toledo to take Veruli, in which he found
some Difficulty, which he revenged by plundering the Town: Another of his
Commanders took Babuco, and beat out the Pope's Forces; the other Places made
no resistance. In the interim, the Walls of Anagni being ruined, the Governor
in the nightime blew up the Powder and fled, and left the City to the Mercy
of the Spaniards, who plundered it with great Security.

Whilst this was doing, Commilo Orsino fortified Rome, and prepared it for a
Siege, by cutting down all the Trees, Rome prepared for a Siege.
and destroying all the Houses, Walls, Gardens and Vineyards about it, to the
Damage of ten millions of Crowns; which enforced the Citizens to seek all the
means that were possible to prevent this Devastation and Ruin, but in vain;
and there was no less Care taken of the Castle of S. Angelo, five Bastions and
a Counterscharpe being added to its former Works. But when the Noise of the
taking Anagni and the other Towns came to Rome, nothing could consolate the
Citizens, but fearing another Sack like that of Bourbon in the year 1527, they
would not be quiet till the Pope sent Ambassadors to Alva to Treat of Peace.

In the mean time Alva took Valle di Montone without resistance, and finding
himself deluded with the pretense of a Treaty, he took Palestrina and Segni;
after this he marched to Tivoli, which submitted without any dispute to his
will, who received the City under his Protection, and would not suffer his
Soldiers to enter into it. Those of Vico-Varo, a strong and populous Town upon
the Teuerone, promised Orsino to defend themselves bravely; but seeing their
Fields, Gardens, Vineyards and Country Houses go to wrack, they desired Orsino
to provide for himself, who thereupon sent to Alva for leave to march away with
Drums beating and Colors flying, as if no enemy had been near, which the civil
good natured enemy granted, and thereupon he entered the Town; and though he
promised to leave but sixty Spaniards in garrison, took the liberty afterward to
do as he thought fit. This Town by reason of its Greatness, Strength and
Populousness, might have defended it self against a greater Army than that of
the Spaniards if they had had the Courage; and was surrendered very opportunely
for the Spaniard.

The Pope began to want Money, but durst ask none of the Citizens of Rome,
because they were at great charges to fortify the City: He solicited the
Venetians also, to enter into the War, but they were for a Peace between the
Parties; but then there was so much Pride on the one side, and so much Anger on
the other, that nothing could be effected. The French that were in the City
were very troublesome to the Romans for want of their pay, which occasioned
many Thefts and Robberies, and that in the day time. Alva having refreshed his
Forces a small time after the taking Vico-Varo, drew them into the Field and
took Toscolano San Marino, Grotta Ferrata and Gandolso, and from Grotta Ferrata
marched toward Ostia. The inhabitants of Nettuno submitted to him, and
defended his men against those of Velletri, who assaulted them in the Suburbs
of Nettuno. The Pope seeing his weakness, sent again to the French King to
declare a war against the Spaniards, and at last obtained his desire in that
point.

The Duke De Alva coming before Ostia (this City was heretofore a very
considerable place, but being ruined by Wars and time, and now almost desolate,
The Seige of Ostia.
though the Governor had bestowed some time and pains in fortifying it) but
however this place preserved it self and beat off the Spaniards with great loss
several times, but at last the Castle of it was taken too, after which a Truce
ensued, and Alva returned into the Kingdom of Naples with the Spanish Horse,
leaving the Foot in the Towns he had taken. The Duke of Guise was on the way
for Italy with a great supply, and the Pope in the time of the Truce, was very
earnest with the Venetians to join with him, but to no purpose. And thus stood
Affairs in the beginning of the next year in Italy.

In France, Henry the Second having been won by the Arts of Cardinal Caraffa to
break his Oath, the Admiral Coligni the Sixth of January attempted to surprise
Doway, Leus, The French Affairs.
a Town in Artois, using the people with great barbarity. In the mean time the
Duke of Guise had passed the Alps, in the depth of the winter, with an Army of
Twelve Thousand Foot and Five Thousand and Three Hundred armed Horse, and Eight
Hundred and Eight Light Horse, with which Forces he besieged Valenza, a strong
Town in the Duchy of Milan; and after he had battered it five days, Valenza
taken.
stormed and took the Town the twentieth day of January, and a few days after
the Castle. He dismantled the Town, but at the request of the Pope, he
preserved the Castle. From thence he passed into the Dukedom of Ferrara, where
he was respectively entertained by the Duke, who had declared for the Pope, but
he would not go with him to Bononia, fearing his Countries might be invaded by
the Spaniards and their Allies in his absence; but however the Duke of Guise
went thither with his Forces, where he found an hearty welcome, but no Forces
to join with him, which much displeased him.

In the mean time the Pope finding the inconvenience of having Ostia in the
enemies hands, which deprived Rome of the benefit of the Sea, Ostia retaken by
the Pope.
and sending some Forces thither, it was Surrendered, after a short defense,
upon the account of an Inundation of the River. After which the Pope recovered
most of the other Towns as easily as he had lost them.

In the Spring the Duke of Guise began the War with the Sack of Compli, a small
City of Abruzzo, The War in Italy under the Duke of Guise.
which being taken by Scalado was severely treated; the Spoil of this City was
estimated at two hundred thousand Crowns, great part of which was found in the
Ruins of the City, where it had been hid many Ages, and was unknown to the
Inhabitants. The 24 of April, the Duke of Guise sat down before Civitella, a
City of Abruzzo, built upon an high Hill, and very steep on the North, on the
top of which it had a Castle, ruined by its own Inhabitants, in the time of
Charles VIII, for fear it should have been Garrisoned by the French. This City
would not yield, and therefore the Duke of Guise was forced to stay before it
till the Cannon could be brought from Ancona and Ferrara to batter it; but when
all was done, this small place, by the nature of its situation, and the Courage
of its Inhabitants, baffled all their Attempts, and forced the French, after a
long Siege, to retire, and leave it. The Women of this Town contributed very
much to the saving of it, not only by working at the Breaches, though many of
them were slain by the Enemies Shot, but also by taking men's Clothes, and
appearing in Arms among them in the sight of the Enemy, so that the Defendants
seemed more numerous than indeed they were.

In the mean time, The Duke de Alva takes the Field.
Alva having brought an Army of 16000 Foot and 2000 Horse, consisting of
Spaniards, Germans and Italians, together with a good Train of Artillery
brought him by Sea, he marched out of Pescara, May 10, and drove the French out
of Givlia, a Sea-port-Town, about ten miles east of Civitella; whereupon the
Duke of Guise having lost above half his Army, left Civitella, the 15 of May,
when they had lain before it twenty two Days.

The Duke of Florence took the Opportunity of this distracted State of Affairs,
and by pretending he was much inclined to join with the French and Pope against
the Spaniards, which would certainly have ruined their Power in Italy, forced
King Philip to give up the City and State of Siena to him, who accordingly took
Possession of it July 19. This whole intreague is described at length by
Thuanus, but I am forced to be very short, the nature of this Supplement not
admitting such long Digressions.

Toward the latter end of the Summer, Segni taken by the Spaniards.
Segni, a strong City of Compagnia di Roma, having made the best Defense it
could, fell at last into the Hands of the Spaniards, who plundered and burnt it,
and slew the greatest part of the Inhabitants. When the Pope heard the
deplorable News of the Sack of Segni, he fell into a fit of Melancholy, and
said, He desired to be with Christ, and would with great Constancy and
Satisfaction, expect the Crown of Martyrdom,; As if (says Thuanus) this had
been the Cause of God: And that he had not been brought into this great Danger
and Trouble, by a War which his Relations had involved him in, with great
Rashness and Ambition.

Those that were about him could not forbear Smiling; and knowing very well,
That as the Pope had begun this War without Cause or Provocation, so he might
end it when he pleased upon Just and Honorable Terms, King Philip, and his
General, the Duke de Alva, being both extremely addicted to the Sea of Rome:
And therefore taking this Opportunity, they persuaded the Pope to send
Alexander Placidi, a Knight of great esteem, to the Duke of Alva, to treat
about a Peace, by whom also the Cardinal of Sanfloriano sent a private Account
of the beating the French at S. Quintin, which as it sunk the Pope's Interest,
so it raised the Spanish.

Upon this the Duke de Alva took up a Resolution to surprise the City of Rome
by Night, and treat with the Pope within the very Walls of Rome; and he came
very early in the Morning under the Walls of Rome, and found the City in a
profound Quiet, and altogether unprovided, so that in all probability he might
have surprised it without the least Resistance; but as he took an Oath of the
Captains, That they should not suffer their Soldiers to plunder or sack the
City, so it is verily thought, upon great Reasons, That his Fear the Switz and
Germans would have done this whatever he or his Officers could have done or
said to prevent it, made him stop, and by his Presence try if he could affright
the Old Pope into a Compliance. However, Thuanus is of Opinion, he truly
designed to surprise the City, but that his Heart failed him, when it came to
the Point of Execution.

At the same time there came Letters from the King of France, The Duke of Guise
recalled.
to recall the Duke of Guise into France, where his Presence was absolutely
needful, and the Pope had his Hostages returned, and was left at Liberty to
take the best care, he could of his own Affairs: Yet when the Duke of Guise
came to ask the Pope's leave to return, upon the account of the great Necessity
of his Master's Affairs, there was a sharp contest between the Duke and the
Pope, insomuch that his Holiness told the Duke, He had done very little toward
the advancing his Masters Interest, or the Good of the Church in this Voyage,
and much less for the Improvement of his own Honor and Reputation. In the mean
time the Duke de Alva withdrew his Army to the Town of Colonna.

The Duke of Florence had now obtained what he desired, A Peace between King
Philip and the Pope.
by gaining the State of Sienna, the Duke of Guise was gone for France, the
Pope's Forces were sufficiently baffled, and his Towns lay at the Mercy of the
Enemy, his Treasures were spent, and the Venetians had absolutely refused to
assist him; So that the Pope was now forced to come to a Treaty of Peace, in
good earnest, and it was well he had the King of Spain and the Duke de Alva to
treat with, considering in what State his Affairs were.

The Peace was however agreed at last, upon these Terms. I. That the Duke de
Alva, in the Name of his Master, should beg the Pope's Pardon, and it should be
granted. II. That the Pope should renounce the Amity with France. III. That the
King of Spain should restore to the Pope one hundred Towns and Castles he had
taken in this War, the same being dismantled first; and that they should
restore those Estates they had seized, to the proper owners. IV. That both
Parties should remit all Wrongs, Injuries and Losses Sustained during the War,
and Pardon all that had taken Arms on either Side: And that Paliano should be
put into the Hands of Bernardo Carbone, a Kinsman of the Caraffa's, to be kept
by him for both Parties, with a Garrison of eight hundred Men, till they should
otherwise dispose of it by mutual Consent. These Articles were publicly signed
at Cavii^
Cava the fourteenth of September; but there was a private Article signed the
same Day, That John Caraffa should have such a Recompense for Paliano as should
be adjudged an Equivalent by the Senate of Venice, who were the Arbitrators in
this Treaty. The Place meant was Rossano, a Populous and Rich City in the
Kingdom of Naples, which was to be granted to him by the King of Spain, with
the Title of a Principality, which he might transfer to whom he pleased, if not
an Enemy of the King of Spain's. That upon the delivery of this Grant and
Place, Paliano should be dismantled, and Caraffa should yield up all his Right
in it to the King of Spain, which he also might assign to whom he pleased, if
he were not Excommunicated, or the Pope's sworn Enemy; which was added to
exclude Mark Anthony Colonna, and was easily granted by the Duke de Alva, in
compliance with the Morose and Inexorable Humor (they are Thuanus's Words) of
the Old Gentleman, who would soon die, and then the King might dispose of
Paliano as he thought fit.

The Duke de Alva, in a short time after went to Rome, and on his Knees begged
the Pope's Pardon, with as much Humility as could have been wished: And the
Pope absolved him and his Master with as much Haughtiness as ever need to have
been used.

The great Desire I had to lay all this Italian War together, has made me omit
some things that happened in the former Year, Francis Venero, Duke of Venice,
to whom succeeded Laurentius Prioli, a Learned, Wise, Eloquent and Magnificent
Gentleman; so that for many Years after his Death, the Venetians regretted the
Loss of him, and wished for such another.

In England the Persecution was so far from extirpating the Reformation, The
Affairs of England.
that it made it spread; but the Quarrels at Frankford, among our English
Exiles, about the Liturgy, had a more Pestilent Influence upon that Religion
then, and in after Times, than the former had. The Queen, in the mean time was
very busy in raising the Religious Houses, and had nothing to disgust her,
till the breaking off of the Truce between her Husband and the King of France,
which very much afflicted her every way.

The Duke of Guise shipped his Men at Civita Vechia for France, and himself
took Posthorses, and went by Land. The Cardinal of Caraffa went soon after,
the Pope's Nuntio, to King Philip, and Augustino Trivultio, to the King of
France, to procure a Peace between those two Potent Princes, who had been
engaged in this War by the Pope and his Relations.

In the Interim the Duke of Ferrara was exposed to the Resentment of King
Philip, Ferrara rescued from Ruin by the Duke of Florence.
and had certainly been ruined, if the Prudence of Cosmo Duke of Florence had
not prevented it: First, by sending slow and small Supplies against the Duke of
Ferrara, and then by maintaining and fomenting Differences between the Spanish
Commanders at last, by representing to the Duke de Alva, who visited him at
Legorn, That the King of Spain had no other way of settling his Affairs in
Italy, than by quieting those Commotions his just Resentment against the Duke
of Ferrara, had raised: That all Italy being weary of Wars, promised themselves
a Peace would follow upon the Victory of that Prince; but now, if he should go
on to make one War the cause of another, he must expect to lose their
Affections; and that mere Desparation would enforce them to take other
Measures, and seek new Allies and new Counsels. This convinced that Duke, That
it was his Master's Interest to make a Peace with Ferrara, because then there
would be neither Prince nor Commonwealth in Italy, that would have any
dependence upon France.

Our Author John Sleidan has only given us the Letter or Speech which began the
Diet at Ratisbonne, The Diet of Ratisbonne.
but dyed before he could give us any account of the Transactions there: After
they had consulted of those things which related to the State, and the Turkish
War, there arose some debate concerning the composing the Differences of
Religion. And here it was first agreed, That all that had been done in the
Treaty of Passaw, and the Diet of Ausburg, concerning the Peace of Religion,
should remain firm and immovable. But then those of the Augustane Confession,
presented to King Ferdinand, by their Deputies, a Protestation, in Writing, to
this purpose.

That King Ferdinand had performed a most useful Office, A Remonstrance of the
Protestant Princes.
for the good of Christendom, by settling a Peace, in the Matters of Religion,
between the Princes and the States of Germany: But then he had annexed a
Limitation, which was very Grievous, That no Archbishop, Bishop, Abbat, or
other Ecclesiastical Person, should receive the Augustane Confession, but that
he should resign his Office, and be deprived of the Revenues thereunto
belonging. That those of the Augustane Confession did not consent to this
Limitation, nor can they now consent to it; because this was a denying them the
Benefit of embracing the Saving and True Doctrine of the Gospel, by which not
only the Bishops but their Subjects too, were driven out of the Kingdom of God,
which was not fit to be done. Besides, it was a Reproach to their Religion, to
suffer those who should embrace the Augustane Confession, to be judged unworthy
of the Sacred Ministry: And therefore they could not approve this Restriction
in the Diet of Ausburg, without doing Injury to the Glory of God and their own
Consciences; neither can they now consent to it. That this Limitation was an
Hindrance to the so much desired Union of Religion, seeing thereby the Bishops
were deprived of the Liberty of speaking their Minds freely in Matters of
Religion, because they should thereby forfeit their Office and Revenues, if
they approved of the True Religion. That on the contrary, the Peace would be
much stronger between the Princes and States of the Empire, if Religion were
perfectly Free. That therefore the Electors, Princes and States, who had
embraced the Augustane Confession, desired now (as they had also formerly done
in the Diet of Ausburg) That this grievous Limitation and Restriction might be
abolished; and that it might be free for all Ecclesiastical Persons to embrace
the Augustane Confession, and suffer their Subjects to embrace it. That they of
the Augustane Confession did not by this, desire that the Revenues of the
Church should be dissipated, or turned to Profane Uses, or annexed to certain
Families; but they would take great Care to prevent these Inconveniences, and
do their utmost in it. And that by this means the true Intention of the
Founders should be observed, though the Profession of the True Religion should be
permitted, for it was, without doubt, their Design, to have the Pious and
Sincere Service and Worship of God Promoted and Settled, though they erred in
their Choice. That the Electors, Princes and States, aforesaid, would suffer
the Public and Civil Business of the Empire to be dispatched in this Diet at
Ratisbonne; but then they had commanded them, their Deputies, not to give any
consent to any thing, till the said Limitation were taken away: But then, if it
was once Abolished and Repealed, they were ready and willing to assist and
promote the Public Affairs in this Diet, to the utmost of their Abilities.

This Protestation or Remonstrance was very often renewed afterward in several
of their Dyets; but being always opposed by the Princes of the opposite
Religion, and by the Emperors, it could never be obtained; because they ever
thought, That the granting this Liberty, would end in the Rnine of the Roman
Catholic Religion. On the other side, those of that Religion wrote sharply
against the Peace of Religion, as it was then established by the Treaty of
Passaw, and the Diet of Ausburg, calling it a Lawless Confusion; and in
private, saying, That as it was obtained by a War, so it must by a War be
revoked.

In the Year 1556, the Thirty first of July, Ignatius Loyola, the Founder of
the Order of Jesuits, died, in the Sixty fifth year of his Age. He was born in
Spain, and at first served as a Soldier; which Employment he deserted in the
Year 1521, upon a Wound received at Pampelune. In the Year 1528 he began to
gather Companions. In the Year 1534 or 35 this Order was first framed by him;
and in the Year 1609 he was Canonized by Pope Paul IV. And (as Petavius says)
it was confirmed by Paul III, in 1540, the Twenty seventh of September. James
Lainez, a Spaniard, was this Year his Successor, and the second General of that
Order; which had then obtained One hundred Colleges in several Parts of
Christendom, as one of that Society assures us.

In the beginning of this year, Albert the Son of Casimir Marquis of
Brandenburg, Germany, to defend his Case; Albert Marquis of Brandenburg dies.
and sojourning then with Charles Marquis of Baden, at Pforzheim, in
Schwartzwalt, being extremely worn out with the Troubles of his Affairs, and a
Disease which sprung from the Intemperance of his former Life, died the Eighth
Day of January. This Prince was an Illustrious Example of the Instability of
Human Greatness, and of the Divine Justice: For He that was once surrounded
with so many Thousands of Fighting Men, that his Name was terrible to all Men,
and almost the whole German Empire lay exposed to his Ravage, at last, by a
change of his Fortunes, was deserted by all Men, and now ended his Life in
great Misery and Poverty; being despised by his very Enemies, as the great
Thuanus represents it.

The Eleventh of March the Diet, began at Ratisbonne the last year, was ended.
In it there was a Decree of Recess made, That a Friendly Conference should be
held the Fourteenth of August at Worms, for the putting an End to the
Differences of Religion: That a double Supply of Eight Months should be granted
to King Ferdinaud, to enable him to carry on the War against the Turks: That
the Peace of Religion, and that of the State, should be preserved with great
and exact care; and for the Renewing the Imperial Chamber of Spire, which is
the Supreme Court of the Empire.

In April died John Count Palatin of Simeren, President of the said Imperial
Chamber, and the Father of Frederick, who about two years after succeeded Otho
Henry in the Palatinate of the Rhine. He was a Prince of great Learning, and
managed this Trust with the highest Commendations both for his Prudence and
Justice.

Soon after the great Controversy between the Families of Nassaw and Hesse,
The County of Catzenellobogen settled by Agreement.
which had been depending Fifty Years, and is often mentioned by Sleidan
concerning the County of Catzenellobogen was friendly ended at Frankfort upon
the Main, by the Interposition and Mediation of Otho Henry and Augustus
Electors, William Duke of Cleves, and others, who were made Judges in this
Affair for both Parties, the Landgrave of Hesse by their award retaining that
County, upon paying to William Prince of Orange 1600 Crowns, and resigning up
to him the Earldom of Diez for 1050 Crowns.

When the time of the Conference appointed by the Diet drew near, the Divines
who were of the Agustane Confession, had a Meeting at Frankford on the Main,
the First of August, to adjust their own private Differences before they entered
into a Conference with the Roman Catholics; The Conference at Worms.
so that this latter was not begun till the beginning of September. At the
opening of it, Julius Pflug, Bishop of Naumburg, who was President in this
Conference, desired those of the Augustane Confession, that they would in the
first place show openly their Disagreement with, and Detestation of the
Zuinglians, Osiandrians, Synergists, and Adiaphorists: Because the Peace of
Religion was only granted to those of the Augustane Confession by the Diet, and
this Conference was appointed with none but them, and the Emperor besides knew
that most of them had Orders to do this: That therefore some benefit at least
might result from this Conference, they would once for all, by a common
consent, condemn these Errors, and there would be much less danger and
difficulty in the rest. The younger Ministers and Deputies of Saxony easily
assented, and producing their Instructions, were very forward to separate the
Augustane Confession from these Errors. But Philip Melancthon (an old wise Man,
who saw the drift of this cunning Gamester) said the Examination and
Explication of their several Doctrins ought to go before the Determination and
Condemnation of them; and that till this was done, they ought not to be
condemned. The Roman Catholics, who were weary of the Conference, thereupon
would go no further in it, till they had given an Account of this to the
Emperor. Ferdinand commanded them to go on, and said it was enough if in the
Progress of the Conference, when they had explained the several Articles, they
did at last remark what was disallowed, by the common consent, in each of them.
But the Bishop of Naumburg refusing to go on, except he were first certain of
the Faith of those he was to dispute with, the Conference broke up without
effect, when there had only been some Papers exchanged between them concerning
the Rule of Judging Controversies and Original Sin. And all the blame was by
the Roman Catholics thrown upon the Divisions which were among them. Thus far
Thuanus.

Now the design of this Condemnation was a Division of the Protestant Interest;
that whereas they were too many for the Romau Catholics while they were
united, they might h^ave the Consent of those of the Augustane Confession to
ruin the Zuinglians, and then they should, with the less difficulty, extirpate
by the Sword the Lutherans too; and in the mean time they knew very well they
were never able to convince them by a Disputation, when it was utterly
impossible they should ever agree about the Rule that was to end these
Differences; the Roman Catholics Assigning the perpetual Consent of the
Church: And the Lutherans, the Old and New Testaments, and the Ancient Creeds;
and allowing no other Writings but as far as they agreed with these, some Ages
being purer than others. Certainly no wise Man of either Side ever did think
that any of these Conferences could put an end to these Controversies; though
they have made use of them to promote by Ends. And that Side that was
uppermost, has ever yet reaped the Advantage; and so it will be, till God
himself put an End to this Controversy.

But to return now to the War between France and Spain. The War between France
and Spain.
The Truce being broken by the Attempt upon Doway, which I have mentioned
already; the War went heavily on, because the Flower of the Nobility and Gentry
were gone with the Duke of Guise into Italy, which had much dispirited and
weakened France. And the Duke de Montmorancy, who from the beginning had a great
Aversion for this War, which he foresaw would end in the Ruin of France, was
more intent in levying Soldiers to defend the Borders of the Netherlands, than
in prosecuting the War against King Philip, and Invading his Dominions. In the
mean time, Queen Mary of England, Queen Mary joins with Spain.
being over-persuaded by King Philip her Husband, and disposed to it by the
Arts of Dr. Wotton, who was then her Ambassador in France, and by his Nephew,
who found the French were well disposed to a Rupture with England, if Calice
might be the Prince of it, she I say entered into the War too, and sent an
Herald to the French Court with a Declaration to that purpose, who delivered it
the Seventh of June. The French King took no less care to raise a War between
England and Scotland, by way of Diversion, Mary the Queen of Scotland being
before this sent into France to be married to the Dauphin, his Eldest Son. So
that he thought he had now a Right to Command that Nation to espouse his
Quarrel; but the Scotch Nobility thought otherwise, and would not Engage in a
War against England, when they had no interest of their own to do it.

The Spaniards were all this while intent in providing Men and Arms, and the
Twenty fifth of July attacked the Fort of Rocroy, in the Borders of Champagne
and Hainalt, four Leagues from Maribourg to the South; but finding there a
greater Resistance than they expected, they marched away toward Picardy with
an Army of Thirty five thousand Foot, and Twelve thousand Horse. The Body of
the French Army being but Eighteen thousand Foot, and Five thousand Horse, and
for the most part, both Sides Germans; so that the French thought it their
Interest to coast along by the Enemy, and defend their Borders, and cover their
Towns, which was all they could safely do in this inequality of Forces. There
was then a very small Garrison in St. Quintin, The Siege of St. Quintin.
under the Command of Charles de Teligny, Captain of the Troop of Guards
belonging to the Dauphin; but the Army coming suddenly before it, the Sieur de
Coligny the President of Picardy, put himself into the place with some few
Forces, and sent to Montmorancy to come up and succor him. This was
disapproved by those about him as Dangerous, and if things succeeded not,
Dishonorable. In the beginning of the Siege, Teligny was slain in a Sally, by
Engaging imprudently beyond his Orders, who was a Person of great Courage and
Strength, Industry and Fidelity, and an Experienced Commander. And Andelot, The
Battle of St. Quintin.
who was sent by Coligny to bring Two thousand Foot into the Town, was, by a
mistake of his Guides, misled, and falling into the Trenches of the Besiegers,
he was slain, and most of his Men cut off; and Montmorancy, attempting to
relieve the same place, was beaten also, and lost Two thousand five hundren
Men, and himself was taken Prisoner. This Battle had a fatal effect upon
France; for it made the Life of Henry II ever after Unfortunate, and reducing
France to the necessity of a dishonorable Peace, it became the occasion of the
Civil Wars which followed, to the great hazard of the Ruin of that Potent
Kingdom, and may serve as an Example to Princes, not to violate their Faith,
whoever dispense with it.

Montmorancy was from the beginning averse to this War, Montmorancy ruined by
being taken Prisoner.
and foretold the ill Consequences of it; as he was an old, experienced, wise
Commander, and a great Lover of his Country, so till then he had lived in great
Power, and enjoyed the Favor of his Prince; but now when his good Fortune left
him, he lost the good Esteem and Regards of all Men; which from thence forward
were conferred upon the Duke of Guize, who employed them to the damage of
France, The News of this Victory filled France with Terror and Sorrow, and the
Netherlands with Joy and Courage. The Duke of Nevers, and some others of the
principal French Commanders however escaped.

If the Victorious Army had forthwith marched to Paris, they might have taken
it; but King Philip was resolved to hazard nothing, but commanded his Army to
go on with the Siege of St. Quintin; and the King of France leaving Compeigne,
where he then was, and going to Paris, so quieted the Minds of the People by
his Presence and good Words, that things began to settle, and the fear in a
short time to abate.

Coligny kept the Townsmen of St. Quintin two days in Ignorance of this Loss,
and when they came to hear of it, though he saw the Town would at last be
taken, yet he persuaded them to hold it out to the last, that so the King might
have time to recollect his Forces, and be in a condition to oppose the
Victorious Enemy. Another of the Andelot's got into the Town, with about Five
hundred Chosen Men, and some few Volunteers of the Nobility; but when all was
done, King Philip coming in Person into the Camp, and the Siege being carried
on with great diligence, the Town was taken by Storm the 27th of August, The
Day of the Battle.
and Coligny and Andelot became Prisoners too, and the latter was wounded. At
this Siege there was Eight thousand English employed, who did great Service;
but finding themselves ill used after the Town was taken, they returned to
Calis. St. Quintin taken by Storm.
There were above Four hundred French Soldiers slain in this Town, and Three
hundred taken Prisoners; and more had perished, if King Philip, who was
present, had not entered the City, and by Proclamation restrained the fury of
his own Soldiers, to whom he granted the Plunder of the Town, which was great,
and took particular care that those who had not been concerned in the danger of
the Storming the Town, might have no share in the Plunder of it.

Soon after this Victory, King Philip sent an Express to the late Emperor
Charles his Father, who was then in his private Retirement in Spain, desiring
him to send his Advice how to proceed; the wise and good Prince returned him an
Answer to this purpose, as the Great Thuanus relates it. A Letter of Charles V,
to his Son Philip.
Though this Retreat gives me the utmost security, yet I received the Account
of your Victory with a joyful and a pleased Mind; and I congratulate the happy
and fortunate Beginnings of my beloved Sons Reign; and I render to God Almighty
my humblest and devoutest Thanks and Praises, who has not suffered the Persidy
of his Enemies to go long unpunished, but has thus suddenly chastised the
Truce Breakers both in Italy, and on the Borders of the Netherlands. For though
my mind foretold me it would come so to pass, and I comforted my self with that
hope, yet I was vexed that just at that time, when I had restored Christendom
to her Peace, and was going to compose my Soul in Peace, all things should of a
sudden be filled with an unexpected War and Tumult. But then as to the Advice
my Son desires from me, he is not to expect it either now or hereafter. He has
with him many grave and wise Men of an approved Fidelity, and bred up to
Business during my Reign, whose Counsel I would take if I were now at the Helm.
Let him consult with these Men, and well considering the weight of their
Reasons, after he has first implored the Divine Assistance and Grace, let him
determine what is best to be done. This Wise Prince would neither put himself
to the Trouble of considering what was best to be done, nor his Son to that of
approving what perhaps he would not have liked, or of rejecting the Counsels of
a Father, which would have been dishonorable to both. He had been so long a
Sovereign, that he knew the Thoughts and Tenderness of a Princes Heart, and
could distinguish between Civility nnd reality. And which was most of all, he
was really, and not pretendedly Dead to the World.

The Germans tumultuously demanded their Pay, after the Victory; the English
also desired leave to return, pretending they had been ill used, and the King
was forced to grant their Request, to prevent worse Consequences; So that in a
short time this victorious Army moulder'd to nothing, though his Captains did
what they could to persuade him to keep his Army up. And, which was yet worse,
many of the Germans passed over to the French, and helped to fill up their
Numbers; so that King Philip took only Castelet, Han, Chaulnes and Noyon, all
small Places, and this last by Surprise too. And then, in the latter end of
October, was forced to withdraw his Army into the Low Countries, having in the
mean time fortified S. Quintin, Han and Chaulnes to preserve them.

Whilst the Spanish Army was thus mouldering away and dispersing, the French
King was every Day increasing his. The French Army grows great.
He had sent for six thousand Switz, which were coming out of Piedmont, his
German Supplies were come, as far as Is Sur Tille, near Dijon; And the Duke of
Guise was every Day expected out of Italy, with the Forces under his Command,
who was sent for, presently after the Defeat of S. Quintin, and was now on the
Road with the Duke de Aumale his Brother. And the Duke of Nevers was
strengthening Compeigne with a Royal Fort, by the King's Order.

The Duke of Guise, upon his arrival at S. Germain, was honorably received,
and declared General of the Landforces, which had till then, from the taking
of Montmorencey been in the Hands of the Duke of Nevers. A Persecution in
France.


The Disorder of the War diverted Men from the Thoughts of Persecuting the
Protestants in France, so that now they grew and multiplied very much, even in
Paris. The fifth of November, in the Evening, there was a great number of these
met in a Place called Bertomier, in S. James-street, to perform the Offices of
Religion, and to receive the Lord's Supper after their way. This being
discovered by some, that lived near that place, they provided good quantities
of Stones, in the neighboring houses, and their Arms ready in the Street; and
when in the dead of the Night the Meeting broke up, they that first went out
had Stones thrown at them; and a Tumult thereupon arising, a vast number of the
Rabble at that Signal, came running together, and attempted to break into the
House; they that were yet in the House, advised by their Danger, drew their
Swords, and issued out, and all of them, except one (who was slain in the
Crowd) made their escape though some were wounded. The Women, and others, who
were less able to shift, to the number of one hundred and twenty, rendered
themselves to Jean Martignon, the then Sheriff, who, when it was now Day,
carried them to Prison, the People being hardly kept from pulling them in
Pieces, by the Constables and their Guards. Thereupon there were diverse Rumors
spread abroad concerning this Meeting, as is usual in New and Odious
Occurrences: The misrepresentations of the Roman Catholics against the
Protestants.
That this Rabble met in a Chamber in the Night, to Eat and play the Whore, and
that after the Supper was over, they committed promiscuous Villainies, the
Mother lying with the Son, the Father with his Daughter, and the Sister with
her Brother; That the Tables and Provisions were found, and that the Carpets
and Tapesteries had still upon them the Marks of these Villainies: And because
this was not enough, they added, to enrage the Multitude yet more against them;
that they had Communicated in the Blood of a Child. This Account was given to
the King, but without any Author to justify it; but then no Man daring neither
to contradict it, for fear of being taken for an Heretic; those that were of
the Religion, wrote a small Piece, which they called an Apology, in which they
show, That the Crimes thus laid to their Charge were mere Slanders, and they
cited Passages out of the Fathers of the Church, to show that the same
Forgeries had been made use of by the Pagans against the Primitive Christians;
and that they might be sure it might come to the King's Hands, they got it
conveyed into his Bedchamber; which Book was afterward answered by Anthony de
Mouchy, a Divine, and the chief of the Inquisitors, and by Robert Cenali,
Bishop of Auranches.

Jean Munier, Recorder of Paris, was appointed to examine the Prisoners, who
reporting their Answers to the Parliament, Nich. Client, a Saintonian, who had
been a Schoolmaster many Years in Paris, and was now in the sixtieth Year of
his Age, Taurin Gravelle, an Advocate i nthe Parliament of Paris, and
Phillippina Lunia of rigort, the Relict of one Graveron, a Gentleman, who was
dead, were all condemned the fourteenth of September, and the two first were
burnt alive, but the latter was first strangled. And four Days after Nich. Le
Cene, a Physician of Normandy, and Peter Gambara of Poictou were burnt. Francis
Rebeziers, born at Stafort in Condomois, and Frederick Danville of Olerone in
Bearne, were led with an Iron Ball in their Mouths to the Place of Execution,
where they were hanged, and their Bodies burned to Ashes. When they were now
going to proceed against the rest, a Noble Matron, which was among the
Prisoners, offered a Petition to the Parliament, excepting therein against
several of the Judges, and offering many Reasons in her Petition, which ought
not to be neglected, to have them set by, and some others to be appointed in
their stead at the Trial: Whil the Parliament were considering what they ought
to do as to this Petition, there came Envoys from the Switz and Protestant
Princes in Germany, to desire the King not to proceed against a Company of
miserable People, who were of the same Religion with themselves. And thereupon
the Affairs of Philip being then in great Prosperity, and those of France in a
declining Condition; and the King needing the Assistance of the Switz and
Protestant Princes of Germany, for the Recovery of his Country, he suffered the
Parliament to act more mildly with them: So some of them were dismissed, others
turned over to the Ecclesiastical Courts, where by the Revocation of the
Sentence, they escaped Death. Rantigny and Champagne, two married Ladies, were
given to their Husbands, who were very averse to that Religion, and Ovarty,
another Lady, was given into the Hands of Queen Catherine.

The King of France published an Edict the seventeenth of May, commanding all
Bishops and their Curates to reside upon their Benefices, and to preach to the
People, or to appoint others in their stead, who should do so, upon pain of
being deprived of the Profits of their Cures. There had been a Law published to
the same purpose by Lewis XI, the thirteenth of January 1476, which was now
revived, Men judging that Preaching was a likelier way to fix Men in their
Religion than Fire and Faggot. But, however, this Edict was not much regarded
by the Clergy of France, who were then as Unlearned and Ignorant, as they were
Cruel and Bloody.

The Army belonging to King Philip, being, as I have said, dissipated, The
Siege of Calais.
or put into Winter Quarters, and that of France growing daily greater, it was
taken into Consideration, How they should employ that chargable Body of Men,
though the Winter was then in its greatest Rigor. The first Debate was,
Whether they should attempt the Recovery of S. Quintin, and the other Places
that were lost, or enter upon some new Enterprise; and here they resolved upon
the latter, and the Reduction of Calais having been proposed by Senarpont,
Governor of Boulogne, in the latter End of the Summer, if the Misfortune of S.
Quintin had not broke their Measures, they presently resolved to reassume that
interrupted Design. A part of their Forces marched under the Duke of Nevers,
pretending they intended to attack Luxemburg and Arlon. Another Part under the
Duke of Guise, (who was now General of all the French Forces) pretended to
block up S. Quintin, and the other Places that were lost. Nevers having passed
through the Territory of Argone, came to Stenay, a Town in the Dukedom of
Lorain, and having staid there a short time, suddenly sends his part of the
Army to join the Duke of Guise, who lay then at Amiens, who presently marched
away for Boulogne, as if he had been solicitous for the Preservation of it, but
suddenly wheeling about, the first of January, Newnham-bridge, a Fort seated a
mile from the Town of Calais, which commanded the Avenues to the Land-ward:
There was another called Risbank, which lay near to the Town, and commanded the
Harbor on the North of the Town, and upon these two Forts the greatest part of
the Security of Calais depended.

The Lord Wentworth was then Governor of the Town, but the Garrison was not
above five hundred Men, and there were not above two hundred Townsmen, able to
bear Arms; so that the Duke of Guise sending three thousand Musketeers, and
the Soldiers of Newnham-fort, having made one improsperous Sally against them,
and not being relieved by the Governor, the Cannon was brought up against it,
which began to batter it the next Morning. The Duke of Guise knew very well the
whole stress of the Success lay in the celerity of his Actions, and
accordingly, the next Day, attacked the Fort of Risbank too, which were both
yielded the same Day, by the order of the Governor.

The Town of Calais is seated in a Plain, The Site of Calais.
and on three Sides of it is almost inaccessible, by reason of the River Hames,
part of which fills its Dikes, which are Great and Deep, and the rest falls,
with several other small Rivers into the Haven, on the west Side of the Town.
Its Form is Square, and at three of its Corners, it has Royal Bastions, and the
fourth, which is toward the South, has an Ancient but strong Castle for its
Defense; besides, it has a strong Bulwork of Earth, which is very high and
thick, but is of so sandy a nature (as the French found after this, to their
Damage) that the force of a Cannon scattered it like dust. The Rivers and
Marshes encompassing the Town on all Sides, there was no Passage to it but by a
Causey from the Fort of Newnham, nor was it possible for any Ship to enter the
Town, but what passed under the Fort of Risbank, so that these two Forts were
the great Securities of the Town, which were both now in the Hands of the
French; after which they lodged on the Causey and Banks twenty Foot Companies,
and one German Regiment, and one thousand one hundred Horse: The Marshal de
Terms secured the Way leading to Guines, with the rest of the Horse and the
Switz. The fifth of January they began to batter the River-gate with four whole
Cannon; and three hundred Culverins were employed against the other parts of
the Walls and Bulworks, but their main Battery was against the River-gate,
whilst the English drew almost all their Forces on this Side; the Gate and some
of the next Towers being much battered, the Duke of Guise ordered fifteen
Cannon suddenly to be planted against the Castle, the Walls of which were not
faced with Earth within; this Battery was played with that Fury, that the Noise
of the Cannon was heard as far as Antwerp, which is thirty three German Miles
to the North: A great Breach being made there, Andelot was commanded to pass
the River, and lodge himself upon the other Side with one thousand two hundred
Musketeers; after this they drew the Water out of the Town-Dike, which was
thought by the English the greatest defense they had, and by pitched Hurdles
they laid a Passage over the muddy Dikes and marshy Grounds for the Soldiers,
and secured the Foot from the Annoyance of the Small-shot by other Hurdles
about half a foot thick, which had Stakes fenced with Iron to strike into the
Ground, and Loop-holes to shoot through. The Night after (the Walls being now
battered down) the Duke of Guise ordered Grammont, with three hundred
Small-shot, to play all Night into the Breach, to hinder the English from
making any Works within the Castle, for their Defense. Strozzi was ordered at
the same time to lodge himself with the same number of Foot and one hundred
Pioneers, on the other Side, near the Gate, but was beaten off by the English
Small-shot, and forced to return to the Duke of Guise. The next Morning, the
Duke of Guise having ordered the Breach at the Castle to be carefully viewed,
Grammont was ordered with three hundred Muskets, to enter the place, who was to
be seconded by Strozzi, with the same number; these passed the Dike in Water up
to the Navel, and notwithstanding any resistance the English could make, lodged
themselves in the Castle, driving those of the English, that had not been
slain, into the Town. The Castle being thus gained, the Duke of Guise put a
strong Garrison into it. The English, so soon as the Tide returned again (which
filled the Dikes) stormed the Castle, in hopes to regain that important Post,
and being beaten off, they planted four Cannon against the Bridge, and forced
open the Castle-gate, and then stormed it the second time, but having lost two
hundred of their best Men to no good purpose, they then began to treat of a
Surrender; which at last was agreed; The Governor and fifty others being to
become Prisoners of War; The Soldiery and Townsmen to be at liberty, to pass
into England or Flanders, without any Injury, as to their Lives or Liberties:
And all the Ammunition, Cannon, Housholdstuff, Gold, Silver, Merchandise and
Horse, was to be left to the disposal of the Duke of Guise. On these Conditions
was Calais delivered up to the French, the fourteenth of January 1557, 58, when
it had been two hundred and ten Years in the hands of the English. The Place
was no sooner yielded up but great numbers of Ships came over, who
understanding what had passed, returned back. King Philip had smelt the Design
of the French upon this Place, and had wrote to Queen Mary, that he would put
Succors into the Town; but this was suspected, by the English, as a Design to
get Calais into his own Hands, and so his Prediction came to pass.

After Calais was taken they fell to consider, Guines taken.
Whether they should attack Guines, which was in the Hands of the English, and
lay two French Leagues from Calais, to the South, or Graveling, a Town of
Flanders three Leagues to the N. E. But they resolved to attempt Guines, which
was nearer, and more necessary for the securing the Possession of Calais, the
Lord Gray was Governor of it, who had a good Garrison, and had received some
Succors from King Philip; yet at the first Attack he left the Town, and fled
into the Castle; but whilst the French were plundering the Town, returned
again, and drove them out, and firing the Town returned into the Castle again,
which in a short time after he surrendered, when he had eight hundred English,
Spanish and Flemmings to have continued the Defense of it; but the Hearts of
the English were down, for Gray was reputed a good Soldier.

There was now nothing left to the English but a small Place called the Comte
de Oye, which had a Castle not strong, but almost unaccessible, as being
surrounded with unpassable Marshes, and which had no Passage but over a
Timber-Bridge: This Place lies almost two Leagues from Calais toward
Graveling, the Garrison of which never staid for a Summons, but hearing of the
loss of Guines fled, and left the Place open and unguarded, and Sipetra took
possession of it, without any further trouble, for the French. Burnet calls
this Castle Hammes, and Thuanus Oye; but the Castles of Hammes lay directly
between Guines and Calais. One Sir Edward Grimstone was then Comptroler of
Calais and a Privy Counselor, and he had often given Advertisement of the ill
condition of the Garrison; but the Treasury was low, the People discontented,
and the Thoughts of the Queen and her Council more set upon extirpating Heresy
(as they called it) than upon preserving this important Post, so it was lost,
and the Grief and Dishonor of this Misfortune sat so heavy upon the Spirits of
the Queen, that she never joyed after.

The next thing the French undertook was the taking of the Castle of Herbemont,
in the Forest of Ardenne, belonging to the Count of Beilisteine, which was very
troublesome to the Inhabitants of Ivoy; this enterprise succeeded well too, and
they took the Castle the sixteenth of February, and after it several other
small Places on the Frontiers, were deserted by their Garrisons.

This Year a Fleet of one hundred and twenty Turkish Galleys loosed from
Prevesa a Port of Epirus, and passing by Brindisi, took and plundered Reggio, A
Turkish Fleet land in several Places of Italy, and carry many into Slavery.
a City in the South of Italy, after which, landing in the Bay di Surrneto,
they carried four thousand persons into Slavery, among which was a great many
Monks and Nuns. The Grief and Shame of this was the greater, because it was
done in sight of Naples. From thence it sailed to the Coast of Provence, and
having refreshed the Sailors, it returned to Minorca, and took the Town of
Citadella, with great difficulty, and the loss of four hundred Men, after which
it returned in August into Turkey. The French Fleet, in the Mediterranean was
able to do nothing for want of Money, so the Fear was much greater than the
Hurt.

The twenty fifth of May the Dauphine was married to Mary Queen of the Scots,
The Dauphine married to Mary Queen of Scotland.
yet the Scotch Ambassadors refused to promise under their Hands and Seals to
procure the Dauphine, in the next Convention of their States to be received and
owned as King of Scotland; and thereupon four of them dying soon after, it was
suspected that they had been poisoned: Yet in the next Convention the thing was
granted, and the Earl of Argile was appointed to bring the Marital Crown into
France: But in the mean time Mary Queen of England dyed, which occasioned a
great Change in England, France and Scotland. The greatest part of the Scots
were not pleased with this Marriage; and the French too, underhand, disliked
it, as tending to the exalting the House of Guise, and the depressing that of
Montmorency, and Gasper de Coligny Admiral of France, who were both at this
time Prisoners to King Philip.

A meeting in the mean time being appointed at Perone between Christierna the
Mother of the Cardinal of Lorraine and Perrenot Bishop of Arras for King
Philip, The first Proposals of a Peace between France and King Philip.
and the Duke and Cardinal of Loraine for the French: Perrenot deploring the
progress of the Turkish Arms during this unfortunate War, and above all things
the increase of Heresy in France and the Netherlands, cunningly offered the
House of Guise their Assistance for the ruining Montmorency, Coligny and
Andelot, as favourors of the Reformation, when a Peace were once settled between
these two Crowns: The House of Guise hereby only seeking to aggrandize it self
upon the Ruin of these three great Men, and the Spaniards to imbroil and
weaken France. The Cardinal, at his return, acquaints the King with what
concerned Andelot, intermixing a mention of a Peace with it. Henry II, was a
mild and most merciful Prince, but had an implacable aversion for the
Reformation, which had been instilled into him in his Infancy, by those who had
the Care of him; and he had before this heard something of Andelot's
Inclinations to favor that Party, and thereupon sent for him, who waited upon
the King at Monceaux, a Castle near Meaux. Andelot Marshal of France ruined by
the Arts of the Guises.
The King gave him great assurance of his kindness to him, and of his Sense of
his Merits and Services, and then told him, He was much concerned to hear, from
all Places, That he was not sound in the business of Religion; and thereupon
asked him what his Belief of the Sacrifice of the Mass was. A^delot, who was a
Man of Spirit, answered otherwise than the King desired, and according to
Calvin's Doctrine: The King admonished him, That he should consider himself, and
not run into Mischief: He replied with more confidence than he had shown
before, That it was a great Satisfaction to him, that the King, whom he and his
Family had found a Bountiful Master, and to whom he had in all things hitherto
shown himself a most Loyal, Faithful and Industrious Subject, had so far
approved of him: But then he was not to play the Hypocrite with God in the
business of Religion; his Body, his Estate, and his Honor were in the Hands of
the King, and he might dispose of them as he thought fit, but his Soul was
subject to none but God, who gave it, and therefore in this matter he must obey
God only as his greatest Master. This Answer so intaged the King, that taking
his Lance in his hand, and intending only to throw it on the ground, he wounded
the Dauphin with it, who sat beneath him; and the Tables being taken away, he
ordered Andelot to be taken into Custody, who was for some time detained in the
House of the Bishop of Meaux, and from thence he was sent to the Castle of
Melun.

Andelot being thus laid aside, the Baron de Monluc, a Person of good Merit,
was made General of the French Foot in his stead, which was a Place of great
consideration in the Army. This Lord had been educated in the Court of the Duke
of Lorain, and was much addicted to the Interest of that Family: Yet, as he
says in his Memoirs, he refused this Employment at first, because he foresaw
it would expose him to a flagrant Envy, and the Resentments of the Family of
Montmorancy.

In the beginning of May, Thionville besieged and taken.
the French sat down before Thionville, with about Five thousand Horse, and
Fourteen thousand Foot. This Town is seated in the Dukedom of Luxemburg, in a
Plain Country, but Low and Marshy, and having the Moselle on the N.W. which
fills its deep Ditches, on which sides it has only two Bastions, which are
short, so that they cannot clear their Dikes, and at a great distance from each
other. The rest of the City is secured by great Towers, which extend themselves
beyond the Walls, and they again are within well filled with Earth. Quaderebbe,
a Brabentiner, was Governor of this Place, who had a Garrison under him of One
thousand nine hundred Foot, and Two hundred Horse. The chief Battery lay on
that side which is covered by the Moselle. This place, after a sharp defense,
was taken, upon good Articles the Twenty third of July: But then Strozzi, an
excellent Commander, and a Man of great Courage and Prudence, was lost before
it, who was accounted one of the best Captains of that Age. Four thousand
Townsmen, and Fifteen hundred Soldiers marched out of this place when it was
yielded up, most of the latter being wounded on the Head. The French lost Four
hundred, and had more wounded in this Siege. After this, they took Arlone,
another Town in the same Dukedom, three German Miles from Luxemburg to the
West, by Surprise, which being burnt by an unexpected Accident, was dismantled
and deserted. Their next Design was against Luxemburg, but here they spent
seventeen days to no purpose.

It had been ordered by the Council, The Defeat of Thermes, near Graveling.
That at the same time the Duke of Guise invaded the Dukedom of Luxemburg,
Thermes, who was Governor of Calais, should enter Flanders, and that the Duke
of Guise should second him with some German Forces, and that his Brother the
Duke of Aumale should join also with him at Fair en Vermandois: If their
Orders had been as well pursued, as they weye prudently contrived, the Affairs
of King Philip had been brought into great distress. Thermes went from Calais,
in the beginning of July, with Five thousand Gasconers and Germans, and Fifteen
hundred Horse, passing by Graveling, and coming suddenly before Dunkirk;
Dunkirk surprised,
and while he was treating with the Inhabitants, taking advantage of their
Negligence, he Surprised the place, and having Plundered the Town, he put a
Garrison into it; And Vinoxberg.
after which he took Vinoxberg, without resistance, though it was a Rich and a
Populous Town, which he treated in the same manner; but then being seized by
the Gout, his usual Disease, he committed his Forces to the Sieur Villebonne, a
Man too much addicted to Spoil and Rapine, who wasted all the Country with Fire
and Sword as far as Newport. King Philip in the Interim had sent the Duke of
Savoy to Liege, with Orders to assemble Forces near Maleburg, to oppose the
Duke of Guise; but when he saw Thionville and Arlonne lost, and the Duke of
Guise lie still, he took the opportunity to Surprise these Frenchmen before any
Succors were come up to them; to which end he sent Count Egmont, an Industrious
Captain, to whose diligence the Victory of St. Quintin was very much owing; he
coming to Graveling, which lies between Dunkirk and Calais, and from the
several Spanish Garrisons, got together Twelve thousand Foot, and Three
thousand Horse, and a great number of Peasants, who being enraged at the Spoil
of their Country, were desirous of an opportunity to Revenge their Losses. This
being known to Thermes, who expected the Duke of Guise every day according to
his order, he recollected his scattered Forces; and although he was not well,
took Horse, and posted to his Camp near Graveling, being very solicitous,
though too late, to secure his Retreat to Calais, Count Egmont being now at his
heels with his Forces: A Council of War was thereupon held in the Night, and it
was resolved that the French should take the advantage of the Ebb the next Day,
and march by the Seashore toward Calais. They passed the River Aa that
Morning, without any difficulty at the Low Water; which Egmont observing, he
passed it too, and met the French. Thermes, who saw now there was no security
but in their Valor, having the Sea to the North, the Dike of Boulaie on his
Back, and the Enemy on his Front and Side, thereupon drew up his Men in the
order of Battle; being secure on two Sides, to the South, which was his
left hand, he placed his Wagons, and planted his Fieldpieces in the Front,
which consisted in six Culverins and three Faulcons, and on his Wings he placed
his Horse, that they might cover the Gasconers who were in the Front, the other
French were in the Middle, and the Germans in the Rear. Count Egmont had for
haste left all his Cannon on the other side of the River, and would not stay
for it, fearing the French might in the mean time escape him; dividing his
Horse into five Parts, he commanded the Light Horse to begin the Fight; his
Foot were divided into three Parts, according to their Nations, Flemings,
Germans and Spaniards. He himself was one of the first that charged the
Gasconers, who at first stood their ground stoutly, and Count Egmont's Horse
was slain under him; but his Army being most in number, when they came to close
Fight, Horse to Horse, and Foot to Foot, the Flemings being much encouraged by
the hopes of Victory, and the French despairing of any other Escape, the Fight
was a long time doubtful; the Gasconers fought manfully, the Germans were only
Spectators, and the French Horse could do little for want of Ground; in the
very heat of the Battle, twelve English Ships coming up, put an end to the
Fight, by gauling the French on the Right Wing with their Canon on that side
they thought themselves most secure: Fifteen hundred were killed in the Fight,
and many more perished in the Flight, being knocked on the head by the
Peasants, who were enraged by their Rapins; others were drowned, and Thermes,
Villebone, Senarpont, the Count of Chaulness and Merviliers were taken
Prisoners; and the English Fleet took up Two hundred in the Sea, and carried
them into England to the Queen. This Victory cost the Flemings Five hundred
Men, and was gained the Thirteenth of July.

The Duke of Guise hearing of this Defeat, returned to Pierre-pont, in the
Borders of Picardy and Champagne, the Twenty eighth of July, that he might be
ready at hand to prevent any Attempt might be made on France. The Townsmen
meeting, as the Custom is, in a place called the Scholars Field, without the
Suburbs of St. German, near Paris, a few of them, who were addicted to the
Protestant Religion, began to sing David's Psalms in French Meter; thereupon
the People began, to leave their Sports, and joining with them, sung the same
Psalms: After this, a greater number, and among them Anthony King of Navarr,
and Jonae his Lady, who was already suspected to favor that Religion, fell
into the same Practice. The Clergy were much alarmed at this, affirming that
this new Invention was designed to bring the ancient Custom which they had
received from the Church of Rome their Mother, of singing the Public Service
in the Latin Tongue, into contempt, by introducing the use of one understood by
the meanest of the People. Whereupon they represented this as very Seditious to
the King, who ordered an Enquiry after the Authors of it to be made, and forbad
the Use of this Custom for the future, on pain of Death.

About the same time, The English Fleet unsuccessful.
News was brought of the arrival of an English Fleet of an Hundred and twenty
Ships upon the Coast of Normandy, under the Lord Clinton. Haure de Grace and
Diepe being feared, they sent the President of Boulogn to take care of those
Places; but the Fleet went on, and at Conquet, a Port of Britain, the Thirty
first of July, they landed, an Hundred and fifty Pesants at first opposing
them; but Seven thousand Men being landed, and the Ships with their Cannon
playing upon them, the Inhabitants left the place and fled. The English entered
the Town, and plundered it; but Kersimont the Governor of that Province, coming
up with Six thousand which he had hastily raised, he forced the English, with
the loss of Six hundred of their Men, to return on board their Ships; about an
Hundrd of them fell into the hands of the French, and among them one Hollander,
who told the Fnench that thirty Dutch Ships, under the Command of one
Wakenheim, had joined this Fleet at the Isle of Wight by the order of King
Philip; and that they were ordered to take Breast, which the French thereupon
fortified, and took great care of. Whereupon the Lord Clinton finding no Good
was to be donc, returned, having made a very expensive and unprosperous Voyage.

The French by this time had got together a very great Army, which the King saw
drawn up near Pierre-pont; and King Philip's was not less, but then neither of
these Princes were disposed to try the Hazards of the War any further; and
Montmorency having agreed for his Ransom, at the rate of one hundred and sixty
five thousand Crowns, and being now grown old, and averse from the Thoughts of
War, he and Christierna, the Mother of the Duke of Loraine, went to and for
between the two Princes, to promote a Treaty of Peace.

Vendosme Vidame of Chartres, who was made Governor of Calais, after Thermes
was taken Prisoner, The Treaty of Cambray began.
had a Design upon S. Omers, but it was discovered and prevented. In the middle
of September, Ambassadors from England, France and Spain met at Cambray, to
treat of a Peace in good earnest, and the first thing they agreeed upon, was
the withdrawing of the two Armies, because they seemed very dissonant from the
End of that Meeting. The greatest Difficulty they met with was about Calais,
which the French were resolved to keep, pretending it was an ancient Piece of
their Dominions, tho'lately recovered: And the English, on the other side,
would never consent to the Treaty, if it were not restored: But before this
Contest could be brought to a conclusion, Mary Queen of England dyed, which
ended the Controversy for the present, and thereupon this Congress was
dissolved, and another Meeting appointed in the same Place in January following.

The fifth of November the English Parliament met, The Parliament of England
meet, and Queen Mary dies.
but in a very ill Temper. On the seventeenth day of that Month, the Queen
dyed, in the forty third Year of her Age, when she had reigned five Years four
Months and eleven Days. Her Death was for some Hours concealed, and then it was
communicated to the House of Lords by the Lord Chancellor, who sent for the
House of Commons, and the Lord Chancellor signified to them also the Queen's
Death; and both Houses presently agreed to proclaim Elizabeth her Sister Queen,
wishing her a long and a happy reign.

The great Thuanus, contrary to his Custom, passes over Queen Mary without any
Character; he could say little that was good of her, and would say nothing that
was ill. Those of her own Religion are now so sensible of the Errors of her
Government, that they are more put to it for Apologies than Panigyricks on her
Memory.

In Germany a Diet was appointed to meet at Frankford the twenty fourth of
February, The German Affairs.
to which the Ambassadors named by Charles V, before his Voyage into Spain,
came and delivered his Resignation of the Empire, by which he had transferred
his Authority to Ferdinand his Brother, then King of the Romans, to the
Electors, who after a short deliberation accepted the same, and in a solemn
manner elected and admitted Ferdinand to the Empire, and afterward crowned
him. After his return to Vienna, he sent Martin Gusman, his Lord High
Chamberlain, to Rome to acquaint the Pope with the Resignation of Charles V,
and his Advancement to the Empire, and to assure his Holiness of his good
Affections to that See. The morose Old Gentleman would not admit the
Ambassador, but left the business to be discussed by the Cardinals, who were
appointed for that purpose; who must needs make a great business of it, and
resolved, That what had been done at Frankford was of no Validity, because the
Holy See had not consented to it, and Christ's Vicar, who was entrusted with
the Keys of the That is the Ecclesiasticai and Civil Government.
Celestial and Terrestial Government, without whose Consent, neither Charles
could be discharged from the Empire, nor Ferdinand be admitted. That no
Resignation or Deprivation could be made to or by any other than the Pope.
Besides what was done at Frankford, had been transacted by Men infected with
Heresy, who had lost all that Grace and Power, which belonged to them, whilst
they were Members of the Church of Rome: That therefore Ferdinand was to appear
within three Months before the Pope's Tribunal, to answer for his
Misdemeanors, and to show his Repentance; and then without doubt he would
obtain Pardon from this meek Father: With much more to the same purpose.

Ferdinand was of another Temper, and ordered his Ambassador to return, if he
were not admitted within three Days, leaving a Protestation behind him. This a
little quelled the Pope, who admitted him to a Private Audience the thirteenth
of July, when the Pope excused himself for not having granted his Request
sooner, for want of Leisure and Time to examine all the Difficulties which were
proposed in this Affair by the Cardinals; and seeing his Lordship could stay no
longer at Rome, he might return when he pleased, and he would send an
Ambassador to the Emperor (so he called Charles V, notwithstanding his
Resignation) as soon as was possible. And thus this thing stood till the Death
of Pope Paul III.

Charles V, late Emperor of Germany, The Death and Character of Charles the
Fifth;
being at last overpowered by the many Diseases which oppressed him, died the
twenty first of September. In this Prince (says Thuanus) Fortune and Virtue
strove to Crown his Deserts with the utmost degree of Temporal Felicity. And
for my part, I take him for the best Pattern which can possibly be given of a
virtuous Prince, in this or any former Age. His last Words were these, Continue
in me my dear Savior, that I may continue in thee. He lived fifty eight Years,
six Months and twenty five Days, and was Emperor of Germany thirty six Years.

Thuanus says of him, That no part of his Life was destitute of some
commendable Action, yet he showed the greatness of his Soul most visibly in the
close of it: Before he was wont to conquer others, in this he overcame himself,
and reflecting on a better Life, renounced this present, which was liable to so
many Chances, before he dyed; and having so many Years lived to the good of
others, began now to live only to God and himself. In all that two Years which
went next before his Dissolution, he lived in the Society of some Monks of the
Order of S. Jerome; and by the Advice of one Constantin, his Confessor, applied
himself chiefly to the reading of S. Bernard, and fixing his Soul only on God,
thus he argued: His Opinion concerning Justification.
That he was unworthy, by his own Merits, to obtain the Kingdom of Heaven; but
his Lord God, who had a double Right to it, that of Inheritance from his
Father, and that of the Merits of his Passion, was content with the first as to
himself, and has left the second to me, by whose Gift I may justly claim it,
and trusting to this Faith, I shall not be ashamed: For neither can the Oil of
Mercy be put in any other Vessel than that of Faith: That this is the only
Confidence of that Man who forsakes himself and relies upon his Lord: That to
trust any otherwise to ones own Merits was not of Faith but Perfidy: That Sins
were forgiven by the Mercy of God, and therefore we ought to believe that none
but God can blot them out, against whom only we have sinned, in whom is no sin,
and by whom alone our sins are forgiven, us. These Doctrins were afterward
thought in Spain to approach so near those of the Lutherans, that his Confessor
was burnt for an Heretic after he was dead; and some others that were about
him had hard measure, after his Death, on that account, and Lucas Osiander
affirms, in express Terms, That Charles V, dyed a Lutheran in the Point of
Justification.

Queen Elizabeth, presently after her settlement, Queen Elizabeth succeeds.
dispatched Messengers to all the Princes of Christendom, giving notice of her
Sister's Death, and her Succession, and among them, to the Pope also, by Sir
Edward Karn, then Resident at Rome. His Holiness, in his usual Style replied;
That England was held in Fee of the Apostolic See, That she could not succeed,
being illegitimate, nor could he contradict the Declarations made in that
matter by his Predecessors Clement VII, and Paul III: He said it was a great
boldness in her to assume the Crown without his Consent; for which, in Reason,
she deserved no Favor at his Hands: Yet if she would renounce her Pretentions,
and refer herself wholly to him, he would show a Fatherly Affection to her, and
do every thing for her that could consist with the Dignity of the Apostolic
See. It was great pity this generous Pope should fall into such Heretical
Times; his great Soul would certainly have wrought Wonders berfore the Days of
Luther; but now alas! all this Papal Meekness served only to render that
sinking Ship more despicable and hated; for Queen Elizabeth, when she heard of
it, was nothing concerned at it, but immediately she recalled Karn's Powers,
and commanded him to come home: And Popery from hence forward fared very will
in England; but then our Affairs have been so exactly described by others, and
are so well known to English Men, That I shall here dismiss them, and apply my
self wholly to the Foreign Affairs.

Thuanus observes, The Scotch Affairs.
That this Year there was rather no War than a Peace in Scotland, for that the
whole Kingdom was imbroiled with Rapines and the burning of Towns, two of the
principal Nobility of Scotland being carried away captive by the English,
William Keth Son of the Earl Marshal, and Patrick Gray: An English Fleet also,
under the Command of Sir John Clare, infested the Scotch Shoars, and burnt a
Place, by my Author called Cracoviaca, Kirk-wall, Main-Land, the principal of
the Isles of Orkney, which he says was the Seat of the Bishop, and the
principal, or rather only Town in those Islands, which he suppofeth was
severely chastized by Heaven, by a Tempest, which soon after dispersed the
Fleet, leaving a part of the English on the Island, who were all slain by the
Islanders and Natives.

This Year also the Reformation of Religion was much agitated, tho not effected
in Scotland; Scotland begins to entertain the Reformation.
Alexander Somervill Archbishop of S. Andrews, with the assistance of the rest
of the Churchmen, condemned one Walter Mills, an old Priest, to be burnt for
Heresy, and banished one Paul Mefan, hoping thereby to restore their lost
Authority, and curb the People; but it had a quite contrary effect, the patient
and cheerful Martyrdom of Mills incensing the People to that height, that they
spoke very freely, or as my Author has it, Licentiously and Seditiously of the
Churchmen, and a Solemn Procession being made on the first day of September,
in memory of S. Eugenius, or S. Gile's at Edinburgh, of which he was Patron,
whose Image was then carried about with great Pomp, the People tore it out of
the Hands of those that bore it, and threw it into the common Drought, having
first broke off the Head, Hands and Feet of this Wooden Saint, the Monks and
the rest of his Friends fleeing, and leaving him to shift for himself. The
Clergy seeing their Authority thus sinking, assembled in a Synod, the ninth of
November, to try if the seting a good Face, and pretending great Considence
would retrieve their sinking Cause: But they of the Reformed Party, on the
contrary, of all Degrees exhorted one another to persevere in the Truth, and
not to suffer themselves to be oppressed by a small and weak number of Men: For
if (say they) these Men proceed by Legal Courses, we shall be too hard for
them, if they make use of Force, we are a Match for them. They drew up an
Address also to the Queen Regent, which they sent unto her by one James
Sandelands, an Honorable Baron, and of great account, in it desiring, That the
Public Prayers and Administration of the Sacraments might be in the Vulgar
Tongue, and that the Ministers might be elected by the People. The Regent, though
a zealous Catholic, yet fearing a Tumult, commanded the Priests to say the
Prayers in the Scotch Language. The same Demands were made by the Nobility of
the Synod, then assembled at Edinburgh: Who replied, That they must abide by
the Orders of the Canon Law, and the Decrees of the Council of Trent. The
Nobility perceiving them thus averse to a Reformation, sent one John Aresken of
Dundee a learned Man to appease them; who with great respect besought them, At
least to grant the People the use of the public Prayers in their Mother
Tongue. The Clergy would nevertheless abate nothing of their former Severity;
and the Queen regent, by their Persuasion soon recalled what had been extorted
from her. But the Death of Queen Mary of England, and the Succession of Queen
Elizabeth, which happened this Month, soon turned the Scales, and gave her
Cause to repent her too great obstinacy.

The Learned Spotiswood observes, That this Mills was the last Martyr that dyed
in Scotland for Religion; That Patrick Lermoth Bailiff of the Regality,
absolutely refused to pass Sentence of Death, as a Judge upon him, after the
Bishop had delivered him up to the Secular Power; that in the whole City of S.
Andrews a Cord was not to be had for Money, so that they were forced to take
one of the Cords of the Archbishop's Pavilion, to tie him to the Stake. It had
been good Prudence to have desisted, when they saw the whole Body of the People
thus bent against them, but they were hurried on to their Ruin, by a blind
Rage.

The People of Scotland were no less incensed on the other Side, and resolved
openly to profess the Reformed Religion, binding themselves by Promise and
Subscription to an Oath, That if any should be called in question for matters
of Religion, at any time hereafter, they would take Arms, and join in defense
of their Religion and Brethren, against the Tyranny and Persecution of the
Bishops. The principal Men, who joined in this Bond were Archibald Earl of
Argile, Alexander Earl of Glencarne, James Earl of Morton, Archibald Lord of
Lorne, Sir James Sandelands of Calder, John Erskin of Dun, and William Maitland
of Lethington. To this Bond vast numbers throughout the Kingdom subscribed, so
that they found their numbers were at least equal to those that opposed them.

A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION.
BOOK II.
The CONTENTS.
The Deaths and Characters of Frederick I, and Christian II, Kings. of Denmark.
Frederick II conquereth Dietmarsh. The Affairs of Italy. New Bishoprics
erected in the Low Countries. King Philip desirous of a Peace with France, that
he might be at leisure to extirpate Heresy. That Design discovered to the
Prince of Orange. The Diet of Germany. Conditions proposed in it by the
Protestants for a Council. The Emperor confirms the Peace of Passaw. The French
Ambassadors come to the Diet. The Life and Death of David George, a famous
Impostor. The Treaty of Cambray produces a Peace at last. The Peace occasioneth
a Persecution in France. The King goes to the Parliament of Paris, to awe it
into a Compliance: Yet some retain their Freedom at the Price of their Lives.
The King's Answer. A French Synod held by the Protestant Ministers. The
Protestant Princes of Germany write to the King of France in the behalf of the
Persecuted. A Commission issued to Try the suspected Members of Parliament. Du
Bourg first Tried. The sad condition of France during the Persecution. Henry II
slain. The various Characters of that Prince. Francis II succeeds him, a Lad of
Sixteen Years of age. The Persecution goes on. Slanders against the
Protestants. Du Bourg Condemned. Minart, a Persecutor, Assassinated. Du Bourg
Executed. His Character. The rest of the Members of Parliament restored. King
Philip prepares for Spain. He takes Ship at Flushing. Arrives in Spain. Raises
a great Persecution there. The Death of Pope Paul IV. The Deaths of several
other Princes. Pius IV Elected. Scotch Affairs. The English Affairs relating to
Scotland and France. The Scotch Complaints against the French. The War against
the French in Scotland. The Death and Character of Mary Queen Regent of
Scotland. The French Expelled thence. A Conspiracy in France. The King of
Navar, Conde, Coligni suspected to be in it. An Assembly of the Princes of
France. A Decree passed for an Assembly of the three Estates. The Protestants
of France increase. Francis II dies. A General Council desired, and obtained by
the Duke of Florence. Gustavus King of Sweden dies. The Estates of France
opened. The Persecution of Piedmont, which occasioneth a War.

THE First day of January, Frederick I, King of Denmark, who was Elected by the
Dyat of that Kingdom, in the Year 1523, instead of Christian II, Koldingen, a
Town in the Dukedom of Sleswick, when he had lived Fifty six Years, The Death
of Frederick I, King of Denmark.
Three Months and Twenty Days, and reigned Thirty four Years. He was a Prince
of great Moderation and Justice; he overthrew the united Army of Christopher
Duke of Oldenburg, and of the City of Lubeck, who had invaded his Inheritance,
near Alsens, a City of Fionia, with a great slaughter of their Forces. Having
by this Victory obtained a Peace, he caused the holy Scriptures to be
translated into the Danish Tongue, and opened an University and a Library at
Coppenhagen. Not long before his Death he visited his deposed Uncle, who was
then in Prison, and having discoursed very friendly with him a great while,
they mutually forgave each other. By his Queen Dorothy, Daughter of Magnus Duke
of Saxony, he had five Children, Frederick II, who succeeded him in his
Kingdom, Magnus Bishop of Vpsal in Livonia, Joane, Ann married to Augustus
Elector of Saxony, and Dorothy married to Henry Duke of Lunenburg. Christian
II, King of Denmark dies.
The Twenty third of the same Month, Christian his Predecessor in that Kingdom,
followed him, being in the Seventy seventh year of his Age; he had lived in
Prison ever since the Year 1532, having given (says my Author Thuanus) this
Lesson to all Princes, That if they will Reign well and happily, they must
govern their Affections, and not out of a violent lust of insulting over their
Subjects, give up themselves to the conduct of their Passions; and that they
ought to assure themselves, that God is a severe Revenger, always ready, and
delighting to pluck off their Thrones the most Proud and Insolent who shall
abuse that Power he has entrusted them with. Frederick I, being dead, who was a
Prince utterly averse from war, and neither moved by Ambition nor Covetousness
to invade what was another; Frederick II conquereth Diermarsh.
his Son Frederick began a War upon the Inhabitants of Dietmarsh, who had
heretofore been subject to the Dukes of Holstein, the Bishop of Breme, and the
Kings of Denmark successively, and had often regained their Liberty with great
Loss and Dishonor to those Princes that had attempted to reduce this small
Province; but now their time was come, and Adolph Duke of Holstein, this year
made a final Conquest of them, for Frederick King of Denmark, in the space of
one Month.

In the beginning of this Year was a great change of Affairs at Rome. The
Affairs of Italy.
The Kindred of the Pope had already made themselves hated by all Christendom,
and now the Pope himself too fell out with them. they had engaged the Pope in
the War with Spain, which had brought so much Loss and Shame upon that See, and
its Dominions. In the time of those Confusions they had acted many things with
great Rapacity, Intemperance and Insolence without the Pope's knowledge, who
finding his Treasure exhausted, had by their Advice raised great and
extraordinary Taxes upon his People; and besides all this, had sold the Places
of the Criminal and Civil Judges, suppressed the monthly Payments of his
Officers, and seized many of the Lands belonging to the Religious Orders, and
had levied two Tenths upon all the Benefices. The War with King Philip being
ended, and the Pope having with a calm and dispassionate mind heard the
Complaints made against his Relations by one Jeremiah, a Friar of the Theatin
Order, and especially against the Cardinal of Caraffa, began more nearly to
inspect his own Affairs, and the Lives of his Relations. About the same time,
Cosmus Duke of Florenee made great Complaint also of the Caraffa's, because not
content with the extorting what they pleased from the Hospitals, Monasteries
and Clergy within the Pope's Dominions (which they looked upon as their own)
they had also by their private Authority done the same Wrongs in the Dukedom of
Florence, and indeed all over Italy. He thereupon ordered Bongianni
Gianfigliacci, his Resident at Rome, to complain of this to the Pope; but then
the Caraffa's had prevented him from having any Audience; whereupon Cosmus
wrote a Letter to the Pope, which was by the means of Cardinal Vitelli, an
Hater of their Insolence, delivered to the Pope. He having read it, sent
presently for his old Monitor Jeremiah, and by him ordered Vitelli to give him
a more exact account of their Misdemeanors. There was nothing more incensed the
Pope against them (who was Imperious and Jealous of his Papal Power to the
utmost degree) than that the Cardinal had agreed, without his knowledge or
consent, with the Duke de Alva; that his Brother should accept of a
Compensation from King Philip instead of Paliani, which Place the Pope had
designed to unite to his See. Whereupon he presently commanded the Cardinal to
leave the Vatican, and not to come any more into his Presence. The Twenty
seventh of January the Pope summoned a great Consistory, and in it discharged
him of the Prime Ministry of Affairs, and of the Government of Bononia. He took
also from the Duke of Paliani, his Brother, the Command of the Forces of the
Ecclesiastic State, and of the Galleys, and deprived the Marquess di Monte
Belli of the Custody of the Vatican Palace, declaring against them with that
fury, that some of the Cardinals attempted to appease him, and among them
Ranutio Cardinal of Farness: To whom he replied, That your Grandfather had done
much better, if like me he had sacrificed his private Affections to his
Pastoral Office, and having severely chastised your Father's abominable Lusts
and Villainies, had thereby prevented the scandal the Impunity of them has
given to the whole World. So that nothing that could be said or done, could
reduce the old Man from his Resolves against them, but tended rather to the
increasing of his Fury. And hereupon he forthwith abolished some Imposts,
pretending they were exacted without his knowledge: By all which he hoped to
obtain the repute of a Just and Upright Prince, and to cast the Odium of the
ill things which had been done in his Popedom, upon his Relations. After this,
he betook himself wholly to the promoting the Inquisition, which he called the
most Holy Tribunal, and here he showed a very great severity, bringing not only
Men suspected of Heresy, but of some other Crimes within their Jurisdiction.
Then commanding all Monks and Nuns to their several Houses, he Imprisoned some,
and sent others to the Galleys, for not presently obeying him. His Rigor was
so great in this last, that many left his State, and went and settled in the
State of Venice. He spent Fifty thousand Crowns in Corn, to relieve the Poor in
a time of Scarcity, and settled Bishops at Malacha and Cochin, two Cities
belonging to the Portuguese in the East Indies, and made the Bishop of Goa an
Archbishop, exempting him from the Jurisdiction of the Bishopric of Lisbon. He
also erected many new Sees in the Low Countries, at the request of Philip King
of Spain, to the Diminution of the Jurisdiction and Diocesses of many French
and German Bishops. These Sees were settled at Mechlen, Antwerp, Harlem,
Daventrie, Leewarden, Groningen, Midleburg, Bosleduc, New Bishoprics erected
in the Low Countries.
Namur, St. Omers, Ipress, Gant and Bruges, and were put under the Archbishops
of Cambray, Mechlin and Vtrecht. This change gave great offense to the
Low Countries, who esteemed itrather an Inslaving than an Honoring of their
Country, to have so many New Sees settled among them; and the more, because
among other Reasons assigned by the Pope, one was, That these Countries were on
all sides encompassed with Nations which had cast off the Sea of Rome; so that
the Salvation of the Souls of this People was much endangered by Schism, which
rendered this Settlement hateful to all those who favored the Reformation; so
that this was one of the principal Causes of the War which followed, which in
the end proved fatal to many of these New Bishoprics.

In the interim, this Consideration had that effect upon the Spirit of King
Philip, King Philip desirous of a Peace with France, that he might be at
leisure to extirpate Heresy.
that it greatly disposed him above all others to enter into a Treaty of Peace
with France. He saw that not only the License which attended a War, but the
vast number of Germans which he was forced to employ, by their conversing with
his Subjects in the Netherlands, begat in them a good Opinion of Luther and the
Reformation. Henry II of France imprudently communicated to William of Nassaw,
Prince of Orange, when he was Ambassador for Philip in France, when they were
one day Hunting together, That Design discovered to the Prince of Orange.
That King Philip and he had agreed first to extirpate all the Sects which were
then rising in the Netherlands, and after that they would join their Arms, and
do the like in all other places; which being discovered by that Prince to the
Netherlanders, they entered into Consultation for the preserving themselves from
the Pride of the Spanish Government, and made those insolent Demands of King
Philp, when he was going into Spain. This Counsel was then generally attributed
to the Cardinal of Lorain, and Perrenot Bishop of Arras, and all concluded,
That under the pretense of suppressing Heresy, King Philip and Henry of France
had laid a Design of Ruining the Civil Liberties of France and the Netherlands.
When the Commissioners met, for the concluding the Treaty of Peace between
these Princes, they found themselves delivered from one difficulty, the
Restitution of Calais, by the Death of Queen Mary of England; but then
Thionville, Verdun and Toul, three Imperial Cities, had been taken in this War
by the French, and King Philip thought he was bound in Honor, and by his
Interest too, to see them restored to the Empire, and yet he saw the French
were as well resolved to keep them. Nor was indeed his Interest in the
Restitution so great as that of the French was to keep them, he having very
effectually provided for his own Security and Benefit, by the gaining other
Places.

Hereupon these Princes, by mutual consent, The Diet of Germany.
sent Ambassadors to the Diet of Germany, began this Year the Twenty fifth of
February, at Ausburg. The first thing that was done in them, was the
celebrating the Funeral of Charles V, with great Solemnity. His Encomium was
pronounced by Lewis Madruse, then Bishop of Trent, and afterward a Cardinal.
After this Ceremony, an Account was given of the Conference at Worms, for the
Reconciling the Differences of Religion; and there appearing no hope of an
Accommdation, Ferdinand the Emperor promised he would take care to have the
General Council renewed, and that all should obey its Decrees and
Determinations. But the Deputies of the Duke of Saxony, and of several other
Princes of the Empire opposed this, affirming that there being no hopes of
restoring the Peace of the Church by a Popish Council, Conditions proposed by
the Protestants for a Council.
the Edicts of Passaw and Ansburg were religiously to be observed: But the
Emperor persisting in his former Opinion, they said they were not against a
Free and General Council in Germany, so be it were legally assembled by the
Emperor, and not by the Pope, and in which the Pope should appear as a Party
subject to the Council, and not as President and Judge of all others; and
provided the Bishops and Clergy might be freed from the Oath they had taken to
the Pope, that they might freely speak their Thoughts: That the sacred
Scriptures might be the only Rule by which they should judge and determine these
Controversies, rejecting all humane Traditions and Customs that were contrary
to the Word of God: If the Divines who had embraced the Augustane Confession,
might not only be heard, but admitted to give their Votes in the Decision of
these Controversies, and have good Security given them for their going thither;
and that they should enjoy the Liberty granted them by the Decree of Ausburg,
without any fraud or violence: That the Points in Dispute should not be
determined, as is usual in Civil Affairs, by the Plurality of Votes, but by the
Rule and Prescription of the Word of God: That in the first place, the Decrees
of the Council of Trent already made, should be cancelled as vicious, and not
legally assembled; and that these things should be debated anew. And lastly,
That if these things could not be obtained of the Pope, the Emperor should
maintain the Peace of Religion, and the Edict of Passaw. These were the
Conditions the Protestants proposed for the holding of a Council.

The Emperior, The Emperor Confirms the Peace of Passaw.
who despaired of reconciling the differences of Religion on these Terms, and
having no other way left him for preserving the Peace of Germany, Confirmed the
Peace of Passaw. After this, they took into Consideration the Reduction of the
Moneys of Germany to their ancient value and purity, and heard the Complaints
of William of Furstemberg, Great Master of the Knights of Livonia, who obtained
a Grant of an Hundred thousand Crowns for the Levying of an Army for their
Protection against the Russ: But this Sum seeming less than the necessity of
their Affairs and of the Times required, the Livonians neglected it, and betook
themselves to the Protection of Sigismund Augustus, King of Poland, to whom
they assigned Nine of their strongest Places, upon condition that they might at
any time redeem them by the payment of Six thousand Crowns, which was confirmed
by a Treaty Signed and Sworn between them and the King of Poland. After which,
Furstemberg resigned his Dignity to Gotard Ketler. There was also a Complaint
made by the Livonians against the Inhabitants of Lubeck, Riga and Revel, for
furnishing the Russ, who were the Enemies of Germany, not only with all sorts
of Merchandise imported by them to Narva, a Town of Russia, but also with Arms
and Ammunition, which for the future, was, by a Law made in this Diet,
forbidden, which was afterward repealed.

The Twenty eighth of March, The French Ambassadors come to the Diet.
the French Ambassadors were introduced into the Diet, and after they had in an
Elegant Speech declared the great Affections their Master had for the Emperor
and the States of Germany; they desired the ancient League might be renewed
between the Empire and that Kingdom; and that for the future there might be a
firmer and closer Union and Friendship. Upon this the Emperor returned Thanks
to the Ambassadors, saying, That the King might be assured of the Friendship of
the Empire, the Princes and States, and of his too, if his Actions did agree
with his Words, and those Cities which had lately been taken from the Empire,
were restored to it: That this being done, he did not see what could hinder
their entering into a sincere Friendship. At this the Ambassadors replied, That
they had no Instruction concerning what he had proposed about the Cities, but
they would given an Account of it to the King their Master, and in the mean
time they desired the States would meet the King's Proposals of Friendship with
equal Candor. Upon this the Assembly broke up, and the Ambassadors were
re-conducted back with great Civility and Respect; to whom it was hinted, that
the Emperor could not but mention the Restitution of the Cities, but then that
neither he, the Princes, nor the States would break with the King of France,
though those Cities were not restored. They decreed also a Noble Embassy to the
King of France, in which the Cardinal of Ausburg and Christopher Duke of
Wirtemburg were employed.

One David George, a Native of Delft in Holland, born of mean Parents, his
Father being a Fencer, and his Mother a mean Woman, and himself unacquainted
with any other than his Mother Tongue; was a Person of great seeming
Moderation, so that all took him for a very Honest and well-meaning Man, though
he was of a stubborn and incorrigable disposition. The Life and Death of David
George, a famous Impostor.
He was a Person of a comely Countenance-and good meine, and all the Motions of
his Body were Grave and becoming, so that he seemed made up of Honesty. This
Man spread amongst his Countrymen the Pestilent Sect of Anabaptists, to which
they were very much disposed, and this being done to his great advantage (for
he had got a good Estate by it) and fearing he might not be safe, if he
continued any longer in his Native Country, where he was accounted the Head of
that Sect, he went with some of his Followers to Basil, in the Year 1544, under
the Name of John Bruck, and the first of April made a Speech in the Senate of
that City; desiring, He might be protected by them, as one forced to flee for
his Religion; and that they would receive his Wife, Children, Family and
Fortunes, as in a safe Harbor. The Cause, the Person, and the Speech, agreeed
so exactly, and his Temper was so wholely unknown to them, as well as his
former Life, and his Country being very remote, what he said appeared so like
Truth, and had happened to so many others, That August 25, having given the
usual Oath, he was taken into the Protection of that City; where he lived with
the Respect to the Magistrate, that Humanity toward the Citizens, and that
Civility toward all, observing carefully their Religious Rites, and in all
things behaved himself so well, that he gave not the least occasion to any to
suspect him of any erroneous Doctrine, and he was as well thought of by the
most, as he Desired to be, or was esteemed by his own Party. Thus he lived very
quietly in his Family, observing very strictly three things: 1. Concealing the
Name of David George, by which he was well known in Holland and Friesland. 2.
Of what State and Condition he was at Home; so that some took him for a Person
of good Birth, others for a Nobleman or Rich Merchant. 3. Lastly, he took Care
not to admit any into his Sect of the City of Basil, or of the neighboring
Country: But, in the mean time, he took care by Letters, Books and Messengers,
to enlarge his Sect in Holland, and in other such distant Places: But as to
Switzerland he meddled not, for fear he might be discovered. Having thus spent
six Years, with great Pleasure, there happened a thing which gave him some
Disturbance, one of his Followers falling off, upon better Information, and
appearing with great Zeal against the Doctrins of his quondam Master: His House
being also burnt with Lightning, was a sad Presage, That his good Fortune and
his Life were near their End. But that which most afflicted him, was, That an
able Person was come from Holland, who had given an exact account of him and
his Family, to the Citizens of Basil; this brought a great Despondence of Mind
upon him, and that a Sickness, which seized his Wife also, who dyed first, and
David George followed her himself August 25, 1556; and he was buried with great
Pomp, in the Church of S. Leonard. Thus died that famous Impostor and Deceiver,
who had pretended, That he was greater, and more Divine than Christ, and
Immortal; that the Doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles,
was imperfect, and did not lead to a true and perfect Felicity; but his was
such as would certainly make him, who rightly understood it, happy: That he was
the true Christ and Messiah, the most beloved Son of the Father, who was
begotten not of Flesh but by the Holy Ghost, and the Spirit of Christ; which
having reduced his Flesh to nothing, and kept it in a certain place, unknown to
the Saints, had at last delivered it to David George; with much more such
Blasphemous Nonsense. After his Death, the Frand broke out, and this Year March
12, his Sons, and all that belonged to him, to the number of eleven, were
brought before the Senate, and examined concerning his Name, Country and
Doctrine: And they answering as he had taught, were committed to different
Prisons, and all his Papers and Writings were delivered to the Divines. April
26, the Divines and University having considered them, condemned his Doctrine as
false, contrary to the sacred Scriptures, pernicious and injurious to Jesus
Christ, and to be exterminated out of the Christian World. After this, his Sons
were dismissed out of Prison, upon condition they should buy no Lands without
the Walls of the City, without the Permission of the Senate: That they should
entertain no Travelers, though of their near Relations, but should send them
to the public Inns: That they should deliver in all the Books written or
printed by David George, and not keep any by them in the Dutch Tongue; and that
they should send their Children to the School of Basil to be instructed: That
they should pay a Pecuniary Mulct, if required; and that they, their Wives and
Children should appear in the Church, and make Profession of the True Faith,
and Renounce that of David George. Two days after, his Body was sentenced to be
taken up and burnt, together with his Books and Effigies, by the Hands of the
Common Hangman, in the place where they usally executed Malefactors; and all
his Goods they seized to the Public Treasure; adding, That if any Person
presumed to blame this their Decree, he should be liable to the same
Punishment. His Body was found very perfect, so that it might be known by his
yellow Beard from another Man's, though he had been buried two Years and six
Months, and was accordingly burnt in a vast concourse of Men.

In the beginning of February the Ambassadors met again, The Treaty of Cambray
produces a Peace at last.
at the Castle of Cambray, to conclude the Treaty, which was broke up upon the
Death of Mary, Queen of England. Queen Elizabeth, who succeeded her Sister
Mary, a Princes of a Masouline Soul, and of a Prudence above her Sex, fearing
if she relied upon the Spaniard, she might either be deserted or dishonored by
his Protection, had in the mean time, made a separate Peace with France. After
which she changed the Religion of England, in her first Parliament, abolishing
all the Laws made by her Sister Mary, and reviving those made by her Brother,
Edward VI, and rejecting all Obedience to the Pope of Rome. This Peace with
France did much facilitate the Treaty of Cambray: In which, among other things
these Princes promised to do their utmost, that a General Council should be
held as soon as was possible, to the Glory of God and the pacifying Men's
Consciences. This last Clause, by the perverse Counsels of these Princes, in a
short time raised a War in the Low Countries and France, which was more lasting
and more fatal than any former Wars. This Treaty was signed at Cambray, April 3.

These two Kings having thus regained their Peace, The Peace occasions a
Persecution in France.
and disburthened themselves of the Cares which the War brought upon them, they
betook themselves solely to the Care of Religion, which in France had been
under consideration the two foregoing Years, and was then omitted on account of
the War and Treaty, but was now reassumed in the heat of a Marriage Feast.
There was one Diana Duchess of Valentinois, a Court-Lady, and one of the
King's Mistresses, who used to beg the Estates of all such as suffered for any
Crime; And the Duke of Guise, who were the Promoters of this Persecution, the
latter aiming at nothing but Popular Applause: These two insinuated this Belief
into the King; That the Venom of Heresy was much spread in France, and that
in truth he was not King of those Provinces in which that prevailed: That the
Impudence of those who embraced it, was so great, that they did not whisper it,
as heretofore, in the Ear, but preached it openly and boldly throughout the
Kingdom, by which the name of God was blasphemed, and his Majesty's Royal
Authority was endangered; for when the Law of God was once confounded, who can
Question, (say they) but that all Human Laws will soon be subverted? And that
they might the more easily prevail, they employed Giles Maistre, president of
the Parliament, Jean de S. Andre, Anthony Minart, and Giles Bourdin the King's
Attorney, and principally the first of these, who was a Man of a fierce
Disposition and Temper, to incense the King's Mind against the Sectaries, he
being no way inclined to such Severities. To this end they tell him, That there
would little be gained by the Peace, if a more cruel War was fomented and
carried on at Home: For that the Disease had already got such Strength, that if
his Majesty dissembled a little longer, the Sword of the Magistrate and the
Laws of the Land would not be able to suppress it, but he must levy Armies, and
himself take the Field against them, as had been done in the case of the
Albingenses. That what had hitherto been done, had not had its desired effect,
because all the severity had been spent upon the populace and the mean people,
the hatred and detestation of which had affected all Men, but very few had
taken example by it. That now it was fit to begin with the Judges, many of
which had embraced their Doctrine secretly, or favored them on other accounts,
and by their connivance nourished the Distemper, suffering this Offense either
to go unpunished, or very lightly corrected. This, they said, was the very Root
of the Evil, and that all labor was in vain till it were pulled up.

Not long after this, the King was prevailed The King goes to the Parliament of
Paris to aw it into a Compliance.
upon to come into the Parliament in Person, whilst the Members were debating
about the Punishment of the Sectaries, June 14. He-seemed rather to labor to
conceal his Anger, than to have come with a calm Mind: Among other things he
told the Parliament; That having made a Peace he hoped it would turn to the
general Good; but he was much concerned that the business of Religion, which
was one of the principal Cares of a good Prince, had been, during the War,
tumultuously and seditiously treated by some: That therefore he desired for the
future, more care might be taken of the Christian Religion: And because he
heard that affair was this Day to be debated by them, he was come thither; and
he admonished them to proceed in it with Freedom, saying, It was God's Cause,
who knew all our Hearts and Thoughts.

Though the Members of the Parliament knew the King was brought thither to
deprive them of their Liberty; Yet some retained their Freedom at the Price of
their Lives.
yet there were some who resolved to retain their ancient Freedom at the price
of their Lives; and having declaimed against the Manners of the Court of Rome
and its ill Customs, which had degenerated into most pernicious Errors, and
given occasion to the rise of many Sects; they thence inferred, That the
Penalties of Heresy were to be mitigated, and the Severities of the Law
abated, till the differences of Religion were composed by the Authority of a
General Council, and the Discipline of the Church reformed. And this was the
Opinion of all the good Men in the Parliament. Arnold du Ferrier, President of
the Criminal Court, an honest and a wise Person, and the best Lawyer in France,
was the first who proposed this Method, and was followed by many others, among
which was Lewis du Faur, a Man of great Sense, and of a generous Temper, who
added, That all were agreed that the Differences in Religion had occasioned
great Disturbances, but then (said he) we ought carefully to enquire, Who
caused these Disorders, lest as Elijah answered Ahab, when he reproached him,
as the Troubler of Israel, it might be said to us; It is thou that have
troubled Israel. Then Anna du Bourg beginning with a Discourse of the Eternal
Providence of God, to which all things are subject; when he came to the
Question proposed, said, There were many Sins and Crimes committed by Men,
which the Laws had already forbidden, and yet the Gallows and Tortures which
were employed, had not been able to prevent the frequent Perjuries, Adulteries,
profuse Lusts, and Profane Oaths, which were not only connived at, but
cherished. On the contrary, every Day new punishments are invented against a
sort of Men, who could never yet be convicted of any wicked Attempt; for how
can they injure the Prince, who never name him but in their Prayers for him?
Are they accused of breaking our Laws, perverting the Allegiance of our Cities
or Provinces? No, the greatest Tortures could never extort a Confession that
they so much as thought of any such thing. Are they not accused of Sedition
only, because they have by the Candle of Scripture discovered the shameful and
increasing Villainies and corruptions of the Roman Power, which they defire may
be reformed? Christopher Harlay and Peter Seguier the two Presidents said with
great Modesty, that the Court had hitherto justly and rightly discharged its
Duty in this Particular, and that it would still do the same without changing,
to the Glory of God, and therefore neither the King nor People of France would
have cause to repent the trusting to it. Christopher de Thou, with great
freedom reflected on the King's Attorney and Advocates, for presuming to defame
the Proceedings of that Court, and indangering its Authority. Renatus Baillet
desired the Judgments which were blamed, might be re-examined, and more
maturely considered. Minart having made a short Preface, to soften the Envy
which had been raised against them, only added, That he thought the King's
Edicts were to be observed. After these Maistre the President made a sharp
Harangue against the Sectaries, instancing in the Severities which Philip the
August is said to have employed against the Albingenses, 600 of which he burnt
in one day; and in the Waldenses, which were massacred with Fire and Smoke,
partly in their Houses, and partly in the Dens and Caves they had fled to.

The King having obliquely reproached the Court for entering upon this Debate,
The King's Answer.
without his Order, added, He now clearly saw, what he had heard before, That
there were some among them, who despised both his Authority and the Popes. That
this was the fault of but a few, but it was dishonorable to the whole body of
them; but only they that were guilty should suffer the Punishment. And
therefore he exhorted the rest to go on in their Duty. The Reflections of la
Faur and du Bourg, who mentioned the Story of Ahab, and the frequent
Adulteries, exasperated the King more than the rest, and therefore he commanded
Montmorancy to apprehend them, who again ordered Gabriel de Montgomery, a
Captain of the Guard, to take them and carry them to the Bastile. Afterward
Paul de Foix, Anthony Fumee, Eustace de la Port, were also taken into Custody,
but la Ferriere, du Val and Viole were concealed by their Friends, and escaped
this Storm. Men censured these Proceedings, as they stood affected; but the
Wiser were much disgusted, That the King should be so far imposed on by others,
as to come personally into his Court to subvert those Laws he ought to have
protected: That he should make use of Threats and Imprisonments; saying, That
this was a clear Instance that he was subject to the Passions of others, and
who could think but these things were the forerunners of great Changes? A
French Synod held by the Protestant Ministers.


The Ministers of the Reformed Religion, notwithstanding, held a Synod at S.
German, June 28, one Morelle being President, in which they settled the order of
their Synods, the Authority of the Presidents, the taking away the Supremacy in
the Church, the election of Ministers, and their Office and Duty, Deacons and
Presbyters, Censures, the Degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity, of contracting
and dissolving Marriages, which yet were only temporary Decrees, to be varied
as future Synods should think fit; but to oblige particular Persons till so
altered.

About the same time came Ambassadors from the Protestant Princes of Germany,
The Protestant Princes of Germany write to the King of France.
with Letters to the King, subscribed by Frederick Cout Palatine of the Rhine,
Augustus Duke of Saxony, Joachim Elector of Brandenburg, Christopher Duke of
Wirtimberg, and Wolfang Count of Weldentz. In which they represent to the King,
How much they were afflicted to see so many Pious, Quiet and Holy Men, who
professed the same Religion, Imprisoned, Spoiled, Banished, and put to Death,
as Seditious Persons in France. That they thought themselves bound by Christian
Charity, and the Alliance which was between them and France, to beseech him
well to consider this Affair, which concerned the Name of God, and the
Salvation of so many Souls; that he ought to free himself from Prejudice, and
employ great Judgment and Reason in it. They assured him they were no less
solicitous for the Glory of God, and the Salvation of their Subjects than he,
and upon the Differences of Religion, had maturely considered how they might be
composed: That they had found by degrees, and insensibly, through Avarice and
Ambition many Corruptions had crept into the Church, which were dishonorable
to the Majesty of God, and Scandalous to Men, and that they ought to be
reformed by the Testimonies of the Holy Scriptures, the Decrees of the
Primitive Church, and the Writings of the most Ancient Fathers: That the
Corruptions and Disorders of the Court and Church of Rome, had long since been
complained of in France, by W. Parisiensis, John Gerson, Nicholas Clemangius
and Wisellius of Groeningen, the Restorer of the University of Paris, under
Lewis XI, and other Divines: That King Francis, his Father, of Blessed Memory,
was convinced of this, and had wisely endeavored to put an end to the
Differences of Religion, and to reform the Discipline of the Church: That now
France was not involved in War abroad, they besought him the Difference of
Religion might by his Authority and Conduct be quietly ended: That this might
easily be effected, if the King would but appoint Learned and Peaceable Men,
who should examine their Confession of Faith, without Partiality or Prejudice,
by the Holy Scripture, and the Ancient Fathers: That in the interim he should
suspend all Legal Severities, discharge the Imprisoned, recall the Banished,
restore their Estates to those that had been ruined: This they said would be
acceptable and pleasing to God, Honorable to the King, Profitable to France,
and very Grateful to them. The King entertained the Ambassadors kindly, and
having read the Letter, said he would suddenly send them a satisfactory Answer;
but by that time they were arrived at the Borders of France, the Fire, their
coming seemed to have abated, raged more horribly than ever.

June 19. A Commission issued to try the suspected Members of Parliament. Du
Bourg first tried.
a Commission was issued to Jean de Saint Andre, the President and Promoter of
these Troubles, Jo. James de Memme, Master of the Requests, Lewis Gayaut,
Robert Boet, Eustace Bellay, lately a Member of the Court of Parliament, but
then Bishop of Paris, and Anthony de Nouchy, to try the Members of Parliament,
which had been imprisoned. Du Bourg being interrogated by Saint Andre, refused
to answer, None of the Members of that Court being to be Tried, but by the
whole Court. Whereupon Bourdin obtained a new Commission from the King,
commanding Du Bourg to plead before these Delegated Judges; and if he refused,
that they should take him for Convicted, and Guilty of Treason. He being thus
deprived of his Privilege, lest he might seem to despise the King's Authority,
and making a Protestation to save the Privilege of others, the third Day after
answered in such manner, to all the Questions proposed, that he seemed to
differ very little from the Lutherans and Calvinists; so without any other
Witnesses produced, he was by the Bishop of Paris declared an Heretic, judged
unworthy of the Sacerdotal Character, and delivered up to the Secular Power:
From which Sentence he Appealed to the Archbishop of Sens.

Whilst these miserable Men were thus persecuted for their Religion; The sad
Condition of France during the Persecution.
and their Favorers, Friends, and such as had presumed to speak freely, were
by Informers also brought in Question; there was a sad Face of Affairs in
France, and a sullen silence. The Court, in the interim was never more Jolly,
the Preparations for a great Marriage filling it with Mirth and Bravery, which
in a short time too, had as lamentable a Conclusion. Among other things there
was a Tilt prepared, and a Yard made for that purpose, not far from the
Bastile, in which the Members of the Parliament were then imprisoned. Some Days
being spent in this Divertisement, June 29. the King would needs run against
the Count of Mongomery, and they breaking their Lances, the Sight of the King's
Helmet by accident flying up, Henry II, of France slain.
he received a Wound in the Eye, and falling from his Horse was latched by some
of his Servants, and carried into a Tower belonging to the Bastile. It is said,
whilst they carried him thither, he looked up, and remembering the Members of
Parliament which he had committed there, said; He feared he had done wrong to
those Innocent Men. The Cardinal of Lorrain, who was present, angry at it,
replied; That Thought was put into his Mind by the Devil, the Enemy of Mankind:
That he ought to be careful of his Motions, and continue constant in his Faith.
Whether this were so or no, I will not affirm, (says Thuanus, my Author)
because I am resolved to write nothing without good Authority: The Physicians
saying too, That in these kinds of Wounds the Speech is lost. At the Report of
this Accident Andrew Vesale, a Famous Physician was presently sent from
Brussels by King Philip, that he might however show his Good Will to this
Prince: But he came too late, the King dying July 2. when he had lived forty
Years, three Months and eleven Days, and reigned twelve Years and three Months.
The Marriage between Margaret his Sister and Philbert Duke of Savoy, was
hereupon hasted, that it might be finished before his Death, and Celebrated it
was without any Pomp or Magnificence.

There was great variety of Opinions, some extolling his Life beyond Reason,
The various Characters of Henry II, of France.
as Martial and Brave, and his Conquests, by which he had enlarged his Kingdom,
adding to it a great part of Italy, Scotland and Corsica: That having obtained
a Victory against Charles V, at Renty, he had reduced that Great Prince to the
Thoughts of a Retreat to a Private Life. That out of his rare Respect to the
Church of Rome, (not regarding his Oath) he had renewed the War and succored
Paul IV. That recalling his Army out of Italy, he had been able to defend
France against the united Forces of King Philip, and Mary of England, and at
last had ended the War, at least by an useful Treaty; and by the Marriages of
his Daughter and Sister, had secured the Public Peace. Others said he had
violated the Glory of his Just Arms by breaking the Truce, and involved himself
(by the Fault of others) in an unjust and unprosperous War, spent vast
Treasures, and lost the Flower of his Kingdom: That the Peace was Desirable,
but very Dishonorable; and the Marriage only a Covering for the infamy of the
Concessions: And that as he delighted too much in War, so he perished
dishonourably like a common Soldier: His Misses, who reigned rather than he,
his Prodigality and Luxury were not forgotten: And the abundance of Poets then
in France, was taken for an Instance of the Corruptions of the Times.

To speak freely without Love or Hatred, he was a Warlike Prince, and too
little affected to the Arts of Peace; but then he was soft and easy, and
governed too much by others. Wise Men then thought there would follow a War,
his Children being very young, his Wife Ambitious, and the Court divided by
Faction: And this accordingly came to pass, and brought forty Years of great
Calamity upon France. But I shall for the future be very short in the French
Affairs, referring the Reader to Davila, and other Writers, of the Civil Wars
of France. The Reader may be pleased to know, That I have in all this followed
Thuanus, abridging him in some Places, and in others transcribing him at large.

The King being crowned, Francis II, a Lad of sixteen Years of Age, succeeds
him. And the Persecution goes on.
and the Dominion of the Queen Dowager as Guardian, and of the Guises, as Prime
Ministers, established to the great Dissatisfaction of the Princes and Nobility
of France, the next Care was to carry on the Persecution against the
Protestants: Oliver the Chancellor was employed against the Members of the
Parliament, which were imprisoned at the time of the King's Death, and S.
Andre, and Anthony de Mouchy against the rest of the People; who, that they
might spread the terror of their Names over the whole Nation, thought fit to
begin with Paris. Their principal Bloodhounds were Russanges, and Claude
David, two Mechanics, and one George Renard, a Tailor, who had all three
professed the Reformed Religion; and were now employed, as best acquainted with
these Men. They drew in two Apprentices shortly after, who had deserted their
Masters: And these, to gain the greater Applause, Slanders against the
Protestants.
confessed not only that they had Nocturnal Meeting, but (which says Thuanus,
was a notorious Lie) that they at them used promiscuous Conjunctions after the
Candles were put out. And this Impudent Story created a great Detestation of
the Protestants, in the Minds of the deluded Catholics, whose Ears were open
to these kinds of Misrepresentations. This lie was carried on with great
Industry, and these two Wretches were led first to the Cardinal of Lorrain, and
then to the Queen, to communicate this rare Secret, no Man daring to contradict
it. The Queen, who was never a Friend to the Protestants, from henceforth was
more than ever enraged against them: But Oliver, the Chancellor, suspecting the
Story, examined these Lads separately, and by their Varying and Contradicting
each other, found it to be a mere Lie. But when it was discovered so to be,
they went unpunished, the Hatred against the Sectaries drowning the Voice of
Public Justice.

However, the Places of Meeting being thus discovered, great Numbers of Men and
Women were taken and imprisoned, and others left the Kingdom, whose Goods were
seized and confiscated. Many Children were left by their Parents, which filled
the Streets with their Cries and Lamentations, to the great Affliction of
almost all Men. This Example was soon after followed at Poictiers, Tolose, Aix,
and generally in the Province of Narbonne, George d' Armagnac, the Archbishop
of that See, a Cardinal, employing all his Interest and Industry, that the
suspected might be taken up. They were by this time become so numerous, that
their very Number gave them Boldness, which being thus exasperated, vented it
self in severe Reflections on the King, Queen and Guises; in which there seemed
to be more than a private Anger and Liberty.

The King of France had been a long time afflicted with a tedious Quartane
Ague, Other Slanders spread against the poor persecuted Protestants.
but overgrowing that Disease, he shot up in height, and grew apace, but was
very Pale, and of a sickly Constitution; being removed to Blois, which was his
Native Air, his Face of a sudden was overspread with Redness, Spots and
Carbuncles, whereupon a Report was raised, That he had the Leprosy, and that a
great number of Children, of less than six Years of Age, had been torn out of
the Arms of their Mothers about the Loire, to make a Bath of their Blood for
the Cure of the King. It was uncertain whether the Guises or their Enemies had
invented this Story, for different Ends; but the Blame of it was certainly cast
upon the Protestants, and the King by that means was exasperated against them
by the Guises. The Protestants, on the other side, put out a Book, to show that
this Story was invented and fathered on them by the Cardinal of Lorrain. And
after this one of the Spreaders of this Report being executed for it, averred
with his last Breath, That he had Orders from the Cardinal so to do.

In the mean time the Process was carried warmly on, Du Bourg condemned to
Death.
against Anna du Bourg, and the rest of the Members of the Parliament, who were
Prisoners in the Bastile; who were sent thither by the Orders of Henry II. Du
Bourg had appealed first to the Parliament of Paris, and after to the
Archbishop of Sens; but his Plea was overruled by both, and the Sentence of the
Bishop of Paris was also confirmed by the Archbishop of Lions. He declared
himself willing, after this to be degraded, That the Sign of the Beast in the
Revelation being blotted out, he might have nothing of Antichrist left in him:
However, this variety of Appeals prolonged their Process some Months. After
this he sent them a plain Confession of his Faith, which agreed in all things
with that of Geneva. Frederick Elector, and Count Palatine of the Rhine, also
so far espoused his Cause, as to write a Letter to the King in his behalf;
desiring his Life might be spared, and that he might be sent to him. December
18. Anthony Minart the President was shot dead, Minars a Persecutor slain.
in the Night, as he returned Home, which was charged upon du Bourg, as done by
his Procurement; because he had foretold, That he would be forced from giving
Sentence against him, if he did not willingly forbear it, upon his challenging
him as his suspected Enemy. However, it hastened the Sentence of Death against
du Bourg, who heard it with great constancy of Mind, he saying, He pardoned his
Judges, who had pronounced it according to their Consciences, though contrary to
the Word of God, and sound Knowledge. At last he advised them to extinguish
these their Fires and repent of their Sins, Du Bourg led to Execution.
and taking his Leave of them said, He went willingly to the Stake. From thence
he was carried in a Cart to the Place of Execution, and having spoken a few
Words to the People, was first hanged and afterward burnt. He only said, My
God forsake me not, that I may not forsake thee. He was 38 Years old, and was
born at Riom in Auvergne, of a Rich and Noble Family, Anthony du Bourg, a
Branch of which had been Chancellor of France under Francis I. His Character.
He took his Degrees at Orleance; and was esteemed a good Lawyer, and an
upright Judge, and many of the most zealous Catholics interceeded for him,
during his Imprisonment, and his Death was deplored by many very heartily. The
rest of the Members of Parliament were restored.
His Constancy partly confirmed and partly exasperated the Minds of the
Protestants; so that from his Ashes there sprung up a Crop of Rebellions and
Conspiracies, which for a long time kept this once most flourishing Kingdom in
a low condition. The rest of the Members were restored, by the Court at last;
de Thou, one of the Members of that Court opposing, and at length mastering the
more bloody Guisians. The meaner People, who being then in Prison, were
dispatched with less Difficulty, some being condemned to Death, others to
Renuntiation, and others to Banishment. Images erected in the Streets to be
Worshipped.


About the same time there was another Project set on foot in France, they
erected Images of the Saints and Virgin Mary in the Streets and Market Places,
and burnt Candles before them in the daytime, singing Songs to their Honor,
and seting Chests, and if any passed by without giving Money and worshipping the
Images, he was presently set upon by the Rabble as an Heretic, and he escaped
well if he was only beaten and trodden into the Channel, and lost not his Life:
Which only served to irritate and unite the Protestants the more.

King Philip having made a Peace with France, King Philip prepares for Spain.
resolved this Year to return into Spain; in order to this he came to Gaunt,
and there summoned a Chapter of the Knights of the Golden Fleece; from thence
he went to Zealand, committing the Government of the Netherlands to Margaret
Duchess of Parma, the Wife of Octavio, his Sister, with a guard of 3500
Spaniards, which were all distributed on the Borders of France, in the Fronteer
Towns. After the Peace he had principally employed Granvel Bishop of Arras, who
had advised him to leave this Guard, for fear of the Lutherans, which were very
numerous in these Provinces, by reason of their Neighborhood to Germany. The
principal Care of these Countries was committed to William Prince of Orange,
and the Count of Egmont, who were Men of great Birth, and had particularly
deserved well of Philip, in his last War with France; these remonstrated
against the leaving of the Spaniards, and freely said; They had not much mended
their Condition, if when they had preserved their Country with their Swords,
they must now be exposed in Peace, to the servile Yoke of Foreign Forces and an
Insolent Soldiery. King Philip was inwardly displeased with this Liberty, yet
suppressed his Resentment; and that he might not seem to go thence offended
with these Great Men; he promised to withdraw those Forces within four Months.
After this he took Shipping at Flushing, August 26. being attended by a Fleet
of 90 Ships. He takes Ship at Flushing.
He met with so great a Tempest on the Shoars of Gallicia, that the Ship in
which he went, perished, the King being hardly got out of her into a small
Bark, that waited upon him. Thuanus says, He ascribed his Delivery to Heaven,
and said, He was preserved by the singular Providence of God to extirpate
Lutheranism: And Meteren, That this Tempest was an Omen of the great Calamities
that attended him and his States, a great part of the Fleet being Shipwrecked.

He soon fell to the Work he believed God had called him, He raises a great
Persecution in Spain.
and began with the extirpation of Heresy; some few had been put to Death
before his arrival, here and there; but the greatest part were kept, that he
might have the joy of seeing them burnt at Vallidolid and Seville. September
24. this pompous Show was begun in the Person of John Ponce, a Son of the Count
de Baylen, who was brought forth with great State, and burnt as an Obstinate
Lutheran; and with him John Gonsalo, a Preacher: After these Isabella Venia,
Maria Viroesia, Cornelia and Bohorquia, which was a Spectacle of great
Compassion and Envy, the last of these being not above 21 Years old, yet
suffering with great Constancy. After these followed Ferdinad de St. Jean, and
Julian Ferdinando, John de Leone and Frances Chavesia a Nun, Christopher
Losada, a Physician. and Christopher de Arles a Monk, and Garsia de Arras. This
last was the Man, who had brought that Spark into Spain, and by his constant
and learned Preaching, improved it so far, that he had brought over to his
Opinion the greatest Part of the Monks of S. Isiodore, and of the Inhabitants
of Seville: yet afterward he had deserted his Companions, and disputed against
them too before the Inquisitors; but being at last convinced of the Wickedness
of it, he repented; and being brought before the Inquisitors, reproached them
as fitter for Mule-Drivers than Judges of the true Faith, of which they were
brutishly Ignorant, though they impudently assumed that Title and Office.
Constantio, the Confessor of Charles V, burnt after he was dead.
Giles and Constantio were reserved to bring up the Reere, but they both died,
yet their Bodies were burnt. This last was Confessor to Charles V, in the last
two Years of his Life and Retirement: Soon after his Death he was imprisoned,
and died in durance. His Body was carried about in a preaching Posture, and the
dreadful ghastly look it had, brought. Tears from some, whilst others laughed
at the theatrical Hypocrisy and Bloody Folly of the Monks.

From hence this Cruel Scene was removed to Vallidolid in October following,
Twenty eight Nobles burnt at Vallidolid.
where in the presence of Philip, 28 of the Principal Nobility of that Country
were bound to Stakes, and most Catholickly and Charitably burnt. Whether
Thuanus were weary of the former Cruelties, or wanted exact Informations of the
Particulars of this last, I cannot say, but the last is most probable; but
however he gives none of their Names or Qualities, and says there was some
Variation in the Time. Thus Spain was preserved from Heresy (as they call it)
not by the Learning or Piety of the Clergy, but the Bloody Zeal of King Philip.

Pope Paul IV, The Death of Pope Paul IV.
being worn out with Years, and very much afflicted with a Dropsy, July 29
sent for the Cardinals, and told them, He was going the way of all Flesh; and
having advised them to chose a good Successor, recommended to them The most
Holy Office of the Inquisition (as he called it) which was the only thing that
could preserve that most Holy See. He, after this, pointed in another Discourse
to King Philip, whom he said God had raised up as the great Defender of the
Catholic Faith; and he added, That he did not doubt but the Christian Religion
would by his Counsels, however now afflicted, be restored to its Ancient State.
He dyed August 18. aged 83 Years, having sat Pope four Years, two Months and
twenty three Days. Whilst he was yet dying, The People of Rome express their
Hatred of him and the Inquisition.
the People broke open all the Prisons, especially those of the Inquisition,
which they also set on Fire, and they were hardly restrained from burning the
Palace of Minerva, where that Court Sits; with the same Fury they beat down the
Image of the Pope, and broke off its Head and Right Hand, and three Days it lay
exposed in the Streets, to the Contempt and Scorn of all Men, after which it
was thrown into the Tiber. After this the Arms of the Caraffa's were demolished
all over the Town. His Body was buried with little Pomp, and a Guard of
Soldiers drawn up to secure it from the Rage of the Populace.

It is observed, The Deaths of several Princes.
That this Year was fatal to the Princes of Europe, August 17, Lawrence Prioly
Duke of Venice died, and was succeeded by Jerome, his own Brother, his rare
Virtues dispensing with the Venetian Laws, of not suffering Honors to continue
in the same Family, lest they might seem Hereditary. September 1, died Hercules
di Este Duke of Ferrara, he married Renata, a Daughter of Lewis XII, King of
France; and was happy in all his Government, except his taking part with Henry
II, in that unjust War against King Philip; as Thuanus calls it: But he was
happy in this, That by his Prudence he extricated himself, and came off with
little or no Damage, in his Treaty of Peace, with that Potent and provoked
Prince.

February 12. died Otho Henry Duke of Bavaria, Count Palatine of the Rhine, and
was succeeded by Frederick III. April 29 died Francis Otho, Duke of Lunenburg.
January 24, died William Prince of Henneberg; so that within the space of one
Year died Charles V, two Kings of Denmark, a King of France, a Duke of Venice,
a Pope, the Elector Palatine, the Duke of Ferrara, and three Queens, Helionora
of France, Mary of Hungary, and Bona Sfortia Queen of Poland.

The Conclave was very much divided in the Election of a new Pope, Pius IV,
elected.
between the French and Spanish Factions, each Side laboring to have a Pope of
their own Interest; So that this Contest lasted three Months; till at last the
Ambassadors of the other Princes began to remonstrate, That this long Delay
tended only to the improving the Differences in Religion, and the increasing
the Enemies of that See. At last, after a Vacancy of four Months and seven
Days, John Angelo Medici was elected, December 26. by the Suffrage of forty
four Cardinals. He was born at Milan, of obscure Parents, and took the Name of
Pius IV: He began his Reign with a Pardon of the Insolences the People of Rome
had committed upon the Arms and Statue of Pope Paul IV, He changes his Manners
to the Worse.
his Predecessor: But he soon changed, for he that till then had seemed the
most Courteous, Patient, Good, Grateful and Liberal of Men, presently became
quite another Man, and took up other Manners: He rescinded all the Acts of his
Predecessor, and presently acknowledged the Imperial Dignity to be lawfully
invested in Ferdinand, the Brother of Charles V, and received his Ambassadors
with great Civility and Respect.

To return near Home, Scotch Affairs.
the Protestant Religion was already received in all Parts of Scotland,
especially in the Towns and Families of the Nobility and Gentry, though in
secret; but Queen Elizabeth having entertained the Reformed Religion, and
settled it in England, they thence presumed she would be a sure Friend to those
of that Persuasion in Scotland: And a Parliament being called to open May 10.
1559. at Sterling, Alexander Cunigham Earl of Glencarn, and Sir Hugh Cambel, an
eminent Knight, and Sheriff of Air, appeared there in the behalf of the
Ministers of the Reformed Religion, who had been summoned to appear there by
the Regent; who was now resolved to dissemble no longer, but to excert her
Authority, and show her Zeal in their Ruin; accordingly she threatened them
severely, and said; She would banish all their Preachers, who under pretense of
Religion promoted a Rebellion. The Deputies amazed with her great Words,
opposed Supplications, remembering her of her Promises; to which she famrtly
replied, That the Promises of Princes were not to be expected to be fulfilled
further than agreed with their Convenience. A Mystery which she ought not to
have revealed however, if her Anger had not broken open the Recesses of her
Heart. At this the two Deputies replied, by Glencarne, That if she would keep
no Promise, they would acknowledge her no more, but renounce their Obedience to
her, the Mischief of which she ought seriously to consider. The Boldness and
Briskness of this Answer abated the Regents Anger and Courage, and she seemed
much calmed, and replied; I will consider of it. The news of this being carried
that Night to S. John's- Town, the Inhabitants of it met that Night openly in
their Churches, and had Sermons. The Queen Regent thereupon ordered all the
Ministers, who were come as far as that City, but attended by vast Numbers of
the Nobility, Gentry and Commons, in order to their appearing in the
Parliament, to return Home, saying; She would not proceed in the Citation; yet
afterward she declared them Rebels for not appearing. This made many leave her
and go over to the Protestants. Whereupon she commanded one James Halyburton,
Mayor of Dundee, to apprehend one Mefan a Preacher, who thought to have lien
hid in that Place; and ordered the People to celebrate Easter-Sunday, after the
ancient manner. When in this no body would obey her, one Areskin of Dundee went
over to them, and assured them, The Regent was so exasperated, that there was
nothing but Ruin to be hoped for at her Hands; and that she had no regard to
her Promise: Thereupon they all resolved to dissemble no longer with her, but
to use Force against Force. One John Knox, a bold and violent Preacher, further
inflamed their overheated Minds by a Seditious Sermon. The Nobility going to
Dinner from the Sermon, a Quarrel arose in the Church, and the Priest that
interposed being severely treated, the Rabble fell upon the Statues and Altars,
and destroyed them in a moment; after this, they fell upon the Franciscan and
Dominican Abbeys, where they also destroyed the Images and Altars. The next
that suffered was the Carthusian Abbey, which they demolished so entirely in
two days (thought very great) that the Footsteps of its Foundations were not
easily to be discovered.

The Regent was by this time as much incensed as they; and swore, She would
revenge this Villainy with the Blood of the Inhabitants, and the Ruin of the
Town. But in the interim the Example spread, and the same things were reacted
at Cupre in Fife. The Regent having assembled some Forces under Hamilton Earl
of Argile, and the Earl of Athole, marched easily toward St. John's- Town,
that the Cannon might overtake them. But the Inhabitants of that Place writing
to their Friends what was doing, he Earl of Glencarne came presently to their
Assistance, with Two thousand five hundred Horse and Foot. And shortly after
they had Seven thousand Men in Arms against her; so that she now saw that Force
would not do; upon which she sent the Lord James Steward Prior of St. Andrews,
and one Cambell (who though Protestants, continued in their Obedience to her) to
treat with the Earl of Glencarne and Areskin, who agreed, May 29, That all
Forces being discharged, the Town should be set open to the Regent, that she
might refresh her self a few days in it: That no French should yet enter into
it, nor come near it by three Miles: That all other Controversies should be
determined in the next Parliament. Whereupon she entered the Town, and was
honorably received. But one of the Inhabitants being slain by an insolent
Soldier, and the Regent expressing not any Concern for it; They from thence
concluded the Treaty would not be long observed, and accordingly about three
days after she ordered the Town to be sacked, changed the Magistrates, and
restoring the mercenary Scots, sworn to and paid by the French. Being hereupon
urged with her Promise, she answered, That Promise was not to be kept with
Heretics, and if she could make an honest Excuse after the Fact committed, she
would take upon her Conscience to kill and undo all that Sect; concluding, That
Princes ought not to have their Promises so strictly urged upon them; and then
went back to Sterling. The Convenience and Strength of the Place, made her
think it worth the breach of her Faith to them; but the Lord James Steward the
Prior of St. Andrew, and the Earl of Argile, were so offended with this
Procedure, that they left her, and went over to the Protestants, and gave them
notice that she intended to Garrison Cupre and St. Andrews, in Fife, with
Frenchmen. Whereupon they destroyed the Franciscan and Dominican Abbeys of the
last City under the Archbishop's Eyes, yet he durst not show the least
discontent at it, but fled into Faulkland. The Regent assembled all the French
she had in the Kingdom, which were two thousand, and one thousand Scots, and
march^d for Cupre the Thirteenth of June. The Earl of Argile, on the other
side, brought in one thousand Protestants to the Relief of St. Andrews, and
Patrick Lermoth Bailiff of the Regality, their Chief Officer, levied five
hundred more of the Inhabitants of St. Andrews, and before Ten of the Clock the
next Morning there were above three thousand Horse and Foot, which being drawn
up to the best Advantage upon the Banks of a small River by Mr. James
Halleburton, Provost of Dundee, a Man of good Experience and Valor, and
therefore made General that day, made so formidable an Appearance, that the
Regent durst not hazard a Battle against them. By this time she saw, to her
Cost, how necessary it was for Princes not to break their Faith. For when she
would have gladly come to Peace, there could no reliance be made upon her
Promise, and she had nothing else to engage. And when they demanded the French
might be sent away, she said that she could not do it without order from the
King of France. So she was desired to withdraw the Garrison out of St. John's-
Town; which when she refused, the Protestants marched thither the Twenty fourth
of June, and in a few days took it. From thence they marched to the Abbey of
Scone, and took and sacked it; and being informed the Regent designed to put a
French Garrison into Sterling, they went in the night from St John's-Town
thither, and surprised it, and ruined all the Monasteries, Images and Altars.
They also changed the Religion at Lithgo, Linlithgow.
in the way to Sterling, and wheresoever they prevailed. The Regent and the
French in the mean time retired from Edinburg to Dunbar, expecting till this
Storm should blow over, and here they heard of the Death of Henry II of France:
The Protestants rejoiced at it, as a thing that tended to their Safety, but had
like to have made it the occasion of their Ruin, by withdrawing from the Army.
The Regent thereupon marched with her Forces to Edinburg, and in the way had a
fair opportunity to have fought and overthrown the remainder of their Army,
which was prevented by the Duke of Hamilton, and James Earl of Dowglass. The
Twenty fourth of July a Truce was made to last till the Tenth of January; which
the Regent observed so much the more exactly, because she found by Experience
that the former breach of Promise had involved her in greater Difficulties and
Distresses. Yet even here she could not totally lay aside her old wont, but
broke Faith as far as she durst.

It is necessary here to Transcribe some of our English Affairs which relate to
Scotland, The English Affairs relating to Scotland.
that we may see how far, and upon what Provocations Queen Elizabeth was
concerned. Henry II, of France had no sooner ended his War with King Philip,
but he began to cast an Eye upon England, as very convenient for the Dauphin
King his Son, and Mary Queen of the Scots, and on that Account refused to
recall the French Forces out of Scotland, as by the last Treaty he had
promised; but instead of that, he sent more thither by stealth, and was very
earnest with the Pope to declare Queen Elizabeth an Heretic and Illegitimate,
and Mary the Lawful Heir of England; which yet was diligently but underhand
opposed by the Imperial and Spanish Agents at Rome. However the Guises never
left exciting the credulous and ambitious Hopes of that Prince, of Uniting the
Crown of England to that of France, by the means of Queen Mary their Heir, till
at last they prevailed on him to assert openly the Pretenses of his Son and
Daughter-in-Law, and to consent they might use this Title, Francis and Mary, by
the Grace of God, King and Queen of Scotland England and Ireland, and to
quarter the Arms of England with those of Scotland, upon their Plate, and on
the Walls of their Palaces, and the Coats of their Heralds. The English
Ambassador complained of this, but to no purpose, as tending to the great
Injury of his Mistress, with whom they had lately made a Peace, they having
never done it in the Life of Queen Mary, though there was a War between the
Nations: That there were great numbers of Soldiers Listed in France and Germany
to be Transported into Scotland upon the same Continent with England. So that
Queen Elizabeth had just reason to suspect the Intentions of the French, who
now breathed nothing but Blood and Death against the Protestants; but that
Prince's Designs, whatever they were, perished with him, to the great Advantage
of Queen Elizabeth, who had otherwise been attacked by all the Forces of France
and Scotland, both as Illigitimate and an Heretic. Yet she ordered his
Exequies to be celebrated at St. Paul's with great Solemnity, and by Charles
Son to the Lord Howard of Effingham her Envoy, condol'd his Death,
congratulated the Succession of Francis his Son, and promised to observe the
Peace between them religiously.

Yet Francis the new King, Fradcis II, of France, claims England in the Right
of Mary his Wife.
and Mary his Wife, the Queen of the Scots, (by the Advice of the Guises, who
now had got the Government of France, in a manner, into their Hands) still
continued the Claim of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the use of the
Arms thereof more openly. And when Throgmorton, the English Ambassador in
ordinany, a Wise and Stout Man, severely expostulated the Business. They
replied, Queen Mary might assume the Arms of England with some small
Distinction, to show her near Relation to that Royal Blood. But he denied this
could be done by the Laws of Heraldry, if the Person using the Arms of another
Family was not derived from a certain Heir. After this they pretended, They
only used these Arms, to force the Queen to lay aside the use of the Arms of
France. To which he answered, That twelve Kings of England (as Dr. Woton showed
in the Treaty of Cambray) had worn the Arms of France, with so undoubted a
Right, that no opposition had been made to it in any Treaty between France and
England. At last, by the Interposition of Montmorancy, who was no Friend to the
Guises, he prevailed, and the Title of England and Ireland, and the use of the
Arms of those Kingdoms was laid aside, because that great Man thought, It was
not for the Honor of France to have any other Title or Arms assumed or
engraven on their Seal than that of the King of France. That this one Title was
as good as many: And he also showed, That the former Kings used no other, though
they claimed the Duchy of Milan, and the Kingdom of Naples. But however, from
this Use of the Title and Arms of England imposed on this young Queen, by the
Arts of the Guises, and the Ambition of Henry II, as from a Fountain, sprung
all those Calamities, which afterward ruined her: For from this Time Queen
Elizabeth was a declared Enemy to the Guises, and a concealed one to the Queen
of Scots; which last enmity, was by the Malice of cunning Men, a growing
Emulation, and new Occasions, which every day sprung up, so improved, that at
last it ended in her Death. For Princes will endure no Rival, and Majesty is
very sensible of Affronts.

The French by the Treaty were to give four Hostages for the Restitution of
Calais within eight Years; but when it was to be done, they would give but
three. The French Provocations against the English.
The English Merchants were ill used in France: A Servant of Throcmorton's, the
Ambassador, was sent by Francis, Grand Prior of France, the Brother of Guise,
publicly to the Galleys: A Pistol was discharged against the Ambassador, in
his own Lodgings: And he had no Plate allowed him, for his Table, but what had
the Arms of England engraven on it, in contempt: Du Brossay was also sent with
Supplies of French into Scotland: And the Galleys of France were brought from
Marseille in the Mediterrancan into the British Seas.

This was the State of Affairs between France and England, The Scotch
Complaints against the French.
when the Troubles of Scotland broke out, and the Lords of the Articles sent
William Maitland their Secretary; who made a deplorable Representation of the
State of that Kingdom to Queen Elizabeth, setting forth; That since the
Marriage of their Queen to the Dauphine of France, the Government of Scotland
had been charged, the French Soldiers laid all waste; The principal Employments
were given to Frenchmen, their Forts and Castles put into their Hands, and
their Money adulterated to their Advantage. That the Design was apparently to
possess themselves of Scotland, if the Queen should happen to die without
Issue. Cecil (who was the Queens Prime Minister) employed Henry Percy Earl of
Northumberland, to find out what the Lords of the Articles designed; and what
Means they had to attain their Ends; and upon what Terms they expected Succors
from England. They said, They desired nothing but the Glory of Jesus Christ,
the sincere Preaching of the Word of God, the extirpation of Superstition and
Idolatry, the Restraint of the Fury of Persecution, and the Preservation of
their ancient Liberties. That they knew not for the present how to effect this;
but they hoped the Divine Goodness, which had begun the Work, would bring it to
its desired End, with the Confusion of their Enemies: That they earnestly
desired to enter into a Friendship with the Queen of England to the
Preservation of which they would Sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes.

The Consideration of these things was not warmly entertained in England, Queen
Elizabeth holds off at first; but,
be cause the Scots had little Money, and were not over-well cemented among
themselves; so they were only advised, Not to enter rashly into a War. But as
soon as the English knew that the Marquess of Elboeuf, the Queen of Scots
Uncle, was listing Men in Germany by the Rhinegrave, for a War in Scotland,
That Cannons were sent to the Ports, and Preparations made to conquer that
Kingdom, and that in greater Quantities than seemed necessary to reduce a few
unarmed Scots: That the French, to draw the Danes into this War, had proffered,
That the Duke of Lorrain should renounce his Right to Denmark: And that they
were renewing their Solicitations with the Pope, To give a declaratory Sentence
for the Queen of Scot, against the Queen of England: Thereupon Sir Ralph
Sadler, a wise Man, was sent to the Earl of Northumberland, and Governor of
the middle Marches, on the Borders of Scotland, at last is forced to unite with
the Protestants of Scotland. Reasons assigned for the driving the French out of
Scotland.
to assist him, and Sir James Croft, Governor of Berwick. The English Council
could not see whither all this tended, unless the French designed to invade the
Kingdom of England, as well as assume the Title and Arms of it.

Upon this the Council of England began to consider in good earnest, and with
great Application of the Scotch Affairs, it was thought a thing of very ill and
dangerous Example, that one Prince should undertake the Protection of the
Subjects of another Prince, who were in Rebellion: But then it was thought
impious not to assist those of the same Religion, when persecuted for it. And
it was certainly a great Folly, to suffer the French, the sworn Enemies of
England, when they challenged the Kingdom of England too, and were at Peace
with all the rest of the World, to continue armed in Scotland, which lay so
near and convenient for the Invasion of England, on that side which had the
greatest number of Roman Catholics, both of the Nobility and Commons. This was
thought a betraying the Safety and Quiet of the whole Nation, in a very
cowardly manner: And therefore it was concluded, It was no Time now for lazy
Counsels; but that it was best to take up their Arms, and as the English Custom
was, To prevent their Enemies, and not stay till they should begin with us. It
was always as lawful to Prevent an Enemy as to repel him, and to defend our
selves the same way that others Attack us. That England could never be Safe,
but when it was Armed and Potent; and that nothing could contribute more to
this End than the securing it against Scotland. That in order to this the
Protestants of Scotland were to be protected, and the French Forces driven out
of it; and this was not to be done by Consultations, but by Arms. That the
neglect of these Methods had not long since lost Calais, to our great Hindrance
and Shame: That a little before, whilst the French pretended to preserve the
Peace with great Fidelity, they had surprised the Fort of Ambleteul, and some
other Places near Bologne, and by that means forced the English to surrender
that important Place. That we must expect the same Fate would attend Berwick,
and the other Fronteer Garrisons, if they did not forthwith take Arms, and not
rely any longer on the French Pretenses of maintaining the Peace, which were
never to be believed, their Counsels being secret, their Ambition boundless,
and their Revenues immense; so that it was then a Proverb in England, France
can neither be Poor nor Quiet three Years together: And Queen Elizabeth was
used to say that Expression of Valentinean the Emperor was good, The War
resolved.
Francum amicum habe, at non vicinum: Let a Frank be thy Friend, but not thy
Neighbor. So that upon the whole it was conclu^^d, That it was Just, Honest,
Necessary, and our Interest, to drive the French, as soon as was possible out
of Scotland.

Hereupon William Winter Master-Gunner in the Fleet, The War begun.
was sent with a Fleet to Edinburgh Frith, who to the great terror of the
French fell upon their Ships of War on that Coast, and their Garrison in the
Isle of Inchkeith. The Duke of Norfolk, then Lieutenant of the North, was also
sent toward Scotland, William Lord Gray, (who had well defended Guines against
the French, tho unsuccessfully) was made Governor of the Eastern and Middle
Marches; and Thomas Earl of Sussex, who had been Lieutenant of Ireland in the
Reign of Queen Mary, was sent thither again with the same Character; and
commanded to have a particular care the French did not excite the barbarous and
superstitious Irish to a Rebellion, under the Pretense of Religion.

The French in the interim were not idle, but the Regent reproached the Lords
of the Congregation (so the Protestants were called) in a Proclamation, that
they had brought Englishmen frequently into their Houses, that came with
Messages unto them, and returned Answers back to England; though they made no
Answer to them, because they did not think it convenient either to deny it, or
openly to Avow it for the present; and the King of France and Queen Mary wrote
each a distinct Letter to the Lord James Stewart, threatening him with
Punishment as his wickedness deserved, and by Word of Mouth let him know, That
he would rather lose the Crown of France, than not be revenged on the Seditious
Tumults raised in Scotland. And one Octavian, a French Captain, landed soon
after with a French Regiment, great Sums of Money and Ammunition of War, and was
forthwith sent back by the Regent for one hundred Horse, and four Ships of War;
and in the mean time she fell to Fortify Isith or Leith, expelling all the
former Inhabitants, and making it a Colony of French only, it being a
Sea-Port-Town, fit to receive Supplies, and a Place that might serve the French
Companies for a Refuge, if they should happen to be reduced to any great
straight. This was done about September, as appears by a Letter of the Nobility
about it in that Month. The Regent's Reputation was by this time at so low an
Ebb, that nothing she said was believed, and all she offered suspected.

About this time, Four Divines and two thousand Men, sent from France to
Convert the Scots.
M. Pelleuce Bishop of Amiens (afterward Bishop of Sens) arrived at Leith,
attended by three Doctors of the Sorbon, Furmer, Brochet and Feretier; he
pretended he came to dispute with the Preachers of the Congregation, and he
sent to some of the Nobility residing then at Edinburg, desiring a Hearing: But
for fear their Arguments might not prove so effectual as was expected, Le
Broche, a French Knight, came over at the same time with two thousand Foot to
reinforce their Sylogisms. The Congregation-Nobility reject however their armed
Logic, and would have nothing to do with them.

The Eighteenth of October, the Lords assembled their Forces at Edinburg, The
Lords of Scotland Arm against them, and depose the Regent.
and the Regent, with the Bishop of St. Andrews, Glasgow, Dunkeld, and the Lord
Seaton, the same day entered Leith. And some Messages having passed betwixt
them, they proceeded so far at last as to suspend the Queen-Regent's
Commission, discharging her of all Authority till the next Parliament,
prohibiting the Officers to serve under her, or by color of her Authority to
exercise their Offices from thenceforth. This Decree bears Date the Twenty
third of October.

The Twenty fifth they summoned the Town of Leith, She prevails over them.
commanding all Scots and Frenchmen to depart within twelve hours. But failing
in this Attempt, the Regent took Edinburg, and restored the Mass there, and all
those of the contrary Religion were forced to flee into England, or where they
could find shelter. Hereupon the Queen sent for more Forces, and the Marquis
d'Elboeuf was sent from Diep with eighteen Ensigns of Horse, which were
dispersed at Sea by Tempest, so that he arrived not at Leith before the Spring
of the next year.

The Lords retired first to Sterling, and then to Glasgow, where they reformed
all things after their usual manner; and in the mean time they sent William
Maitland and Robert Melvil to Queen Elizabeth, where at last they obtained what
they designed in the manner I have expressed.

The French hearing this, resolved to suppress the Lords before the English
should come up to their Assistance, and thereupon began to waste and spoil the
Country to Sterling; but though they met with little Resistance, yet they could
not attain their End.

In February an Agreement was made between the English and the Scotch
Commissioners, Scotch Liberties and Freedoms from a French Conquest, and for
the Expulsion of the French Forces out of Scotland, The Scotch Lords go on with
their Reformation.
the Articles of which were Signed the Twenty seventh of that Month. About this
time the English Fleet, under Captain Winter, came up, and took all the French
Ships in the Fyrth of Edinburg, which much amazed the French who were then
marching for St. Andrews, by the Seaside; whereupon they returned to Leith.
About the same time, the Lords of the Congregation reformed Aberdene, but the
Earl of Huntley coming up in good time, saved the Bishop's Palace, which had
else been reformed to the Ground.

The English Landforces, to the number of two thousand Horse, The English
Forces enter Scotland, and besiege Leith.
and six thousand Foot, entered Scotland, under the Command of the Lord Gray, in
the beginning of April. The English at first beat the French into Leith, and
battered the Town very diligently; but remitting in their Care and Industry,
the French made a Sally out of Leith, and cut off a great number of the
English, which made them more vigilant. The last of April, a Fire happened in
the Town, which burnt the greatest part of it, with much of the Soldiers
Provisions. The Seventh of May the Town was Stormed, but the Ladders proving
too short, an hundred and sixty of the English were slain, and nothing was
gained. Soon after there came up two thousand English more.

In the mean time the French King sent to Queen Elizabeth, The French proffer
to restore Calais to the English.
that if she would withdraw her Army out of Scotland, he would restore Calais
to her: To which she replied, She did not value that Fisher-Town so much, as to
hazard for it the State of Britain. Thereupon the French perceving no Peace
could be had without the French were recalled out of Scotland, and disdaining
to treat with the Scots who were their Subjects, they began a Treaty with the
Queen of England.

In the mean time, Mary of Lorain, Queen Regent of Scotland, died in the Castle
of Edinburg, the Tenth of June, partly of Sickness, and partly of Displeasure:
Before her Death, The Death and Character of Mary Queen-Regent of Scotland.
she sent for the Duke of Wastellerand, the Earl of Argile, Glencarne,
Marshall, and the Lord James, and bewailing the Calamities of Scotland, prayed
them to continue in Obedience to the Queen their Sovereign, and to send both
the French and English out of the Kingdom; so asking their Pardon, and granting
them hers, she took her leave with many Tears, kissing the Nobility one by one,
and giving the rest her Hand to kiss.

She was a Wise, Good, Religious Princess, full of Clemency and Charity, and
would doubtless have prevented the Calamities of Scotland, which befell there in
the end of her days, if she had been left to her own Measures; but being
governed by the Orders of France, she was forced to do and say what she did, to
her great dishonor and disquiet, which too at last ended in the Ruin of those
she most desired to Promote, as it always happens in Breach of Faith. She would
often say, That if her own Counsel might take Place, she doubted not but to
compose all the Dissension within that Kingdom, and to settle the same in a
perfect Peace upon good Conditions.

Soon after her Death (or as Thuanus says, The French forced to leave Scotland.
a little before it) Ambassadors from France and England came to Edinburg, who
sending for the Scoth Nobility, began to treat about the sending the French out
of Scotland; which was at last agreed, and the Sixteenth of July the French
embarked on the English Fleet for France; and the English Army the same day
began their march by Land for Berwick, and the Fortifications of Leith and
Dunbar were dismantled; but sixty Frenchmen were left to keep the Castle of
Dunbar; and the same number the Isle of Inchkeeth, until the States should find
means to maintain the said Forts upon their own Charges from all Peril of
Foreign Invasion.

In August the Parliament met, A Parliament in Scotland.
which established a Confession of Faith contrary to the Roman Religion, and
passed three other Acts, one for Abolishing the Pope's Jurisdiction and
Authority, another for Repealing the Laws formerly made in favor of Idolatry,
and a third for the Punishing the Hearers and Sayers of Mass; and with these
Acts Sir James Sandelands was sent into France for the Royal Assent of the King
and Queen, which was refused, and he severely treated for undertaking that
Embassy by the Guises.

The Oppression of the Princes of the Blood in France by the House of Guise, A
Conspiracy in France.
and of the Protestants by the Roman Catholics, caused a dreadful Conspiracy,
which drew in all the desperate People of that once most Fourishing Kingdom, to
the great hazard of its Ruin. The concealed Head of this Conspiracy was Lewis
Prince of Conde, the apparent Godfrey de la Bar, Sieur de Renaudie, a Young
Gentleman of an Ancient and Noble Family of Perigort, who falling into a long
and ruinous Suit for a Living, which his Uncle had intercepted and detained
from him in Angoumois, had not only been overthrown by his Opposite, but had
also, for some fraud in the management, been severely Fined and Banished for
some time; he at Lausanne and Geneva had contracted a Friendship with some
others of his Country, who had fled thither on the account of Religion, by whom
he had been brought over to that Persuasion; and after returning into France in
disguise, he had wandered over a great part of the Kingdom, and made many
Friends of that Religion, and being a Stout, Subtle Man, and exasperated by the
things he had suffered, he undertook this dangerous Employment, willingly as a
means to revenge the Wrongs he had undergon.

The Conspirators met the First of February, The Conspiracy of Blois formed at
Nantes.
at Nantes, in great numbers, on diverse Pretenses, and there formed the fatal
Design of Blois, for the Surprising the King and the Court the Fifteenth of
March, and the bringing the Guises to a Trial for all their Encroachments on
the French Privileges, and Abuses of the Royal Authority. The whole Design is
so well expressed in Davila his History of the Civil Wars of France, that I
shall rather refer the Reader thither for his Satisfaction in it, than attempt
to reduce it into a Dark, and scarce perhaps Intelligible Compendium.

It was very extraordinary, Thuanus his Reflection on this Conspiracy.
that before ever this Kingdom had in the least been shaken by any Commotion,
the Majesty of the King, the Authrity of the Governors and Magistrates being
all in their former vigor, that such great numbers of Men, in all Parts of the
Kingdom, should enter into so unheard, so dangerous a Design. But such was the
Hatred they bore to the House of Guise, and the Detestation that all Men began
to entertain of the bloody Practices against the Protestants, that though so
very many were engaged in it, yet they all kept Faith each to other, and
concealed the Secret; so that the Guises had notice of it from Italy, and
Germany, before any of their Spies in the Kingdom scented or suspected it.

At last one Pierre Avanelles, an Advocate of the Parliament of Paris, The
discovery of the Conspiracy.
and a Protestant, out of pure Conscience, for the preventing so great a
Scandal and Mischief, discovered this Conspiracy to Stephen L'Allemont Sieur de
Vouzay, Secretary to the Cardinal of Lorain, he having got knowledge of it from
La Renaudie, the Chief Agent in it, who lodged in his House. The King was then
gone from Blois to Ambois, which was a small and strong Town, which had also a
great and a very strong Castle, and easily to be defended. Here de Vouzay
acquainted the King and the Council with it, and was immediately Imprisoned, to
be produced as a Witness against the Conspirators, if it proved to be true; and
to be treated as an Impostor, Andelot and Coligny come to Court on an
Invitation.
if it happened otherwise. The Guises were very desirous that Andelot, and
Coligni the Admiral, should be invited to Court, fearing or hoping rather that
they too were in the Plot. And they accordingly came presently to the
Queen-Regent, and Coligni, in a Discourse before Oliver the Chancellor,
inveighed sharply against the violent Proceedings in Matters of Religion, which
had exasperated a great part of the People against the Government, and
concluded, That he believed the granting Liberty of Conscience, and suspending
the Severity of the Laws, till the Controversies of Religion were composed by a
Lawful and Free Council, would very much appease and quiet them. Oliver, who
desired a Reformation, Oliver the Chancellor of France, hated the Persecution,
and desired a Reformation.
and hated the bloody Methods then in use, was glad of this Proposition, and
recommended to the Guises the granting of a general Pardon, and Liberty of
Conscience, till a Free Counsel could be had, as an excellent Remedy of these
Evils: Which was presently granted, excluding notwithstanding those who under
pretense of Religion had conspired against the King, his Mother, Brothers, or
Ministers: Which was published the Twelfth of March in the Parliament of Paris;
which yet never shocked the Conspirators, who were well resolved. The same day
Renaudie came to Carreliere in Vendosmois, not far from Ambois, and appointed
the rest to meet him the Seventeenth of the same Month (the King having changed
his Abode, they were forced to change the Day.) That day, Deligneris another of
the Conspirators, and a Captain, repenting the Undertaking, discovered it to
Queen Catherine. The Guises had by this time got a good Body of the Nobility
about the King, and a Party of the Conspirators being met in Arms near Tours,
the Inhabitants of that City would not endeavor to take them, but suffered
them to escape to Saumur; the Seventeenth of March was the day now appointed
for this great Design, and Renaudie, who knew nothing of the Discovery, marched
boldly up to Ambois, and though great part of his Foot were cut in pieces in
the Woods, as they came up in small Parties, or taken Prisoners by the Horse
who were sent out for that purpose, many of which were presently hanged on the
Battlements of the Castle, in their Boots and Spurs, yet Renaudie their Chief
Commander escaped, and was not taken then.

The Duke of Guise obtained a Commission to constitute himself the King's
Lieutenant General in France the Eighteenth of March; and Oliver the Chancellor
obtained, before he would pass it, a Pardon for all who should lay down their
Arms within twenty four hours, and return home with only two or three
Companions, giving them liberty to present what Petitions they pleased in a
peaceable way to the King. The Nineteenth of March, Renaudie met Pardaillan,
who was sent with a Party of Horse to take up such as he found in Arms.
Pardaillan would have fired a Pistol against Renaudie, but it missing, Renaudie
run him through, Renaudie slain.
but was slain in the same moment by Pardaillan's Servant himself. His Body was
brought to Ambois, and hanged on a Gibbet, with this Inscription, The Leader of
the Rebels. Two of his Servants were taken at the same time, and some Papers in
a private Character, which proved to be a Petition on the besalf of the
Protestants, designed to be presented to the King in an Assembly of the States,
Begging a Remission of the Severity of the Laws against them, and Protesting
the utmost Duty and Obedience to him. Many of those who were taken, were
examined against the King of Navar, and the Prince of Conde. Who said, They
knew nothing of Navar, The King of Navar, Conde, Coligni and Andelot suspected.
but heard that Conde should have been their Captain. Whence the Duke of Guise
concluded, That Coligni and Andelot were certainly in it, though Queen
Catherine was of a contrary Opinion; but however Conde, who was then in the
Castle with the King, was commanded not to depart without leave, which he
wisely dissembled. Some few were Tried for this Conspiracy, but many more were
Hanged up by Night, and many Merchants were Slain as they traveled about their
business for their Money, but under Pretense they were in the Conspiracy, so
that there was nothing but Slaughter and Murders to be seen.

About the same time, Oliver the Chancellor dies.
Oliver the Chancellor of France died, not so much of Oldage or Sickness, as
Discontent at the Cruelcy and Iniquity of the Times; his Death was foretold by
some of the Conspirators, who reproached him for his unworthy Complyances. And
when the Cardinal of Lorain visited him in his last Sickness, he expressed his
Resentments against him, and died weeping and sighing for what he had done.
Michel de l'Hospital, a great and a good Man, succeeded him, by the procurement
of Queen Catherine.

Though this Conspiracy was principally designed against the Guises, yet they
desired the World should believe these Men had first made a Defection from God
by Heresy, and then had conspired against the King, Queen Catherine, and the
King's Brothers: The Thirty first of March the King wrote to all the Governors
of the several Provinces, to take great care that the Relics of this
Conspiracy did not imbroil their Provinces; after which there was the like
Account sent to the Elector Palatine, and the rest of the Protestant Princes of
Germany. The Princes of Germany thereupon, among other things, desired the King
to consider whether he had not yielded more than was fit to some about him
(meaning the Guises) who out of an inbred Malice and Cruelty exercised great
Cruelties on Men that were never convicted of any Crime. There they beseech his
Majesty, that he would put a stop to the Sufferings of these Innocents, and
seeing they embrace the same Religion with us, we cannot but desire an end may
be put to those cruel and hasty Executions. This Germany has found (say they)
to be the only Remedy, and France has no other left to restore its Peace, than
by granting a Peace to the Minds and Consciences of Men.

Coligni the Admiral leaving the Court, Coligni sent into Normandy by the Queen.
Queen Catherine ordered him to go into Normandy, and to enquire diligently
into the Causes of the late Conspiracy: He laid the blame of it on the
boundless Ambition of the Guises, and advised the Queen to observe inviolably
the late Edict for Liberty of Conscience, and to put a stop to the Persecution
of the Innocent, as she valued the safety of the King, and the quiet of the
Kingdom. Some of the Captives who had escaped out of the Prisons at Blois,
wrote Letters to the Cardinal of Lorain, telling him, they knew the Escape of
the Conspirators was very afflictive to his Eminence: That therefore they were
gone to seek them, and hoped in a short time to return better attended. This
rallery was a great Mortification to that fearful Minister, who feared new
Commotions, and persuaded the King to put out a General Pardon for all Roman
Catholics. The Clergy labor to bring the Inquisition into France.
In May the King put out another Edict, which was called the Edict of
Romoraulin, by which he took the Cognizance of Heresy from the Civil
Magistrates, and gave it solely to the Bishops, which about five years before
had been so vigorously opposed by the Parliament of Paris. De l' Hospital the
Chancellor is said to have consented to it, only to prevent the violent Guises
from introducing the Spanish Inquisition, which they had recommended to Henry
II, and were now promoting with all their might in France. From henceforward
the Cardinal of Lorain became more placable to those of the Religion, and to
stop the Mouths of those who desired an Assembly of the three Estates,
persuaded Queen Catherine to call an Assembly of the Princes at Fountain-bleau,
to consult of the Public Affairs.

About this time Conde left the Court, Conde leaves the Court.
and by a Letter gave his Brother the King of Navar an Account of the Ill Will
the Guises bore toward him, and that a Debate had been held in the King's
Cabinet-Council, for the taking him into Custody: That therefore he had been
forced to betake himself to him into Bearne. This Letter was soon after
discovered to the Guises who had entertained Spies in the Family of Conde, who
presently wrote a Letter to Conde full of sugared Expressions of Kindness and
Affection; which Conde presently sent to his Brother, who very much approved
his Resolution, but advised him to return to Court and clear his Innocence;
which Conde did not think safe. Perrenot the Brother of Cardinal Granvell, in
an Audience he had of Queen Catherine, told her, there was no way to restore
the Peace of France, but by Banishing the Guises some time from Court, and
Recalling the Princes of the Blood and Montmorancy to their former Stations.

The Twenty first of August, An Assembly of the Princes of France.
the Assembly of the Princes and Notable Men of France was Opened at
Founain-bleau. The Chancellor in his Speech, among other things, complained,
That the Hearts of the People of France were incensed against the King and his
Principal Ministers, but the Cause of it was not known, and therefore it was so
difficult to find out and apply a fitted Remedy. For That, the greatest part of
the Men of this Kingdom being weary of what is present, fearful of what is to
come, divided by different Religions, and desirous of Change, are willing to
imbroil the Kingdom. And therefore their principal Business was to find out the
cause of this Discase, and apply a fitting Remedy to this Sickly Body.

Coligni the Admiral, who was present the next day, Coligni delivers a Petition
from the Protestants to the King.
presented a Petition to the King, which had been given him whilst he was in
Normandy, by a vast number of his Subjects; desiring that the Severity of the
Laws against them, might be mitigated, till their Cause had been duly
considered and determined: That they might have Public Places assigned them
for the Exercise of their Religion, lest their Private Meetings should be
suspected by the Government: And they invoked God to bear Witness, That they
had never entertained any disloyal Thought against his Majesty, nor would do
so: But on the contrary they offered up to God, most devout Prayers for the
Preservation and Peace of his Kingdom.

The Bishop of Valence, a Learned, Grave and Experienced Person, The Bishop of
Valence seconds it.
confirmed this Opinion, showing the great Corruptions in the Church had given
Birth and promoted these Divisions in the Minds of Men, which were rather
exasperated than extirpated by harsh means and bloody Persecutions. Then he
showed the great Use of General Councils, for the composing the Differences in
the Church: And advises the King to call a National Council.
And therefore he said, He wondered how the Pope could quiet his Conscience one
Hour, whilst he saw so many thousand Souls perish, which God, without doubt,
would require at his Hands. But if (said he) a General Council cannot be had,
the King ought to follow the Examples of Charles the Great, and S. Lewis his
Ancestors, and call a National Council of France; commanding the Teachers of
the Sectaries to be present in it, and to enter into Conference with the
Divines, concerning the Points in Controversy, etc. That the Sectaries were
worthy of Blame for their Rebellion, and the Roman Catholics for having been
too Bloody and Cruel in the Prosecution of them; which had only served to
irritate the Minds of Men, and make them enquire more greedily into the
Opinions of those they saw suffer so patiently. That the ancient Fathers
employed no other Arms against the Arians, Macedonians and Nestorians, but the
Word of God, and the Princes then did only banish Heretics.

The Archbishop of Vienne represented the great Difficulties that hindered the
obtaining a General Council; For (said he) there is none of us who does not
know what great pains Charles V, took to procure a General Council, and what
Arts and Stratagems the Poples employed to defeat that commendable hope this
pious Prince had entertained. The Disease is of too acute a Nature to attend
long Delays, which are very uncertain; and therefore the best way was to call a
National Council; which the King had already promised, and the urgent
Necessities of the Church would not suffer him to delay any longer. Having
shown how this had been constantly practiced from the Times of Clovis to
Charles the Great, and so downward to the times of Charles VIII. He concluded,
That the Necessity being Great, they ought to delay no longer, nor to regard
the Oppositions the Pope would make against this Method. For the appeasing the
Civil Dissentions of France, he advised the calling an Assembly of the three
Estates.

The third day Coligni discoursed of the Petition he had presented; and being
asked, why it was not subscribed? He said, There was above fifty thousand Men,
in the Nation, ready to subscribe it: Concluding, That there was nothing more
calamitous, than for a Prince to fear his Subjects: And they to be at the same
time afraid of him. That the House of God (the Church) was to be forthwith
reformed, the Army to be dishanded, and an Assembly of the three Estates called
as soon as might be.

The Cardinal of Lorrain, was so enraged with Coligni's Speech, The Cardinal of
Lorrain replies to Coligni.
that he made a sudden reply to it. That the whole scope of ill Men was to
deprive the King of his military Guards, that they might the more easily
oppress him. That the late Conspiracy was against the King, and not against his
Ministers, as was pretended: That as to what concerned Religion, he would
submit to Learned Men: But then he protested, That no Councils should be of
that Authority with him, as to depart in any thing from the Customs of his
Ancestors; and especially in the most sacred Mystery of the Lord's Supper: And
as to an Assembly of the States, he submitted that entirely to the King. He
concluded, The Sectaries were a Seditious, Proud sort of Men, and that the
Gospel and Faith of Christ was made an occasion of Tumults and Seditions by
them, and therefore they were to be severely prosecuted. Yet he was for
mitigating the Severity of the Laws toward such, as met peaceably without
Arms, who were to be reduced to their Duty by more gentle Methods, more than by
Force. To which purpose he would freely spend his Life. That the Bishops and
Curates should by their presence redeem the Time they had lost, and the
Governors of the Provinces be forced to do their Duties. But then, since there
was nothing under Debate, but want of Discipline, and Corruption of Manners, it
seemed very unnecessary, that either a General or a National Council should be
called. The free Confession of this Cardinal, is the Opinion of the whole
Party; and though the name of a General Council makes a great noise, yet we
very well know how they have treated the ancientest and best Councils, when
they have in any thing crossed their Humors or Interests, and from thence may
conclude, They will never submit to any that shall not be conformable to their
Wills.

The twenty sixth of August, A Decree passed for an Assembly of the three
Estates, and the suspension of the Laws against Heretics. A design upon Lions.
a Decree was past that an Assembly of the three Estates should meet before the
tenth of December, in the City of Meaux. And that if a General Council could
not be had, a National Council should be assembled. And in the mean time all
Severities in matters of Religion should be omitted. Thus (says Thuanus, my
Author) the Protestant Religion, which before was so much hated, began by
degrees to grow up and get Strength with the tacit Consent of its greatest
Enemies. Thus ended the Assembly of the Princes, and Notable Men of France.

About this time Ferrieres Maligni, one of the Conspirators of Amboise,
escaping out of Prison, had a Design to surprise Lions, and had formed so great
a Party in the Town, as might have done it, but remitting the execution of his
Project to a more convenient time, by order of the King of Navarr, the thing
was discovered, and many of his Partisans taken; but yet such was the constancy
of the Party, that though many were tortured, yet nothing could be found out to
prove the King of Navarr or Prince of Conde concerned in this Attempt. Yet were
they invited to Court by the King, to purge themselves of the Suspicion, upon a
Promise they should receive no Injury: But this they wisely refused as not
Reasonable.

This and several other such alarms procured an Edict, That no Prince or other
person, of what condition soever, should provide Money, Soldiers, Arms or
Horses; and if any Person did otherwise, it should be taken for High Treason.
The Cardinal of Bourbon, was also employed to bring the Princes of his Family
to Court, by passing his Faith to them, That nothing should be done against
them. The three Estates, in the interim, meeting at Meaux, were from thence
adjourned to Orleans, and the Marshal de Thermes was sent to Poictiers, with
two hundred Horse, to watch the Motions of the King of Navar, if he came to the
Assembly.

The Protestants in France having obtained a little respite from the Pressures
of the Persecution by the late Edicts, The Protestants of France increase
wonderfully, during the Peace. In some places they grow insolent.
increased, and there were great Assemblies of them in all Parts of the
Kingdom, especially in Dauphine. At Valence, which was an University much
celebrated for the Study of the Law, the fear of the Laws being now removed,
there succeeded in its stead a lawless Boldness and Petulance; so that some of
the Young Students forcibly seized the Franciscan's Church, for the holding
their Assemblies. At Montelimard, they had also their Public Sermons, and at
Romans: And which was yet more insufferable, they met armed, and were very
injurious and rude to the Roman Catholic: Which as to Valence was soon after
revenged with equal Cruelty and perfidy, by one Maugiron, who was sent for that
purpose by the Duke of Guise. At Romans about sixty were taken and committed to
Prison. And at Montelimard, the King's Faith was by Maugiron pawned and
forfeited again; and the Town taken and plundered. The number of the
Protestants increased very greatly also in Bretagne and Normandy, and they had
their Public Sermons in many Cities, in those Provinces, which were managed
with greater Modesty than those in Dauphine.

Though the Guises had given many Testimonies of their small regard to their
Faith; The King of Navar^ and Prince of Conde promise to come to the Assembly
of the States. The Archbishop of Vienne dies.
yet the King of Navarr, and Prince of Conde, had now passed their Promise to
the Cardinal of Bourbon, That they would present themselves in the next
Convention of the States; and that Cardinal had given the King Assurance of it,
being then at Paris; and the King of Navarr was already on the Road. The
Archbishop of Vienne falling sick about this time, by a Letter signified to the
Duchess of Monpensier, his great Confident, That he certainly knew, That if
the King of Navarr and the Prince of Conde came to Court, they would be
committed to Prison; and that Bourbon would not be able to make good his
Promise to them, who was only employed to deceive his Brothers. That
Montmorancy was laid at too, and one la Sague, a Villain, had been examined
against him, and had confessed a Treaty with the Queen of England; That so soon
as the War in Scotland was ended, the Soldiers would be employed in France.
Soon after, this venerable Prelate died of Grief and Vexation. He was a learned
and an honest Man, not infected with the Leprosy of Flattery; Lutheran.

The eighteenth of October, the King entered Orleans, The States meet at Orleans.
attended by a terrible Guard of Soldiers; which made that City more like a
Garrison than the seat of an Assembly of the States. Navarr arrived the
thirtieth of the same Month, with a small Retinue and unarmed; and quickly
found how little the Guises did regard their Faith or Promise, by the little
Respect was shown to him and his Brother, at his Entry, and in their first
appearance before the King: Navarr and Conde secured
And Conde was presently committed to Prison, declaiming against the breach of
Faith, made by the King and the Guises, and the Credulity of his Brother, the
Cardinal of Bourbon, which had betrayed the whole Family into their Enemies
Hands. The King of Navarr seemed to have more Liberty, but was under the
restraint of a Guard; deprived of the Attendance of his own Servants, and
watched by Men, who had order to observe his Looks and Motions; and his
Secretary and all his Letters were seized. The thirteenth of November the
Prince of Conde was examined by the Chancellor and others, in Prison: Who told
them, It belonged not to them to try or examine the Princes of the Blood, but
to the Parliament of Paris and the Peers of France, and the whole Body of the
States. Bourdin the Attorney General, at last told him, That if he declined the
Judgment of these Delegates, he should be taken for convict, and Sentence
accordingly pronounced against him, as guilty of High Treason, and the Witness
should be examined elsewhere. Perceiving by this the head-longhast of the
Guises, his Lady delivered a Petition to the King, for learned Council, which
was granted him: But his Servants were taken from him, and he was denied a
Conference with his Brother of Navarr and the Cardinal, though he desired some
of the Kings Ministers might be present. These Hardships created him much
Compassion in the Minds of Men, and they thought he was hardly used, which made
his Enemies yet more hated. They on the other hand despised the Thoughts of
Men, and bent all their Thoughts how they might destroy the King of Navarr, for
they thought they were secure of Conde. Among other ways, they intended to have
assassinated him in the King's Chamber; of which an account was given him by
some of Guise his Creatures. Upon which he resolved to draw his Sword and dye
fighting, if he were thus attacked; and desired an old Friend to take care to
preserve his Bloody Clothes, and show them to his Son. When he had thus done,
he went unsent for into the King's Chamber, and taking the King by the Hand, so
by his Looks prevailed upon him, that his Heart failed him, and he either
repented, or durst not proceed in this Design. Queen Catharine was already
weary of the Insolence of the Guises, and desirous to save the House of Bourbon
as a Curb upon them; to this purpose she gave order to the Chancellor, to put
what Rubs he could in their way. The Guises, in the mean time, hastened the
Trial of Conde, as much as was possible, esteeming all Delays dangerous to them.

The sixteenth of November, the King being abroad to hunt, Francis II dies.
was taken extreme ill, which caused Montmorency to make the more haste to
Court. The twenty sixth of that Month the Kings Disease grew very great and
hopeless: This turned the Rage and Fury of the Guises into Fear and
Consternation, when they considered what they should lose in the Death of that
Prince. Thereupon they began to work upon Queen Catharine, by other Methods, to
flatter and crouch to her, and to represent the King of Navarr and Prince of
Conde, as exasperated to that height by their late Sufferings, that without
doubt they would seek her Ruin; but they for their Parts would stand by her,
and serve her with great Fidelity. They desired therefore Navarr might be
committed as well as his Brother had been, before the King dyed. The Chancellor
prevented this by showing, in a grave Oration, That it would certainly involve
France in a Civil War. The fifth of December the King dyed, having lived
seventeen years and ten Months, and reigned one Year, five Months and twenty
Days. His Youth, and the shortness of his Reign, makes it uncertain whether he
ought to be ranged with the Good or Bad Princes; and the more, because not he
but the Guises governed.

This Accident changed the state of things, and saved the Life of Conde,
Charles IX succeeds.
or rather the House of Bourbon: Charles IX, his Brother, succeeded him; and
Navarr of a Prisoner, became the second Person in that Kingdom, Queen Catharine
having adjusted all things with him before the late King died. She sent Letters
also to Montmorency, who was not yet arrived at Orleans, to hasten his coming
to the new King, because she was desirous to use his Counsel and Advice. When
he came to Orleans, he asked the Sentinels, By whose Orders they were placed
there, and for what End, and commanded them to be gone, or he would hang them?
The Guards presently disappeared, and then it was visible that the Guises and
not the King needed them.

Though Conde was freed the same moment the King died, The Prince of Conde
fre'd.
yet he would not go out of his Prison till he knew his Accusers and
Prosecutors; to which the Guises replied; It was by the late King's Order, and
would explain the Mystery no further. About twelve Days after, he went to the
Castle of Hane, in Picardy, and there attended the Orders of the new King.
Francis the Second was buried with small State and less Expense, to the great
hatred of the Guises; who in the mean time were very busy to revive the
Differences between Queen Catharine and the King of Navarr, who wisely
prevented their Design, by offering the first Place to the Queen, and reserving
the second to himself, as President of the Kingdom. This passed into a Decree
the twenty first of December.

The Protestant Religion, The Protestant Religion breaks out in the Netherlands.
which had got such footing in France, that it seemed not possible to root it
out, without the Ruin of that Kingdom, began this Year to show it self more
openly in Flanders and the Netherlands, the Nobility espousing it in great
numbers together, with the rest of the States. Nor could Margaret their
Governess, under King Philip, obtain the continuance of the Taxes for the
maintenance of the Spanish Forces: Nor would they of Zealand acquiesce, tho the
Pay was sent from other Places, till these Troops were sent into Spain: Nor
would they grant any Supplies to be disposed of by the Governess, but reserved
that to themselves, that the Soldiers in the Frontier Towns might be certainly
and regularly paid. This was vigorously opposed by the new Bishops, instituted
by Paul IV, as tending to the remitting the Reins of the Ecclesiastical
Government, as well as the Civil.

Bartholomeo Caranza, The Archbishop of Toledo suspected to be a Lutheran.
Archbishop of Toledo in Spain, was also suspected to incline to the Protestant
Religion, and on that account was imprisoned by the Inquisition, and his
Revenues were brought into the King's Treasure. By an Appeal to Rome he saved
his Life; but was never able to recover his See again, but died many Years
after at Rome, in a Private State. Thuanus says, He knew him; and that his
Learning, Integrity, and the Holiness of his Conversation was such as made him
worthy of that Dignity.

The great Progress of the Protestant Religion in all Places, A General Council
desired by many, and opposed by the Pope.
made all Good Men (says Thuanus) desire that the General Council, which had
been intermitted, might be reassumed and carried on; but Pope Pius IV had the
same Fears of it his Predecessors had; lest his own Power should be abated. And
therefore though he judged this the only means to root out Heresies, and very
necessary; yet he delayed it, and unless he were compelled by Force, or some
present Danger, it was apparent he would never admit it. But having resolved,
on the other side, right or wrong, by Force or Fraud to accomplish his own
Desires; and hoping to reap great Advantages from the Ruin of the Caraffa's,
though he had been much assisted by them in the obtaining of the Papacy; he
applied himself to this with great Application and Industry, But prosecutes the
Caraffa's to ruin.
and under the Mask of Friendship. And having laid his Plot, he committed
Charles Caraffa the Cardinal, and his Kinsman, the Cardinal of Naples, to the
Castle of S. Angelo. But Anthony Marquess de Monte Bello, being then not at
Rome, though cited also, escaped the Danger and fled for his Life. Though daily
Accounts came to Rome of the Tumults and Disorders of France, the Pope took no
notice of them. Though the Duke of Florence, who was great with him (for he
pretended to be descended of that Family) did very much urge his Holiness to
consider the State of Affairs in France and Scotland: And told him, It was
Uncharitable to see so many thousands of Souls Lost; and Impolitick, to
necessitate Princes, by the despair of a General Council, to betake themselves
to National Synods. This was much enforced by the Noise, the Speech of the
Chancellor of France had made in the late Assembly, which was then very hot in
Italy. He had, among other things, assured the French Clergy, That if the Pope
would not hold a General, there should very speedily be a National Council
assembled in France; and had exhorted all the Bishops to prepare themselves for
it. To this the Pope answered with great anxiety, seeking Pretenses of Delay,
and pretending he was going to Ancona, and that by the way he would speak with
the Duke of Florence, who was a wise Prince, and his Kinsman, and regulate that
Affair by his Advice.

Cos^us Duke of Florence, The Duke of Florence come to Rome.
perceiving that this Journey of the Pope to Ancona was a Sham, and being
invited by the Pope to Rome, resolved to go thither, to promote this and some
other Private Business he had with the Pope. Before this, King Philip having
heard of the National Council, designed in France, had sent Anthony de Toledo
to advise the King and Council in this, and lay before them the inevitable
Danger of a Schism, which would follow upon it. On the other side, Ferdinand
the Emperor insisted, That seeing the Council was begun on the account of the
Germans, it should be renewed in Germany, and all that was already determined,
should be re-debated anew. Others thought it reasonable, That seeing the French
were now equally concerned with the Germans, the Council should be assembled in
some City in the Confines of France and the Empire, as at Constance; or if the
Germans would agree to it, at Besanzon. The Pope was rather inclined to have it
at Trent, or rather to bring it deeper into Italy, and had some Thoughts of
Vercelli, a City in the Borders of France; though he could not yet resolve
certainly to hold it any where; for he (good Man) was more desirous that
Geneva, which had much infected France and Germany, should be reduced by a War,
than that the Controversies of Religion should be committed to the peaceable
Determination of a Council. And to that end he had persuaded the Duke of Savoy
to make a War upon the Vaudois his Subjects. Whilst the Pope was in this
incertainty, in October the Duke of Florence came to Rome; and persuaded the
Pope by his Arguments to resolve on the calling of a Council the next Year,
that he might provide a General Remedy for a General Disease: He showed him,
That there was no Danger such a Council would pass any severe Sentence on the
Manners and Abuses of the Court of Rome: And that it was fit he should desire
the Discipline and Corrupt Manners of the Church of Rome should be reformed:
That he ought sincerely to promote it, His Arguments for a General Council,
and cause select Divines to be assembled out of all Christian Kingdoms, and to
hear them favorably; that so the Peace of Christendom might be restored, which
was now torn in Pieces by Diversity of Opinions. About the same time the Death
of Francis II, the Advancement of the King of Navarr, and the great Kindness
Queen Catharine, on his account showed to the Protestants, very much terrified
the Pope; and compelled him to entertain the Thoughts of a Council, in good
earnest, which till then had been talked of with no great sincerity.

The Pope thereupon sent Lawrence Lenzi, Bishop of Firmo, to King Philip; With
other concurrent Accidents, at last prevailed.
John Manriquez to the Duke of Florence, and Angelo Guicciardin to the Queen of
France; who was to condole the Death of her Son, to comfort her, and to entreat
her to undertake the Protection of the Religion she was brought up in; and that
she would not open a Door to the growing Schism, nor seek any Remedy for the
Disorders of France from any but the Church of Rome: And to assure her, The
Pope's Ambassadors to thee Christian Princes.
That in a short time all their Desires should be gratified by the Calling of a
General Council; and therefore they prayed her to take Care, That the
flourishing Kingdom of France might not make a Defection from the Ancient
Religion, during her Government, nor any Prejudices be raised against the
Remedies which might justly be expected from it.

The Pope at the same time appointed Hercules Gonzaga, Hierome Seripand, and
Stanislaws Hosio, three of his Cardinals, to be his Legates in the Council; and
sent Zachary Delfino Bishop of Zant, and Francis Commendone, into Germany, to
invite the Protestant Princes to it. Canobbio was sent into Poland on the same
Errant; and had Orders to go on into Russia, to exhort that Prince, who was of
the Greek Communion, to send his Bishops and Divines to the Council; but there
being a War between the Russ and Poles at this time, this Journey was prevented.

The Twenty ninth of September this Year, died Gustavus King of Sweden,
Gustavus King of Sweden dies.
which was the Founder of the Line which now reigns in that Kingdom; he was
succeeded by Eriek his eldest Son. This Prince reigned Thirty eight Years with
great Prudence and Commendation, being only noted for a little too great
Severity in his Taxes, which was necessary in a Prince that was to Found a
Family; but he was otherwise a Prince of great Virtues, and the Reformer of the
Church of Sweden. The same Year died Philip Duke of the hither Pomerania, and
Albert Count of Mansfield, a great Favourer of the Reformation; he died the
Fifth of March, in the Seventieth year of his Age, and Sixtieth of his
Government. The same Year died the Cardinal du Bellay, the Great Patron of John
Sleidan, a Person of great Merit, and employed by Francis I, in many Embassies:
He was a great and hearty Desirer of the Reformation of the Church, and without
all doubt showed our Author the right way to it, though he missed it himself.
The Nineteenth of April died also Philip Melancthon at Wittemberg: He was born
at Brett, a Town in the Palatinate of the Rhine, and was the great Companion
and Friend of Martin Luther, but was more moderate, and a great hater of
Contentions and Disputes, and a lover of Peace: By which Virtues he won the
Love and Respects of both Parties in those troublesome days; on which account he
was sent for into France by Francis I.

The Celebration of the States of France was inter^^^tted by the sudden Death
of Fracis II. But there being great Discontents at the numerous Assemblies of
the Protestants in many Places, which were now openly held; the finding out a
Remedy for this, hastened the opening that Convention. The Thirteenth of
December was appointed for that Purpose, and the Chancellor began the Affair
with an Elegant and Pious Discourse. In which having shown the Use of these
Assemblies, and exhorted all degrees to Peace and Concord, and shown 'em the
common Causes of Sedition and Rebellion, he tells them, That in their times, a
new Cause, that of Religion, had been added to all the former; As if (says he)
Religion could or ought to be the cause of a Civil War, which is the greatest
Mischief that can befall a Kingdom, and contains all others in it. But then God
is not the Author of Dissension, but of Peace; and other Religions, because
false, may be founded and preserved by Force and Fraud; but the Christian
Religion, which is the only true, is only to be established by Patience,
Justice, Prayers and Tears: The ancient Christians accordingly chose rather to
be Killed than to Kill, and Signed the Truth of their Religion with their
Bloods: And yet it cannot be denied but that a false Religion is a very
powerful Exciter of the Minds of Men, and surmounts all other Passions, and
unites Men more strongly than any other thing; so that we must confess that
Kingdoms are divided in effect more by their Religions, than by their Bounds;
and therefore it daily happens, that those that are possessed by an Opinion of
Religion, have little regard to their Prince, their Country, Wives and
Children; and from hence springs Rebellions, Dissentions and Revolts. And in
the same House, if they are divided in Religion, the Husband cannot agree with
the Wife and Children, nor one Brother with another. That therefore a Remedy
might be had for so great a Calamity, it had been decreed at Fountain-bleau,
That there was need of a Council, and the Pope having since declared there
should suddenly be one, that Men ought not in the mean time to hammer ont for
themselves new Religions, Rites and Ceremonies, according to their own Fancies.
For this would not only endanger the public Peace, but the Salvation of their
Souls too. That if the Pope and the Council failed, the King would take the
same Care his Ancestors had, and provide for the Peace and Welfare of his
Kingdom: That it was to be hoped the Bishops would for the future exercise
their Functions with greater Care and Diligence: That the Cure might come from
that Fountain which had caused the Distemper: That they ought to arm themselves
with Virtues, Good Manners, and the Word of God, which are the Arms of
Supplicants, and then go out to War against our Enemies, and not imitate
unskilful Captains, who disfurnish their Walls to make an Irruption. The
Discourse of one that lives well, is very persuasive, but the Sword has no
other power over the Soul than to destroy it with the Body. Our Ancestors
overcame their Sectaries with their Piety, and we ought to imitate them if we
would not be thought rather to hate the Men than their Vices. Let us therefore,
said he, pray daily for them, that they may be reduced from their Errors, and
discharging the hateful Names of Lutherans, Huguenots and Papists, which were
introduced by the Enemy of Mankind, and are too like the ancient Factions of
Guelfs and Gibellins, let us only retain the Ancient Appellation of Christians.
But then, because there are many who only pretend Religion, but are in Truth
led by Ambition, Avarice and Novelty, it is fit to suppress these Men in the
very beginning: These are the Men that ought to be kept under by the Force of
Arms.

When the States came to debate, A Difficulty proposed.
the Clergy and the Commons were of Opinion, That their Powers were determined
by the Death of the late King; and that they ought to return Home: Which was
overruled by the King of Navar and the Council; And they were ordered to
proceed; because by the Law of France the King never dies; but the Lawful
Succession is transmitted without any interruption. The Cardinal of Lorraine
had designed in the former Reign to make a Speech in the Name of the three
Estates; which was then not opposed, but now the Commons would not suffer it,
because contrary to the Ancient Usage: And for that they had some things to
object against the Cardinal himself.

Jean l' Ange, an Advocate of the Parliament of Bourdeaux, The Deputy of the
Commons speaks against the Clergy.
spoke for the Commons, and remarked three great Faults in the Clergy,
Ignorance, Covetousness and Excessive Luxury, which had given Being to the new
Errors, and Scandal to the People. That the Preaching of the Word of God, which
was the chief cause of the instituting Bishops, was totally neglected; and they
thought it a shameful thing, and beneath their Dignity: And by their Example,
the Curates had learned to neglect their Duty too, and had ordered the Mass to
be sung by Illiterate and Unworthy Stipendaries. That the excessive Pomp and
Avarice of the Clergy (who pretended by it to promote the Glory of God) had
raised an Envy and an hatred of them in the Minds of the People. And therefore
he desired that a Council might be assembled, by the order of the King, to
remedy these Mischiefs.

After him James de Silty Comte de Roquefort, And is seconded by the Deputy of
the Nobility.
made a Bold and an Elegant Oration in the Name of the Nobility, and taxed the
Clergy for invading the Rights, and oppressing the People, under Pretense of
the Jurisdictions granted them by the Ancient Kings of France. That therefore
the King ought, in the first place to take care to reform the Clergy, and
assign good Pensions to those that Preached the Word of God, as had been done
by many of his Ancestors, which he named.

Jean Quintin le Bourguinon, The Clergy apologize for themselves.
made a long tedious Speech in the behalf of the Clergy, to show; I. That the
Assembly of the three Estates were instituted for the providing for the Sacred
Discipline. II. That the King might understand the Complaints of his People,
and provide for the Necessities of his Kingdom, by their Advice, and not for
the Reformation of the Church, Which could not Err, and which neither has, nor
ever shall have the least Spot or Wrinkle, but shall ever be Beautiful: But
then he ingenuously confessed, That the Sacred Discipline was very much declined
from its Ancient Simplicity. That therefore the Revivers of the the Ancient
Heresies were not to be heard; and all that had Meetings separate from the
Catholics, were to be esteemed Favorers of Sectaries, and to be punished.
Therefore he desired the King to compel all his Subjects, within his Dominions,
to Live and Believe according to the Form prescribed by the Church. That the
Insolence of the Sectaries was no longer to be endured, who despising the
Authority of the Ancients, and the Doctrine received by the Church, would be
thought alone to understand and embrace the Gospel. That this was the next step
to a Rebellion, and that they would shortly shake off the Yoke of the Civil
Magistrate, and with the same Boldness fight against their Prince, that they
now employed against the Church, if Care were not speedily taken. He desired
that all Commerce between them and the Catholics might be forbidden, and that
they might be treated like Enemies, and that those who were gone out of the
Kingdom on the account of Religion, might be banished. That it was the King's
Duty to draw the Civil Sword, and put all those to Death, who were infected
with Heresy; to defend the Clergy, and restore the Elections of Bishops to the
Chapters, the want of which had caused great Damages to the Church. That it had
been observed, That the very Year the Pope granted the King the Nomination of
Bishops, this Schism began, and has ever since spread it self; for in the 1517,
Luther, Zuinglius and Oecolampadius set up, and Calvin followed them. This
Speech incensed the whole Assembly against him, and especially the Protestants,
who published so many Libels and Satyrs against him, that he soon after died of
Shame and Grief. He was no ill Man, but was a better Decretalist than a Divine;
and had never well thought whether a Reformation were needful or no, But then
it ought also to have been considered that he did not speak his own Single
judgment, but had his matter prescribed him by the Clergy for whom he spoke.

After some days, the King Signified to the Bishops, that they should prepare
themselves for the Council, which was now recalled at Trent; and the Judges and
Prefects were commanded to discharge all that were Imprisoned for Religion
only, and leave all that were suspected, the free enjoyment of their Estates
and Goods; And it was made Capital to reproach, or injure one the other, on the
Account of Religion. After which the Assemly was Prorogued to the Month of May,
of the next Year.

There was in Piedmont, a Valley called by the Name of Perosia, and St. Martin;
Inhabited by about 15000 Souls, whose Ancestors about 400 Years since had upon
the Preaching of Waldus, The Persecution in Piedmont, which Occasioneth a War.
Speronus and Arnaldus, made a defection from the Church of Rome, and had at
times been severely treated for it, by the French, under whom they had been;
but by the last Treaty were assigned to the Duke of Savoy. This People about
the Year 1555, had embraced the Reformation, and had suffered it to be
publicly preached, tho it was forbidden by the Council at Turin, which the
Year following sent one of its own Members, to inquire after the Offenders and
to punish them; to whom the Inhabitants of this Valley delivered the Confession
of their Faith; Declaring that they professed the Doctrine contained in the Old
and New Testament, and comprehended in the Apostles Creed; and admitted the
Sacraments Instituted by Christ; the IV first Councils, viz. those of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon; and the Ten Commandments etc. That they
believed the Supreme civil Magistrates were Instituted by God, and they were to
be obeyed, and that whosoever resisted them, sought against God. They said
they had received this Doctrine from their Ancestors, and that if they were in
any error they were ready to receive instruction from the Word of God, and
would presently renounce any heretical or erroneous Doctrine which should be so
shown to them.

Thereupon a Solemn Dispute was in show, appointed concerning the Sacrifice of
the Mass, Auricular Confession, Tradition, Prayers and Oblations for the Dead,
and the Ceremonies of the Church and her Censures; all which were rejected by
them, they alleging that they were humane Inventions, and contrary to the Word
of God. This Confession was sent by the Duke of Savoy to the King of France,
who about a year after returned Answer, That he had caused it to be Examined by
his learned Divines; who had all condemned it as Erroneous and contrary to true
Religion; and therefore the King commanded them to reject this Confession and
to Submit to the Holy Church of Rome; and if they did not do so, their Persons
and Estates should be Confiscated. But they on the contrary were resolved to
stand by their former Confession. They were thereupon commanded not to admit
any Teacher who was not sent by the Archbishop of Turin, or the Council there;
and that if any Teachers came among them from Geneva they should discover or
apprehend them, upon pain of Death, and loss of all they had. For three years
after this, the people of this Persuasion were let alone and no way molested;
but this Year the Duke of Savoy, much against his will and Inclination, was
drawn by the Pope to make a War upon them. In the beginning of March, Jean de
Carquignau, and one Mathurim and his Wife were taken and burnt; and several of
the Neighbor Valleys were Plundered, several of the Inhabitants were put to
death; and about Sixty sent to the Galleys, and some recanted and professed the
Roman Catholic Religion. After this one Thomas Jacomel a Dominican, was sent
with one Turbis for his Assistant, who was a bloody man, to inquire diligently
and severely into all that were suspected; but the Nobility interposing, there
was no great Severity shown. The Monks of the Abbey of Pignoral, which was
seated in the Entry of the Valley, on the other side, kept a parcel of
Soldiers in Pay; and trapping as many of these Poor People as they could, as
they passed to and fro, they used them very cruelly; and some others of the
Nobility did the same thing; and a Sedition following upon it, they fined the
poor Inhabitants One Thousand six Hundred Crowns. Upon this a sharp war insued,
which ended in the Ruin of the Aggressors of the Church of Rome.

The Pastor also of Perosia, was taken and burnt with a slow, Fire with many of
his Flock, and the Inhabitants were spoiled of all they had, and forced to flee
to the Mountains. Being thus enraged with hard Usages, in the Month of July,
Fifty of them set upon One Hundred and Twenty Soldiers belonging to the Abbey
of Pignoral, put them to flight, and flew the greatest part of them; and about
Four Hundred more of their party coming up, they took the Abbey of Pignoral,
and delivered all their people which were imprisoned there. In October
following News being brought that the Duke of Savoy was sending an Army to
destroy them; They resolved that it was not lawful to take Arms against their
Prince, but that they would take what they could carry away, and betake
themselves to the Mountains, and there attend the good pleasure of God, who
never forsakes his own, and can turn the Hearts of Princes which way he
pleases. There was not one Man amongst them who repined against this Decree.
In after times they had Pastors who taught them otherwise, and told them it was
not their Prince, but the Pope that they resisted, and that they fought not for
their Religion, but for their Wives and Children. The second of November the
Forces of the Duke of Savoy entered their Borders, and the Soldiers attempting
to get above them, they betook themselves to their Slings, and maintained a
Fight against them (though they were but few in number) the space of a whole
day, with no great loss. At last the General finding they were not to be
forced, gave them leave to Petition the Duke of Savoy, That they might live in
Peace, assuring him that nothing but utter ruin coald have forced them to take
Arms against him: for which they humbly implored his Highness's Pardon, and
begging the Liberty of their Consciences, and that they might not be forced to
submit to the Traditions of the Church of Rome; but might, with his good leave,
enjoy the Religion they had learned from their Ancestors.

This Petition was seconded by the Duchess of Savoy, who was a merciful
Princess, a and had great Power over the Affections of the Duke. It being ever
her judgment that this People were not to be so severely used, who had not
changed their Religion a few days agon, but had been in Possession of it from
their Ancestors so many Ages. Upon this they were to be received to mercy; but
the Soldiery fell upon them, when they suspected nothing, and Plundered them
three days together. The General seemed to be much concerned at this breach of
Faith: yet after this they were fined eight thousand Crowns, which they were
forced to borrow on great Usury, and they were also commanded to bring all
their Arms into the Castles the Duke had Garrisoned in their Country. And at
last they were commanded to eject all their Pastors (which was granted with the
tears of their People) that they might avoid the fury of the Soldiers. The
General pretended not to be satisfied that their Pastors were in good truth
gone, and when they suffered them to search their Houses, the Soldiers
Plundered them again, and then burnt their Town. There was one Town called
Angrogne, in a Valley of the same name, the General pretended to show them more
favor, and agreed that they should have one Pastor left them: but they forced
him also to flee into the Mountains afterward, and Plundered his House, and
all his Neighbors, and then enjoined the Sindicks (who are their chief
Magistrates) to find up, and bring in the Pastor; threatening that otherwise
they would burn and destroy the whole Territory; and when they had so done then
they withdrew.

In the mean time their Messengers were gone with the Petition, mentioned
above, to the Duke to Vercelli, where they attended forty days before they
could get Audience, and then they were forced to promise they would admit the
Mass, and when the Prince had upon these terms forgiven their taking Arms
against him, they were commanded to ask Pardon too of the Popes Nuncio, which
at last they did. During their absence, the Inhabitants of Angrogne had
suffered no Sermons but in private, that they might not exasperate the Prince,
or make the Affairs of their Deputies more difficult. But they resolved when
these were returned they would exercise their Religion openly, and not give any
thing to the maintaining of the Soldiers, whether their Request were granted or
denied.

In the beginning of January the Deputies returned, Savoy, and the promises
made by their Deputies. And the next day they entered into the Church of Bobbi,
in Arms, and broke down all the Images and Altars, and after a Sermon, marching
to Villar, where they intended to do the like, they met the Soldiers (who had
heard what was done) going to Plunder Bobbi, stopped them, and with their
Slings so pelted them, that they were glad to shift for their lives, and left
these Reformers to do the same thing at Villar. The Captain of Turin attempting
to stop this Rage was beaten, and the Dukes Officers were glad to seek to their
Pastors for a Pasport. After this they beat the Captain of Turin in a second
Fight. By this time the whole Army drew into the Field, and the Inhabitants of
these Valleys not being able to resist them, they burnt all their Towns and
Houses, and destroyed all the People they took. In these Broils Monteil, one of
the Duke of Savoy's Chief Officers, was slain by a Lad of eighteen years of
age; and Truchet, another of them, by a Dwarf. The Duke of Savoy had sent seven
thousand Soldiers to destroy this handful of Men; and yet such was their Rage
and Desperation, and the Advantage of their Country, that they beat his
Soldiers wheresoever they met them. And in all these Fights their Enemies
observed that they had slain only fourteen of the Inhabitants, and thence
concluded that God fought for them. So the Savoyards began to treat of a Peace,
which at last was concluded to the Advantage of these poor despicable People.
The Duke remitting the eight thousand Crowns they were to pay by the former
Treaty, and suffering them to enjoy the Liberty of their Religion: So that he
got nothing by this War but loss and shame, the ruin of his People on both
sides, and the desolating of his Country.

A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION.
BOOK III.
The CONTENTS.
A Persecution in the Low Countries. The French Affairs. Queen Catharine
favors the Protestants, but orders Montmorency to oppose them. She
suspects the designs of the Nobility. The differences of Religion occasion
Tumults in France. Various Edicts made. The Cardinal of Lorrain procures the
Conference of Poissi. Mary Queen of the Scots leaves France. The three Estates
of France Assemble at Pont-Oyse. The Conference of Poissi. The Rudeness of
Laines, General of the Jesuits. This Conference disliked abroad. The Council of
Trent recalled. Opposed by Vergerius. The Popes Legates sent to Princes to
invite them to the Council. A Diet of the Protestant Princes at Naumburg. The
Queen of England rejects the Council. The Ruin of the Caraffa's. The King of
Navarre drawn over to the Romish Party, by the Arts of the King of Spain.
Scotch Affairs. The Protestant Religion settled there by a Parliament. Queen
Mary Arrives there. Her beginning favorable to the Protestants. Great kindness
at first, in show, between her and Queen Elizabeth. The French Affairs. The
Edict of January, 1562. Injunctions published by the Queen concerning Images.
The King of Navarre pretends to promote the Reformation. The Edict of January
opposed by the Guises. The Massacre of Vassi. The Duke of Guise enters Paris.
All things in France tend to Civil War. The Queen joins with the Roman
Catholic Party out of fear. Orleans surprised by the Prince of Conde. The
Massacre of Senlis. Roan taken by the Protestants. Several Treaties for a
Peace. The Siege of Roan. The King of Navarre shot. His Death and Character.
The Prince of Conde leaves Orleans. Besieges Corbeil. The two Armies come in
view. He marches toward Normandy. The Battle of Dreux, in which Montmorency is
taken. St. Andre slain, and the Prince of Conde taken. Coligni and the Duke of
Guise become Generals. The Pope fondly rejoices at this Battle. The Siege of
Orleans. The Duke of Guise Assassinated. His Death and Character. The Queen
desires, and at last makes a Peace, which is disliked by Coligni.

THIS Year there began a sharp Persecution against all that were suspected to
favor the Reformation in the Netherlands, Perrenot Bishop of Arras, A
Persecution in the Low Countries.
and Cardinal Granvel, hoping by this means to prevent the spreading of a
Religion in that Country, which had made such progresses in Germany and France.
They that embraced this Religion, were no less scandalized by the multiplying
the Bishoprics, and thereupon drew up a Confession of their Faith, to be
exhibited to King Philip, beseeching him, in the end of it, that he would put a
stop to the bloody Executions, which destroyed so many of his innocent People.
This Confession was the same in substance with that published by the French
Protestants; and amongst other things, they took particular care to insert That
the Civil Magistrate was the Ordinance of God, and therefore was to be obeyed.
Their Tributes to be duly paid, and all manner of Respect and Reverence to be
showed to them; and that Prayers were to be made to God for their preservation.

In the month of February, The French Affair.
the new King of France left Orleans, and went to Fontainbleau, where the
Prince of Conde waited upon him, and being introduced into the Privy Council,
asked the Chancellor if there were any Accusation depending against him, and
was told by him and the whole Council, they were entirely satisfied of his
innocence, and leave was given him to demand an Acquital in the Parliament of
Paris. And a Decree was made to that purpose, and Published by the Order of the
Council March 13. after which he went to Paris to prosecute his Discharge
before that Court.

In the mean time Queen Catharine, Queen Catharine favors the Protestants.
the Regent of France, seemed very much to favor the Protestant Party, and by
her Arts and Dissimulation, so far prevailed upon the spirit of the King of
Navarre, who was their Head, that he told the Danish Ambassador, he did not
doubt but he should see the Reformed Religion settled in France within one
year. The Queen, on the other side, told Montmorency, That she counived at them
for the present, that she might the more easily elude the designs of the King
of Navarre, by seeming to comply with him. But then (she said) he and the other
great Men of that Kingdom ought to oppose them, and to complain that the
Religion of their Ancestors was every where violated and despised. She designed
by this, First, To divide the great Men in the Point of Religion. Secondly, To
weaken the Interest of the King of Navarre. And thirdly, To preserve the Romish
Religion in France. But Montmorency, who was her Instrument, designed only the
last, yet he was very active in it. The Queen in the interim carried her
dissimulation so far, that she ordered Jean de Monluc, Bishop of Valence, who
was a great favourer of the Reformation, and no Enemy to the Protestants
Doctrine, to Preach frequently at Court, and She and the King were sometimes
present at his Sermons. He would sometimes speak very freely against the
Corruptions that were in the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church, and
obliquely tax the Papal Authority. The favor the Queen showed to this Bishop,
made Montmorency suspect that in her Heart she had a kindness for the
Protestant Party, and that underhand she and Navarre had one and the same
design. And thereupon he deserted her, and joined with the Guises, his (till
then) Mortal Enemies, the Duchess de Valentois procuring the Reconciliation.
Magdalen of Savoy, Wife to Montmorency, was also an implacable enemy to the
Reformation, and hated Coligni the Admiral, for that and other causes, and
therefore she perpetually stimulated him against the Protestants.

Francis Montmorency, The younger Montmorency's Advice to his Father.
Son of the Constable, was a person of great Prudence, and he wisely advised
his Father not to lose the least of his friends in so necessary a time (for he
foresaw a Tempest would arise in France) of what Religion soever they were:
that it did not become a wise Man to endeavor to gain new friends with the
loss of his old ones, and to prefer the uncertain friendship of reconciled
enemies before the tried affections of his old Acquaintances. That if he
rejected Conde, Coligni, and Rochefoucault, on the Account of Religion, he
would deprive his Family of the affistance of three great Men, and perhaps the
Queen would think never the better of him: therefore his advice to his Father
was to sit still, and let Coligni, and the Guises fight it out, without taking
part on either side, and in all probability Guise would be worsted; and he
would become the Arbitrator of the two contending Religions. And in the mean
time, it was most certain, there were many great Errors, by length of time
crept into the Church, which he ought not to defend, because they were
injurious to the Majesty of God. The good old Gentleman was much moved at this
Advice from his Son, but made no other answer to it, than That he certainly
knew that if the Religion were changed, the Civil Government would be changed
too. That he cared not what became of him, if his little Masters did well, and
the Actions of Henry II. might not be called in question; who was a wife
Prince, and his good Master. So he perished in his first resolves, believing he
was obliged to defend the Cause of Religion against his best, and most ancient,
and tried friends.

The Pope seeing his Jurisdiction and Authority decline so fast in Germany, and
France, The pretended Submission of the Cophthites.
greedily embraced a pretended Overture made by one Abraham, a Syrian Impostor,
who pretended he was sent by the Copthites, an Eastern Sect of Christians, to
make a submission to the Holy See; whereupon he sent Christopher Roderick, and
John Baptista Elianus, two Jesuits, to them; who gained nothing by this
Mission, but an exact Account of the Opinions of these Cophthites, and a
certainty of the Frauds of this pretended Ambassador Abraham, who had feigned
this Mission to the Pope for his own Ends.

This Mortification was soon after attended by another, Livonia falls off from
the Sea of Rome.
not less afflictive to his Holiness, for Gothard Ketler, Master of the
Teutonick Order in Livonia, entirely submitted to Sigismond King of Poland,
which put an end to that Order; when it had flourished there 357 years. He was
thereupon made Duke of Gurland and Semigallen, and Governor of Livonia, and,
Marrying a Wife, withdrew himself and his Subjects from the Sea of Rome. The
Archbishopric of Riga was also about the same time changed into a Dukedom,
John Kothewick,
the last Archbishop of that See, embracing the Augustane Confession, put
himself under the Protection of the Crown of Poland, and was by Sigismond made
Duke of Lithuania. This Archbishopric was founded in the year 1215, by the
procurement of the Knights of the Teutonick Order, the City being then and a
long time after, the Seat of the Master of it, who divided the Sovereignty and
Administration of Justice with the Archbishop. After this short Digression,
which the Reader is desired to Pardon, I shall now return to the prosecution of
the French Affairs.

The new Friendship between Montmorency and the Guises was a very frightful
thing to the Queen Regent, The Queen suspects the designs of the Nobility.
who sought all the way she could possible to divide their Affections, for the
preserving her own Authority, and therefore she was very Anxiously inquisitive
to find, whether this new Kindness between two such Ancient Enemies tended. The
Prince of Conde in the mean time was declared Innocent by the Parliament of
Paris the Thirteenth of June, and his Discharge Recorded. The Differences in
Religion not only disquieted the Court, The Differences of Religion occasion
Tumults.
but the Provinces also, the two Parties reproaching each other with the Names
of Papist and Huguenot. There were frequent Tumults raised also by the Roman
Catholics, to show that Coligni was out, when he said, The Protestant Religion
might be divulged throughout all the Provinces without any Disturbance. And at
Amiens and Pont-Oise things came to a Sedition, the Catholic Artificers
beginning the Quarrel, and falling upon some of the Houses of some of the
Protestants, and they slew one Hadrian Fourre a Priest, because he was reported
to savor the Reformation, and afterward burnt his Body publicly, for which
only two were hanged. An Edict to restrain them.
This necessitated the Council to forbid all Reviling Expressions, and all
Tumults on the Accounts of Religion; And by it, all that had been banished for
Religion in the Reign of Francis II. were invited to return, and promised, they
should enjoy their Goods and Estates, if they would live like good Catholics
for the future, or otherwise might sell them, and retire elsewhere; which was
after opposed by the Parliament at Paris, but yet many returned on that
account, and many that were in Prison were discharged, so that the Protestant
Party appeared numerous. The Cardinal of Lorrain was Alarmed at this, and
represented to the King and Queen: That the whole Kingdom was filled with
Conventicles; That the meaner sort ran to the Sermons out of curiosity, and
were easily corrupted; That the Ancient Ceremonies were little frequented or
regarded, and that they were already derided and scorned by many; That great
numbers every day forsook the Church, and went over to the Protestants. The
Edict of July.
So he would needs have had a new Edict forthwith published, to prevent these
Inconveniences. This being Debated in the Council in the Month of July, there
was another Edict published. That all should live peaceably, and without any
fury each to other, or reproaching one the other; That there be no Listing or
Inrolling Men on either side; That the Preachers should use no Seditious or
Turbulent Expressions upon pain of Death, and the Presidents of the Provinces
should determine of these Affairs, and execute the Edict; That no Sermons
should be frequented by Men Armed or Unarmed, in public or in private, nor any
Sacraments Administered, but according to the Rites of the Church of Rome; And,
That if any Man was Convicted of Herefie, and delivered to the Secular Power,
he should only be Banished; and this was to stand till a General or a National
Council should determine otherwise. This was called the Edict of July.

The Cardinal of Lorrain had so good an opinion of his own Abilities, The
Carelinal of Lorrain procures the Conference of Poissy.
that he was fondly persuaded, he could confute all the Doctrines of the
Protestants out of the Fathers, and thereby acquire a great Reputation to
himself, if he could procure a Conference with their Pastors. It was therefore
resolved, that there should be a Meeting for that purpose at Poissy near St.
Germain the Tenth of August, and that Pasports should be granted to their
Ministers which were to come thither on that account. All of both sides being
invited thither at the same time. The Queen Regent was very much for this
Disputation, but the greatest part of the Roman Catholics were against it, as
thinking it a dangerous thing to suffer the Doctrine, which had hitherto been
received, to be brought under debate, and the Religion of their Ancestors to be
disputed.

In the Interim Mary Queen of the Scots left France, Mary Queen of Scotland
leaves France.
and returned into Scotland, the Cardinal of Lorrain attending her as far as
Calais. There was also a Theatrical Reconciliation between the Prince of Conde
and the Duke of Guise, by the Order of the King; the later protesting, That he
had no hand in the Imprisonment of the Prince, and the Prince telling Guise,
That the Adviser and Procurer of his Commitment was a Wicked Man and a Villain;
To which Guise Answered, That he believed so too, but was not concerned in it.
After which, by the King's Command, they embraced each other as Kinsmen and
Friends, and promised a firm and sincere Friendship each to other, and there
was great Rejoicing in the Court. The Assembly of the States was Prorogued last
year till May of this, and then was, on the account of the great Affairs,
prorogued to August, and Appointed to be opened at Pont-Oyse.

In this Assembly, The Three Estates of France Assembled at Pont-Oyse.
the Agreement between the Queen Regent and the King of Navar was Confirmed by
the three Estates, which was very difficultly obtained by the later. This
Assembly was opened at St. Germain, where James Bretagne d'Autum, who spoke for
the Commons, declaiming sharply against the Ignorance of the Priests, and the
Corrupt Manners and Depraved Discipline of the Clergy, so that they were unfit
to Lead or Instruct the People, but rather disgusted and displeased them, doing
all things for Hire, and nothing as their Duty, enslaving themselves to
Pleasures, and wallowing in Luxury and Idleness. To this he assigned the
Calamities which at present oppressed France. He therefore moved the King to
take away all their Jurisdiction, that he should employ their overgreat Riches
to Pious Uses, and call a National Council, which was the only present and
certain Cure of those Evils; That free Pasports should be given to all that
would come to it, and, that the King or some of the Princes of the Blood should
preside in it, whilst Business of Religion was debated; That the late Decree
against Conventicles should be no prejudice to those of the Reformed Religion,
who rejected the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, nor any Prescription as to
length of time, which could not make what in it self was false, true; and the
Business of Religion was to be quietly and friendly debated according to the
Word of God, and not with the Sword and Reproaches. He that spoke for the
Nobility, excused the Clergy, and desired the King to preserve their
Privileges and Dignities. But then he moved, to have the greatest part of the
Church Lands sold to pay the Debts of the Crown, pretending, that a third part
of the Parchase Money put out to Use, would be as good to them as the whole
Land. That the Edict of July might be recalled, and only multiplicity of Sects,
and ill Language, under the pretense of Liberty, prohibited. That a National
Council might be called, in which the King should preside. That all
Jurisdictions should be taken from the Church, and annexed to the Crown. There
were also many other things demanded in this Assembly, which tended to the
Ruin of the Clergy, the Papal Authority growing into Contempt, and the
greatest part, either out of a desire to promote Piety, The Clergy of France
give the King Taxes to save their Revenues and Jurisdictions.
or of Love to Novelty, favoring the Protestant Party, and daily increasing
their numbers by joining with them.

The Clergy to prevent this Storm wisely gave the King four Tenths for six
years, which very much appeased the King and the Principal Courtiers toward
them. The Queen, by the Advice of Monluc Bishop of Valence, wrote about this
time a long Letter to the Pope, dated the 5th of August, In which, stating the
dangers which attended the differences in Religion, she exhorted him to provide
speedy Remedies, because they were become so numerous,
that they could no longer be suppressed by the Sword; that many of the
Principal Nobility and Magistrates embraced that way, and had drawn over such
Numbers, and so united them, that they were become formidable to the State; yet
by the Rare Blessing of Heaven, they had no Anabaptists, Libertines, etc. none
that denied the Apostles Creed, or the Interpretation of it received in the
Seven General Councils; That therefore most were of opinion, that
notwithstanding these differences, they ought to be received into the Communion
of the Church, which would end in the Peace of the Church; That the use of
Images, which was forbidden by God, and, as to Adoration, disproved by St.
Gregory, ought to be taken away; That Exorcisms and some of the Prayers used in
Baptism, might be omitted; The Lords Supper Administered to all the Laity in
both Kinds, and the Decree of the Council of Constance ought not to be
preferred before the Command of God; That the Prayers might be used in the
Vulgar Tongue, and all that would Communicate might do so the first Sunday of
every Month; That the Psalms might be sung in the French Tongue; A Public
Confession of Sins, Prayers for the Prince, the Magistrates, Clergy, Good
Weather, Fruitful Seasons, and all Affliction might be in the same Tongue; That
the late invented Feast of the Holy Sacrament might be abolished, it being
unnecessary, and the cause of great Scandal and Offense; and that this Mystery
was Instituted for a Spiritual Worship, and not for Show and Pomp; That the use
of the Latin Tongue, which was foreign and unknown, was a great fault, the
Prayers of the Church belonging not only to the Clergy, but to all; but as now
it stands, Who can say Amen to a Prayer in a Language he knows not? That if yet
the Latin must be used, it were fit an Interpretation should be made of the
Prayers in the Vulgar Tongue; That the Receiving of the Priest in the Sacrifice
of the Mass, the People only looking Idely on, is contrary to the Institution;
That the Psalms ought to be in the Vulgar Tongue, and also the Private Prayers
of the People; That these things might be granted without derogating from the
Papal Authority. The Pope was infinitely offended with this Letter, and the
more, because of the fame of a National Council shortly to be holden in France;
but then he dissembled his Resentment, and became the more sincere in the
Assembling a General Council, which he had rather promised than designed before.

The Conference was to be begun the First of August at Poissy, The Corserence
of Poissy:
and the Bishops and Divines were already arrived there, and had entered into a
Debate, what Points were to be Disputed; where they spent the time to no great
purpose, disputing amongst themselves concerning the Office of a Bishop, the
Dignity of Cathedral Churches, of Colleges and their Exemptions, of the
Ordination of Curates and Priests; concerning allowing them Competent Pensions,
abating their number, reforming the Discipline of the Monasteries, of
Commendam's and Benfices, of cutting off the Pleasures and Luxuries of the
Clergy, and of Censures. And they thought the Answering such like Queries was
of great use to the Church in these confused times. There appeared for the
Protestants Augustine Marlorat, The Protestant Ministers.
Francis de S. Pol, Jean Remond Merlin, J. Malo, Francis de Mureaux, N. Tobie,
Theodore Beza, Claud Brisson, J. Bouquin, J. Viret, J. de la Tour, Nich. de
Crallas, Their demands.
and John De l'Espine, who abjuring the Dominican Order did then first openly
profess the Protestant Religion. Soon after Peter Martyr came to Zurich: These
Asked four things; 1st. That the Bishops should be Parties and not Judges; 2d.
That the King and Council should Preside; 3d. That all things might be
determined only by the Word of God; 4th. That whatever was agreed, should be
set down by Notaries. The Queen yielded all these, but would have one of the
Secretaries of State be the only Notary, and she would not consent that the
King should Preside in the Conference. The Cardinal of Lorraine had before
objected against Beza, That he should say, that Christ was no more present in
the Sacrament, than in a Muddy Ditch. This Expression is said to have been
urged by Melanchthon against Oecelampadins as the Consequence of his Doctrine,
and was by a mistake of the Cardinal wrongfully charged on Beza, who denied and
detested it as Blasphemous. The First of September the Conference began, the
King, the Queen, The Conference begun
his Younger Brother, and Sister, and about Eleven Bishops being present, and
the Cardinals of Bourhon, T^urnen, Chestillon, Lorrain, Armagnac, and Guise.
The King opened it with a short Speech, which was seconded by the Chancellor
with a longer. In which he preferred a National Council before a General, and
showed that the Errors of many General Councils had been corrected by National
Synods, The Chancellor's Speech.
particularly the Arrian General Council of Ariminium was condemned by a
Private Council held by St. Hillary Bishop of Poictiers, and banished out of
France. He said, they neither needed much Learning nor many Books, the Bible
alone being sufficient by which Religion was to be Tried and Examined. That the
Protestants were their Brethren, and to be treated as such; if out of Ambition
or Avarice they did otherwise, God would judge and condemn them, and their
Decrees would be rejected. That they ought to Amend and give God Thanks for any
Error that was discovered, and if they did not, God would Punish them.

After him, the Cardinal of Tournon spoke, and Thanked the King, Queen and
Princes for being present, and approved highly of what the Chancellor had said,
but defired a Copy of it, which the Chancellor refused, though it was seconded
by the Cardinal of Lorrain, because he perceived they craftily designed to
mischief him by it. Beza speaks.
Theodore Beza, being next commanded to speak, fell upon his Knees, and after a
Prayer, and reciting his Faith, complained to God, that they had been
injuriously treated as Enemies of the Public Peace. Then he showed, wherein
they agreed with the Church of Rome, and wherein they differed, and discoursed
of the way of attaining Salvation, of Faith, Good Works, the Word of God, the
Authority of the Councils and Fathers, of the Sacraments, and of their use and
true Interpretation; of Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation, and lastly,
of the Ecclesiastical Order and Discipline, and obedience to Princes; he was so
long and so sharp in some of these things, that they had scarce patience to
hear him out, and the Cardinal of Tournon presently replied with a Voice
trembling for Rage; Tournon replies with rage.
That he and the other Prelates had done violence to their Consciences by
condescending to this Conference in compliance with his Majesty's Commands, by
hearing these new Evangelists. That he foresaw, if they were heard, many things
would be spoken by them injurious to the Majesty of God, which would offend the
Ears of the King, and of all good Men. And therefore he beseeched his Majesty
not to believe what was said, That if he could have prevented it the King
should not have been present, but, however, he desired he would not suffer his
Mind to be pre-ingaged in their false Opinions, but to suspend till the Bishops
had Answered it, and the King and the rest there present should know the
difference between Falsehood and Truth. He Asked a Day to Answer in, and prayed
the King that he would persevere in the Religion of his Ancestors. Lastly, he
added, that, but for the respect they bore to the King, the Bishops would have
arisen and put a stop to those horrible and abominable Words. The Queens Answer.
The Queen calmly said, she had done the thing without the Advice of the
Parliament of Paris, the Princes, and Privy Council; That no change was
designed, but that the Disturbances of France might be appeased, and Men
friendly brought from their Errors into the Old Way, which belonged to them to
effect.

The first Dispute was, The Points debated.
about the Lords Supper; The second, which was the 17th of August, was about
the Church, which, the Cardinal of Lorrain said, could not Err, That if any
particular Church did, Recourse was to be had to the Head, the Church of Rome,
and the Decrees of a General Council, and the Concurrent Opinions of the
Ancient Fathers; and before all, to the Sacred Scriptures explained by the
Right Sense and Interpretation of the Church. As to the Lord's Supper, in
effect, he said, That if the Protestants would not embrace their Opinions,
there was no hope of an Agreement. The Cardinal of Tournon thereupon applauded
his Harangue, and said, he was ready to lay down his Life for this Faith,
entreating the King to continue steadfast in it, and was contented (Good Man!)
that if the Protestants would subscribe these two Points, they should be
admitted to dispute all the rest; but if they refused this, all hearing was to
be denied them, and they were to be expelled out of his Dominions. Beza desired
to Answer him Extempore, but the King delayed the Answer to the next day.

Upon a Petition, the Ministers were heard at last again the 24th of September
before the Queen only; when Beza discoursed of the Church and its Notes, which,
he said, were the Preaching of the Word, and a Pure Administration of the
Sacraments. As for the Succession of Persons and Doctrines, it had been often
interrupted; He discoursed of the Ordinary and Extraordinary Vocation, of the
Universal Church and her Authority, of Councils, which he affirmed had, and
might err, of the Dignity of Scripture, and whether the Scriptures were to be
preferred before the Church, or did borrow their Authority from the Church.
Claud d' Espence, a learned Man, Claud d' Espence opposes Beza.
who desired very much the Church might regain her former Peace, being
Commanded by the Cardinal of Lorrain, to answer Beza, began with a Declaration,
that he had a long time wished, that there might have been Conferences, and
said, he had ever abhorred those Bloody Proceedings which had been used against
those miserable Men. Then he said, The Ordination of the Protestant Ministers
Questi'd.
he wondered by what Authority the Protestants took upon them the Office of the
Ministry, and by whom they were Ordained and Instituted; and that seeing they
had received Imposition of hands from no body, how could they be accounted
lawful Ministers; for it was manifest, they had no Ordinary call: And they must
prove an Extraordinary Vocation by Miracles, which they had not. And thence he
concluded, they never came into the Church, either by an Ordinary or an
Extraordinary call. As to Traditions, if any Controversy arose about the Sense
of Scriptures, which could not be otherwise adjusted, they must of necessity
have recourse to the Fathers, who had their Authority from their lawful and
ordinary Call or Succession, because upon them the Gifts of the Spirit were
bestowed: As it was written of the Levites, whose Answers were not to be
questioned. That many things were settled by Traditions, which were not written
in the Scriptures. As, that the Father was not begotten; That the Son was of
the same Substance with the Father; That Infants were to be Baptized; That the
Blessed Virgin continued a Virgin after she brought forth; That the Decrees of
General Councils should be valid, and that they cannot err in Matters of Faith;
and that it cannot be shown, that any of the later Councils have corrected the
former.

Beza replied, Beza Replie^.
that the Imposition of hands was no necessary note of a lawful Call, The two
principal were, a due Inquiry into the Doctrine and Manners of the Person, and
an Election of them to the Ministry. That they were not to expect Imposition
of hands from the Bishops who opposed the Truth, and persecuted those that
Preached it. And that Miracles were not always necessary to an extraordinary
Call, which he endeavored to prove by Isaiah, Daniel, Amos, Zachariah, and St.
Paul. In the next congress, Beza spoke much about the Calling of the Protestant
Ministers, but in such a manner as tended more to the exasperating of the
Prelates, than the appeasing them; so that these two days were spent in mere
squabble, without order, and to no purpose.

There was then in France John Laines, a Spaniard, General of the Jesuits,
Laines General of the Jesuits his Rudeness in the Conference.
who came thither with Hippolito d' Este Cardinal of Ferrara, sent by Pope Pius
IV. as Legate to the King. This Laines, being present this day at the
Conference, called the Protestant Ministers Monkeys, Foxes, and Monsters; and
said, they were to be turned over to the Council called by the Pope: Then he
fell upon the Queen, for meddling in things that did not belong to her, but to
the Pope, Cardinals, and Bishops; and he said, it was not lawful, whilst a
General Council was in being, for the Queen to appoint by her private Authority
a Conference here. The Queen was much enraged at the Insolence of this Man,
but, out of Reverence to the Legate, suppressed her resentment; after this Day
there were no more Public Conferences, but they Drew out three of a Side, and
endeavored to form such an Exposition of the Lord's Supper as both Parties
might agree in, which in the End proved impossible to be done, and so the
Conference of Poissi ended, which was the first Liberty that was granted to
dispute the Established Religion in France; and was blamed by some as a thing
of ill Example, and approved by others as the only means left to prevent the
Storm which hung over their heads. But it had not that effect, so the
Ministers, and especially Beza, (who was invited by the Queen) were honorably
dismissed.

The Fame of this Conference being diffused through Italy and Spain, Philip the
Second was strangely surprised at it; so the Queen sent Jacques de Monbron, In
the History of the Council of Trent, called Jaques de Montbrun.
a Person of good Birth and Repute to excuse it. That Prince would hardly be
induced to hear the reason of it, and turning him over to the Duke de Alva, he
blamed their fearfulness, and advised them to return to the same Severities
which had been used in the Reigns of Henry II. and Francis II. promising his
Masters Assistance for the Extirpation of the Protestants. Adding, That the
King had been sclicited to it by the Catholic Nobility and People of France,
and that he could not neglect their Petition, but he must be wanting to
himself; That he did not fear such vain reproaches, as that with foreign Forces
he invaded what was another; because in this Cause the Spanish Forces were no
foreigners, when the Religion of their Ancestors was at the stake. By this it
appeared to the Court of France, That there was a Correspondence between their
Catholics and the Spaniards, and one Arthur Desire, a Priest, was taken much
about this time near Orleans, going into Spain with a Letter from some great
Men to King Philip, to persuade him to undertake the Protection of their Infant
King, and of the Catholic Religion, which was in great danger to be ruined;
for which he was ordered to do Penance by the Parliament of Paris, and
committed to the Carthusian Monks to be kept a Prisoner for ever; but
afterward he made his Escape. This Sentence was pronounced against him the
14th of July.

In the End of this Year, A Popish Position gives great Offense in France.
one Jean Tanquerel, a young Divine, proposed as his Thesis in a Disputation,
That the Pope as Christ's only Vicar and the Monarch of the Church, can by his
Spiritual and Secular Power, command all faithful Princes as his Subjects; and
if they disobey his Precepts, deprive them of their Dignities and Kingdoms;
which being complained off to the King, the Chancellor sent a Commission to
inquire into it, and Tanquerel being fled, it was ordered, that the Parritor of
the Theological Faculty should make a Recantation of it in his Name in the
School of the Sorbonne, before the Dean, and all the Fellows and Students of
that Faculty, in the Presence of the President of the Parliament of Paris, the
King's Counsel and Solicitor, and for the future, the Parliament forbad all
such questions to be given. And ordered the Sorbonne to send two of their
Fellows to beg the King's Pardon. This Decree passed the 2d of December, and
was put in Execution ten days after.

The Pope had till now dreaded a General Council, The Council of Trent recalled.
as tending to the abatement of his Power, and on that score had delayed it
till Cosmus Duke of Florence, and the fear of a National Council in France,
prevailed upon him to reassume that which was began by Paul III. continued by
Julius III. and was at last interrupted by the Commotions of Germany: The
Pope's Bull.
In order to this, the 19th of November 1559. he Published a Bull for the
recalling this Council to Trent at the Feast of Easter of this Year, vehemently
Exhorting all Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops and Abbats, and all others who
had the Right or Privilege to Sit and Vote in a General Council by common
right, or any Privilege or Ancient Custom; that at that Day they would be
present in the said Council: He also Admonished the Emperor Elect, and all
other Christian Kings and Princes, that if they could not be personally
present, they should send their Ambassadors thither; affirming beforehand, that
he designed nothing by this Council but the Glory of God, the Reduction and
Salvation of the scattered Sheep, and the lasting Peace of Christendom. There
was soon after a sharp Invective Printed at Ausburg by Paulus Vergerius Bishop
of Cabo di Istria in Friule, Vergerius opposes the Council.
who was a Cardinal, and had been employed by several of the preceding Popes in
great Ambassies, and had lately left that Church, and betaken himself to the
Protestants of Germany. In it he set forth the Pride, Pomp, Luxury, Ambition,
Bribery, and corrupt Manners of the Court of Rome. which he vowed he well knew,
and from his heart detested. That the Council was not called by the Pope, to
establish the Doctrine of Christ, but those Human Inventions which they had
brought in contrary to the Commandments of God, not to Purge God's fold, but to
disseminate their inveterate Errors, not to restore Christian Liberty, but to
introduce a miserable Servitude and Oppression on the Souls of Men; none but
the Bishops and Abbats, who should take an Oath prescribed by the Roman
Ceremonial, Lib. 1. c. III.. XIV. being permitted to sit there: That all the
inferior Clergy, and secular Princes had only a right to come, be instructed,
but not to deliberate or vote, by which it must needs come to pass that not
only all those who had separated from that Church on the account of her gross
Errors would not be heard; which was promised at first by Paul III. but that
also many of the most Skilful and most Learned Doctors of that Church would be
excluded from giving any Vote; and all Liberty, in which only there was any
hope of restoring the Peace of the Church, would be taken away, and a Door
opened to let in a Schism which would never have an end.

The Pope, Ambassadors sent to the Protestant Princes to invite them to the
Council.
perceiving that this Complaint would irritate the Minds of the German Princes,
for whose sake the Council was first Indicted, sent Ambassadors to them;
Zachariah Delfino Bishop of Faro, and John Francis Comendon Bishop of Zant,
being by his order directed to all the Princes with Letters of Credence. They
went, first to Ferdinand the Emperor, who was then at Vienna; from thence, they
went by his Advice, to meet all the Princes of the Augustane Confession, who
were then Assembled at Naumberg upon the River Saole in Saxony: whom they were
to treat very gently and modestly, studying to avoid whatever might give
occasion of Exasperation or Offense, by the Counsel of this great and excellent
Prince; he telling them, this was the easiest way to do their Business, and to
get a Positive Answer. He also reminded them of the Conditions upon which the
Protestant Princes had in the last Diet declared, they would consent to the
Council of Trent. That if they happened to be mentioned, the Ambassadors might
not be destitute of an Answer. He also sent Three Ambassadors of his own with
them, 1. Otho Count of Eberstin. 2. Felix Bogislaus, Baron of Hassenstein; And
3. Christopher Meela, Vice-Chamberlain of Bobemia. These being admitted the day
after their Arrival at Naumburg, into the Assembly of the Princes, exhorted
them to be present in the Council to be shortly holden at Trent, that an end
might so be put to the lamentable Differences of Religion, and the Calamities
of Germany. When they had deliberated on the Proposal, they returned this
Answer, Their Answer to the Emperor.
That they were very Thankful to the Emperor for his Care of, and Love to the
Empire. As to the Council, they did not refuse a Free, General, and truly
Christian Council, in which, not the Pope, but the Word of God should sit as
Judge, the Oath of the Bishops being discharged, and a Liberty allowed to those
of the Augustane Confession to Vote: But on the contrary, they perceived the
Pope pretended to continue the Council of Trent, and only to allow those
Bishops to Vote, who were Sworn to him, against which they had already
Protested in many Dyets of the Empire: They concluded with a Promise of a more
partiticular Answer when they had consulted the Princes assembled at Newburg,
they having as yet no Instructions concerning this Point, from them, or their
Deputies. And in the mean time, they prayed the Emperor that he would preserve
inviolably the League of Passam, and the Peace of Religion.

After this, both the Pope's Legates were heard one after another, Pius IV. his
great Care of Religion, The Pope's Legates Admitted.
and good Affection toward them: That to this end, he had recalled the Council
to Trent, for the Extirpation of Heresy and Sects; in which he promised all
things should be transacted with Christian Charity, and Brotherly Affection,
and all should be fully and sweetly heard, and Determinations made, and
Suffrages given, with the utmost freedom and liberty. Therefore they exhorted
them to send Ambassadors with Plenary Instructions, and lend their Assistance
to the bringing so commendable a Design to its desired end; which was, the
restoring Peace to Christendom. They delivered also the Pope's Letters to the
several and respective Protestant Princes, which being Superscribed with the
word Son, were all returned Sealed, to the Legates. The last day of the
Meeting, the Electors, and other Princes, in the Morning returned an Answer to
the Pope's Legates. Their Answer to the Legates.
That they did not acknowledge the Popels Jurisdiction; nor think themselves
bound to give him any account what they intended in the Business of the
Council, the Calling and holding of which belonged not to him; but they had
fully declared their Minds to Ferdinand, the Emperor, their gracious Lord.
That as for them, (the Legates,) they esteemed them for their Noble Birth, and
great Learning, and should have shown them greater respects, if they had not
come on the Pope's Errand. Being thus dismissed, they went to Lubeck, and sent
to Frederick King of Denmark for leave to come to him; but had for an Answer,
That neither he, nor his Father, had never had any Business with the Pope, nor
did he desire now to know their Errand. And Martinego, who was sent to Queen
Elizabeth of England, was forbidden to come over.

To give the Reader a certain and clear knowledge of this Meeting at Naumburg.
The 13th of January, Fredcrick the Elector Palatine, The occasions of the
meeting at Naumburg.
Augustus Duke of Saxony and Elector, Jo. Frederick of Saxony, Wolfang, of the
Palatine Family, Ernest and Philip Dukes of Brunswick, Ulrick Duke of
Meckleburg, Christopher Duke of Wirtemburg, Charles Marquis of Baden, Ernest
Prince of Henneberg; and the Ambassadors of Joachim Duke and Elector of
Brandenburg, and of John and George Fredirick of that Family, of Philip
Landtgrave of Hesse, and of Barnim and Jo. Frederick Dukes of Pomerania, upon
the report of a Council suddenly to be assembled, met at Naumburg, to which
Place the King of Denmark, and the Princes of Lunenburg, sent only Letters of
Friendship, to assure those that met, that they would stand by them. The design
of it was, to put an end to those Controversies which had arisen amongst the
Protestants themselves, to renew their Subscriptions to the Augustane
Confession, to consider, and by mutual Consent to resolve, whether they should
go to the Council, or refuse it. They had great Controversies amongst
themselves about the various Editions of the Augustane Confession, which had
been explained, enlarged, and as to the Expressions very often changed, and the
Elector of Saxony was for the retaining the first Edition, and putting the
Smalcaldick Articles, by way of Preface to it; but the rest not consenting to
it, he left Naumburg, and returned. When they came to consider the Council of
Trent, they were no less divided in that too: Some were for an absolute
rejection of it, others were for the sending Ambassadors from the several
States, who should propose the giving an Account of their Faith in a free and
truly Christian Synod; and enter a great Complaint against the Pope and Court
of Rome, make their Exceptions to the Council on the account of the Suspicion
of the Judges, the perverse Method or Order of Proceedings, and the
Inconvenience of the Place, this they conceived would mitigate the Envy had
been raised against them, and show, that their Enemies, and not they, were the
obstructers of Concord and Union. After this they sent Deputies to the Duke of
Saxony, deploring his departure before the End of the Conference, and giving
him an Account of the Form of Confession they had Agreed to Subscribe, and
desiring him that he would also subscribe it, or at least restrain his Divines
from traducing and defaming it, as they had before done by some things agreed
at Frankford. Soon after Augustus Duke of Saxony Married Anne Daughter of
Morice of the Family of Nassaw, and Brother to William Prince of Orange.

Jerolamus Martinego, The English reject the Council.
who was sent to Treat with Queen Elizabeth for the same end as I have said
already, came into Flanders, and from thence, according to the ancient Custom,
sent for Leave to come into England, but was denied it, the Council of England
not thinking it fit to admit a Nuncio from the Pope, when there were so many
Roman Catholics in the Nation, who, being brought up in that Religion, would
be apt upon such an Encouragement, to Imbroil our Affairs at home and abroad.
The Bishop of Viterbo, the Popes Legate at Paris, thereupon began to Treat with
Throcmorton our Ambassador in that Court; That Queen Elizabeth would be pleased
to send her Ambassadors to the Council, in which he was seconded by Letters
from the Kings of France, Spain, and Portugal, and the Cardinal of Portugal,
and the Duke de Alva. To which she replied, That from her Heart she desired a
General Council, but she would have nothing to do with a Papa. That she would
have nothing to do with the Pope neither, whose Authority was banished out of
England by the consent of the Three Estates. That it belonged not to him, but
to the Emperor to call a Council; and, that she acknowledged no greater
Authority in him than in any other Bishop.

The Twenty fifth of July Erirk King of Sweden was Crowned with great Pomp at
Stockholme upon the Baltic Sea. Erick King of Sweden Crowned. The Cardinal of
Caraffa Hanged.
Charles Cardinal of Caraffa and Nephew of the last Pope, was strangled the
Sixth of March in the Castle of St. Angelo, upon pretense, That he had
Exasperated Paul IV. his Uncle with his false Stories, and put him upon a War;
That he had caused the Truce between France and Spain to be broken, had entered
underhand Treaties with the Protestant Princes of Germany, and also with the
Turk, the Enemies of Christianity; but in reality, because the Pope was much
offended with the sharp Answers the Cardinal made after he was imprisoned; The
Pope being thereupon made sensible, that the Cardinal was a Person of great
Spirit and Interest, and if ever he were dismissed, he would at one time or
other Revenge the Quarrel upon the Popes Relations, so that his Holiness
contrary to his first Intentions, found it was needful to cut him off, though
against Law, as his own Canonists generally said. The Count de Paliani, Brother
of the Cardinal of Carafsa, had the same fate, but on other pretenses.

In France all that desired the Peace of the Church and the Reformation of
Religion, A National Council defired in France.
concluded, the Pope would not hold a Council whatever he pretended, and
therefore urged the having of a National Council; which was opposed by the
Guises and their Faction, for fear the Protestant Party should prevail in it
against the Catholic. They did whatever they could to persuade the King and
Council from it, and procured the Pope to persuade Philip King of Spain to
interest himself in it, who sent Anthony Bishop of Toledo to persuade the Queen
to send the French Clergy to the Council of Trent; and that in the mean time,
to prevent a Schism, the thoughts of a National Council should be laid aside.
He had Orders also, as occasion offered, to threaten those who favored the
Protestants, and to give assurances of his Masters readiness to support the
young King; which was ill taken in France, as a kind of usurping a Right to
interpose their Spanish Pride in the French Affairs. Toledo died in France, and
Maurice his Successor for became very importunate with the Queen to begin a
Persecution against the Protestants, which was as stiffly opposed by the King
of Navar; The King of Navar drawn over to the Popish Party by the King of
Spain's Arts.
and interrupted all the Spanish Proceedings by his frequent Complaints to the
young King. King Philip finding, to his Cost, that this Princes Power was
greater in France than he imagined, began a Design upon him to make him more
pliant to his Desires. This was to reject his Wife, and Marry Mary Queen of the
Scots, and then declaring himself Head of the Catholics in France, the King of
Spain was to give him Sardinia for Navar, and to help him to Conquer England;
and so two Heretical Queens were for Heresy to be laid aside, and the Pope was
to Consecrate and Bless the Business. The King of Navar detesting the Project
of Repudiating his Queen, the Exchange of Sardinia was driven on with more
eagerness, pretending it was the greatest Island in the Mediterranean Sea, next
Sicily, and the most fruitful, rich, and populous, and situate very
conveniently for a Conquest of Barbary. This Project being also seconded by the
Popes Nuncio, the Cardinal of Ferrara, prevented the calling of a National
Council, which Wise Men thought was the only thing that could have prevented
the Civil War, which after broke out to the almost total Ruin of France.

Though the Edict of July had forbidden all Meetings of the Protestants, A new
invented Convention for the Regulating matters of Religion in France.
not only Sermons were openly made, but the Priests were in many places
forcibly expelled, and the Churches seized for the use of the Ministers, which
gave being to the Edict of the 3d of November, for the Restitution of those
Churches upon pain of Death; which by the Persuasion of the Ministers
themselves, was obeyed throughout the Kingdom. But when notwithstanding Men
seemed rather enraged than appeased by the Edict of July, and the Conference of
Poissy was broken up without any effect, there being every day news brought of
new Commotions, they began to think of some more effectual Remedy, which that
it might meet with the greater approbation, and by consequence be the more
universally executed, the Presidents and some chosen Members of all the
Parliaments of France were summoned before the King to St. Germain, by whose
Advice it was to be drawn and Moddel'd. Upon which the Cardinal of Lorrain and
the Duke of Guise left the Court, conceiving the thing would do it self, now
Montmorancy and the King of Navar had espoused that Interest.

About the same time there was a dreadful Tumult at Dijon; A Tumult a^ Dijon.
whilst the Protestants were assembled at their Sermon, the Rabble thought fit
to make themselves the Executioners of the Edict of July, and having procured a
Drum to beat before them, they marched against the Huguenots, but the Meeters
made use of their Weapons, and repelled Force with Force; The Rabble thereupon
turned their fury against the Private Families, and plundered several Houses.
There were also some Tumults at Paris on the same score, and toward the end of
the year all things tended to a general Revolution.

Having thus represented the State of Religion in all the rest of Christendom,
Scotch Affairs.
as shortly, and as well as I can, I return now to Scotland. The Messengers
they had sent into France to procure the Royal Consent to the Acts they had
made in their last Parliament, were no sooner returned with a positive denial,
and a dreadful Reprimand, which frighted and exasperated the Nation both at
once; but they had the Joyful News of the Death of King Francis II. to their
great satisfaction, and the no less affliction of the French Faction in that
Kingdom. On the other side, the Nobility, who had lent their Assistance to the
Expulsion of the French, immediately met at Edinburg, and after a Consultation,
sent the Lord James to their Queen to persuade her to return into Scotland;
Lesley however prevented them, and got to her some days before the Lord James.
She was then at Vitrie in Campaigne, whither she was retired to lament her
Loss: His business was, Queen Mary^ resolves to return into Scotland.
to bespeak her favor to the Catholic Party, and return into Scotland; The
first she readily promised, and as for the other she ordered him to Attend till
she had resolved what to do. It was soon after resolved, that she should leave
France, so that the Lord James found her fixed to return when he came into
France, yet his Assuring her of the great desires the Nobility of Scotland had
to see her there again, much confirmed her. So she sent him back with Orders,
to see that nothing should be attempted contrary to the Treaty of Leith in her
absence.

In March following, M. Giles Noailles, a Senator of Bourdeaux, arrived at
Leith, with three Demands from the new King of France: 1. That the old League
between France and Scotland should be renewed. 2. That the late Confederacy
with England should be diss^lved. 3. That the Churchmen should be restored to
all they had been deprived of. But the Council replied, That it did not befit
them, to treat of things of that Consequence, before the Assembly of the
States, which was to be held the 21st of May, when the Lord James made answer,
That the French, and not the Scots, had broke the old League, by endeavoring
to enslave them. 2. That they could not violate the Treaty made with England;
and, as to the third, That they did not acknowledge those he interceded for, to
be Church men, and that Scotland, having renounced the Pope, would no longer
maintain his Priests and Vassals. About the same time, the Earls of Morton and
Glencarn returned from England, whither they had been sent, with Assurances,
That the Queen would assist them in the Defense of the Liberties of the
Kingdom, if, at any time, they stood in need of her Help; which was heard with
much Joy.

As the Lord James returned into Scotland, he waited upon Queen Elizabeth, and
advised her to stop Queen Mary, if she came by England, (as he expected she
would) 'till he had secured the State of Religion in Scotland; The Pretestant
Religion settled in Scotland.
for though she had promised, She would continue all things in the State she
found them, yet he would not entirely rely upon her Promise, having so often
heard the old Maxim from the late Regent. To make sure work therefore, he
procured an Act to be passed in this Convention, for the Demolishing all the
Cloisters, and Abbey Churches, which were yet left standing in that Kingdom; the
Execution whereof, as to the Western Parts, was committed to the Earls of
Arran, Argile, and Glencarn; as to the North, to the Lord James; and as to the
Inland Counties, to some Barons that were thought the most Zealous: Whereupon
ensued a most deplorable Devastation of Churches, and Church-buildings, says
Spotiswood, throughout all the Kingdom; for every one made bold to put to their
Hands, the meaner sort imitating the Example of the greater, and those who were
in Authority. No difference was made, but all the Churches were either defaced,
or pulled down to the ground. The Church Plate, and what ever Men could make
Money of, as Timber, Lead, and Bells, were put to sale, and the Monuments of
the Dead, the Registers of the Churches and Libraries were burned or destroyed,
and what escaped the Fury of the first Tumults now perisned in a common
Shipwreck, and that under the color of public Authority. John Knox is said to
have very much promoted this Calamity, by a Maxim he published, That the sure
way to drive away the Rooks, was to pull down their Nests, which, in
probability, he meant only of the Monks; but now their Hands were in, was
extended to all the Church Buildings: Noailles was then in Scotland, and
carried the News of this dreadful Reformation to the Queen into France.

She was much enraged at it, The Queen angry with the Proceedings.
and said to some of her Confidents, that she would imitate Mary Queen of
England; but however, she had wit enough to dissemble her Resentment for the
present.

In order to her return, Queen Mary goes into Scotland.
she left Vitri, and went to Paris; and having waited upon the King, and
Queen-Regent, to take her leave of them, she took her Journey toward Calais,
Queen Elizabeth had sent the Earl of Bedford, to condole the Death of Francis,
her late Husband, and to desire her Ratification of the Treaty of Leith; but
this, she said, she could not do, 'till she had consulted with the Nobility of
Scotland; and when the Ambassador replied, They could not but approve of what
they had made, she replied, They did, but not all; and when I come amongst
them, it will appear what mind they are of. The Duke of Guise, and the rest of
the great Men of that Family, attended her to Calais, and the Marquess of
Elboeuf, and Francis, Grand Prior of France, went with her. She took Ship the
14th of August, and arrived at Leith in Scotland the 20th. She was much
concerned, for fear Queen Elizabeth might intercept her in her way home, and
therefore, sent again for the English Ambassador; but when he still insisted,
to have the Treaty of Leith ratified, she delayed it. Her Uncle, the Cardinal
of Lorrain, advised her, to leave her Jewels and Treasures in France, 'till she
were safe in Scotland; but she said, It was folly, to be more concerned for her
Jewels, than for her Person, which she must hazard. The truth is, her Fear was
well grounded, for Queen Elizabeth sent a Fleet to way-lay her; but the two
Navies passed by one another, in a dark foggy day, unperceived, and she safely
arrived at Leith the 21th of August.

The beginning of her Government was very gracious, and she condescended to
grant, That no Change or Alteration should be made in the present State of
Religion; Her beginning very gracious to the Protestants.
only, she said, she would use her own Religion apart, and have a Mass in
private, which was, and by many was thought, very reasonable, she having been
Educated in the Roman Church, and being a Sovereign Princess: Yet the
Preachers, in their Sermons, publicly condemned that Toleration of their
Queen, as unlawful; The Preachers would not Tolerate the Queen.
and the Earl of Arran, being exasperated by his Imprisonment, on the account
of Religion, in France, by the Order of the Guises, from whence he made his
Escape, replied, That he did neither agree to Public nor Private Mass; which
highly displeased the Queen. And Archimbald Douglas, Provost of Edinburg, See
Spotiswood, page 182.
put out an Order, commanding all Papists to be gone; for which, the Queen
committed him to the Castle of Edinburg: And one of the common sort of Men
broke the Tapers in the Court, which were prepared for her Chapel, and a Tumult
had ensued to the Ruin of the other Preparatives for her Chapel, if some wiser
Men had not interposed; amongst whom, the Lord James was one of the greatest
and forwardest, to suppress this insolent Disorder: On the other side, the
Marquess of Elboeuf was much offended, to see the Protestant Religion exercised
openly in Scotland, and the Earl of Huntley, a vain Man, proffered the Queen
his Service, to reduce all the North Parts of Scotland to the Popish Religion,
which was wisely rejected.

In the middle of September, the Duke of Aumarl, and the rest of the French,
Great kindness in show, between Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth.
which had come home with the Queen, went back to France, but the Marquess of
Elboeuf, who stayed with her all the Winter. She sent William Lord Maitland to
Queen Elizabeth, with Letters full of kind and friendly Expressions, and
desiring the like Returns from her: And, amongst other things, that she would
declare her the lawful Heir to the Crown of England, in case she (Queen
Elizabeth) should dye without Issue; which Queen Elizabeth denied, but said,
She would never wrong her, nor her Cause, if it be just in the least point; and
that she knew not any, whom she would prefer before her, or who (if the Title
should fall to be controverted) might exclude her.

The Queen of Scots, in the mean time, Queen Mary begins to favor the Romish
Party.
caused a new Provost of Edinburg to be Elected, changed the Common Council,
and put out a Proclamation, That all her good and faithful Subjects should
repair to, and remain within, the Birgh, at their pleasure, for doing their
lawful Business; which was in opposition to the Provost's Order. She kept her
Masses too, more publicly, and with greater pomp; of all which, the Ministers
complained in vain in their Sermons. The Nobility had divided the Church Lands
amongst them, and had now another Game to pursue, and were striving who should
be most in the Queen's Favor.

The Queen's Expenses being soon found too great, Yet she augments her Revenues
out of the Church Lands.
for the poor Revenues of the Crown of Scotland to maintain. The Remainder of
the Church Lands was divided into three parts, one was assigned to the Queen,
one to the Ministers, and the third was left to the Bishops and Parsons of the
Romish Communion, which they were forced to yield to, to prevent the loss of
all, they now subsisting merely by the Queen's Favor. The Earl of Huntley, to
be made Lord Chancellor, turned Roman Catholic again, which encouraged one
Winyet, a Priest, to write a Book against the Reformation, for which, he was
censured and forced to leave Scotland. Not long after which, she created the
Lord James, her Brother, first, Earl of Mar, and then of Murray, the Lord
Ereskin claiming, and at last obtaining, the Earldom of Mar, which much
offended Huntley, which had enjoyed both these Titles ever since the death of
James the Fifth. This made Huntley enter into many base and unworthy Designs to
murder Murray, which were all, by one means or other, discovered, and, at last,
ended in the Death of Huntley, and the Execution of John Gordon, his eldest
Son, a hopeful young Gentleman, in the Year following.

The beginning of the Year 1562, was very unquiet in France. The French Affairs.
The King had called an Assembly of the Delegates of all the Parliaments of
France, in the end of the last year, which was to meet at St. Germain the 17th
of January of this year, to consider of the means of appeasing these Broils,
and preserving the Peace of France. The King opened this Assembly with a short
Speech, which was seconded by a larger, made by the Chancellor; who having
given a short account of the several Edicts, that had been made before in the
business of Religion; and shown how they had all, by one means or other, been
defeated. He added, That Laws were of no use, if they were not Religiously
observed. But then, (said he) if the Question is put, Why are not the Laws
executed? Must not you, that are the Judges, bear the blame? For if they excuse
themselves, and say, That it was not in their power to execute them, I will
accept the Answer, upon condition they will ingenuously confess, That neither
was it in the King's power: And that this Affair of Religion, by a secret
Judgment of God, for the Chastisement of our Luxury, Indevotion, and Neglect of
his Glory, is so disposed, that we may, by the severity of the Punishment, be
brought to Repentance. In the year 1518, when these Commotions first began,
there is no Man but knows, how corrupt the Manners, and how loose, or rather
profligate, the Discipline of the Church was throughout the World: For, to omit
the Court of Rome, in which, there was nothing right and sound, we had here in
France a young King, brought up in Pleasures, though he afterward was much
improved, but he was then very dissolute; nor was Henry of England any better:
And after all the Judgments God has sent from Heaven upon us, we have not
repented or amended; and therefore, there is no wonder, that this sad
difference of Religion cannot be composed, and the Peace of the Church
restored. No, on the contrary it is now apparent, that our Enemies are become
so numerous, that they are almost able to oppress us. As to those who pretend,
that we have increased them by our Connivance, I can answer, That during the
minority of the King, they are bolder, and I would have them consider too,
that, for our Sins, God has set a Child over us. There are some, who would have
the King arm one part of his Subjects against the other, which, I think, is
neither Christian, nor Human. After very much to the same purpose, he told
them, the Thing proposed by the King to their Consideration, was, Whether it
was the best way for the King to Suppress the Meetings, or to Tolerate them?

Thereupon followed a very great Debate between these Deputies of the several
Parliaments of France, A Debate concerning Toleration.
but, at last, they came to a Resolution, to remit something of the Severity of
the Edict of July, and to allow the Protestants the liberty of Public Sermons;
The Edict of January, which granted Liberty of Conscience to the Protestants.
and accordingly a new Edict was made, which was called, The Edict of January,
the principal Heads of which, were these: That the Protestants should restore
the Ecclesiastics to their Churches, Houses, Lands, Tithes, and other goods
whatsoever which they had taken from them forthwith, and suffer them peaceably
to enjoy their Images, Crosses, and Statues, without any molestation, or
endeavoring to destroy them; or doing any other thing that may disturb the
public Peace, upon pain of Death, without any hope of Mercy. That the
Protestants should have no public Meetings, Sermons, and Prayers; or
administer any Sacraments, publicly or privately, by Night or by Day, within
any City, in any manner whatsoever: Yet, in the mean time, till the
Controversies of Religion shall be composed by a General Council, or the King
shall otherwise order it, Those, who shall go to, or frequent, their Sermons
shall not be molested, provided they be had without the Cities. And the
Magistrates were accordingly commanded, not to disquiet, but to protect and
preserve them from all Injury. That all Seditious Persons, of what Religion
soever they were, should be severely punished, and all should be bound to
discover and deliver them up to Justice, a thousand Crowns being imposed upon
any person who should receive, abet, or conceal, such Riotous Offender, and the
Offender to be whipped, if not able to pay the Penalty. That the said Meetings
should be without Arms, and that no person should Reproach another on the
account of Religion, or use any Factious Names. That the Protestant Ministers
should admit none into their Number, till they had diligently examined their
Lives, Conversations, and Doctrines. That the Magistrates might freely go to
their Meetings, to see what was done, or to apprehend any Criminal, who should
be treated according to their Dignity, and obeyed. That the Protestants should
hold no Synods, Conferences, or Consistories, but in the presence of a
Magistrate. That they should create no new Magistrates, or make any Laws or
Statutes: And if they desire any thing by way of Discipline, it should be
referred to their Authority, or, if need be, be confirmed by them. There shall
be no Levies of Men or Moneys made by them, nor any Leagues entered into for
their private Defense. And as to Alms, they shall only take them of such as are
willing to give. The Civil Laws, especially those concerning Holy Days, and the
Degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity in Marriages, shall be observed. That
their Pastors shall give Security to the Magistrates, for the Observing this
Edict, and promise, That they will not preach any Doctrine contrary to the
Nicene or Apostles Creeds, or the Books of the Old or New Testament, nor use
any Reproaches against the Catholics in their Sermons: And the same is
enjoined the Catholics, in relation to the Protestants. No man shall publish
any Libels to defame another, or sell, or cause them to be sold. Lastly, the
Magistrates are hereby commanded to be very diligent, in case any Sedition
happens, to search out the Offenders, and punish them, without any Appeal to be
allowed to such Offenders.

A Debate being made concerning the Worship of Images, Injunctions published by
the Queen's Order, concerning Images.
these Propositions were published by the Queen, by the Advice of the Bishops
of Valence and Seez, and Monsieur Bouthillier, d' Espence, and Picherel. That
seeing Errors are, according to St. Augustine, rather to be rooted out of the
Minds of Men, than out of Churches, and other places, the Bishops should take
order with the Curates, to have the People well Instructed, and diligently
Admonished, concerning the right use of them, that all Offense or Scandal might
be prevented, both by the Royal Authority, and that of the Church; and that if
any opposed this, he should be treated as a Violater of the Royal Edicts, and
of the public Peace. Images of the Trinity forbidden.
That all Figures of the Holy Trinity should be immediately removed out of all
Churches, and all other public and private Places, as being forbidden by the
Holy Scriptures, the Councils and Testimonies of the Fathers, and only
Dissembled or Tolerated by the Sloth of the Bishops and Pastors. That the
Pictures of all profane Persons, and others, who were not to be found in the
Authentic Martyrologies of the Church, all lascivious and dishonest Pictures,
and those of Brutes, shall be abolished. That no Crowns, Garlands, or
Vestments, shall be put upon any Images, nor Incense, nor Candles, burnt before
them; nor shall they be carried in Processions, nor any Prayers or Oblations be
made to them, nor shall they be worshipped with bended Knees, because all these
things are parts of Worship. That all Images, but that of the Venerable Holy
Cross, shall be taken from the Altars, and either placed on the Valves, or
Walls, of the Churches; so that from henceforth, they may neither be saluted,
kissed, prayed to, or presented with Gifts. That all Images, which were wont to
be carried on the Shoulders of Men in the Churches and Streets, should,
according to the late Canon of Sens, be for ever abolished. Beza opposed the
retention of the Cross, as brought into use by Constantine the Great, and one
N. Mallard, Dean of the Sorbonne in Paris, though he confessed, some ill things
had crept into the Church; yet he was of opinion, that all this Worship of
Images ought stoutly to be defended and retained, and put out a Book to that
purpose; so the Thing fell. This Order was made the 14th of February.

The same Month, but some few days before it, The King of Navar pretends still
to promote the Reformation.
the King of Navar wrote a Letter to the Elector Palatine, in which, he
testified his great desire to promote a Reformation, and that he hoped to have
found a way to reconcile Differences, by the Conference of Poissi. But that
this Affair had not succeeded according to his wish; and that, even in the
Dispute about Images, which seemed to have less of Difficulty, they had yet not
been able to agree. But that, whatever Men pretended, he would, by the help of
God, endeavor, that the Confession of Faith, which could not be destroyed,
without the Ruin of the Peace of the Nation, should insensibly be established
as far as the Infancy of the King, and the present State of Things would
permit. He wrote also, to the same purpose, to the Duke of Wirtemberg, and to
Philip Landtgrave of Hesse. The Elector Palatine wrote an Answer, dated the
20th of April, from Heidelburg, wherein he said, he was sorry to see the
Affections of the Protestants cool in this Affair; and therefore, he exhorted
him to go on in this commendable Design of Reforming Religion.

When the Edict of January came to be published, the Guises and Montmorancy,
The Edict of January opposed by the Guises and others.
who were now reconciled, and were absent at the time of making it, employed
all their Industry, to prevent its having its effect; alleging, it was not
made as it ought, and would prove destructive to the Kingdom of France; and
having brought over Navar to their Party, though they foresaw they should meet
with great, and almost insuperable, Difficulties; yet, they thought, they
should at last gain their Ends. The Duke of Guise went therefore to his Country
House, and his Brother Charles, the Cardinal, soon after followed him thither:
So they both went to Zaberen, a Town belonging to the Bishop of Strasburg,
where Christopher, Duke of Wirtemberg, met him, on pretense he came to visit a
Lady that was his Kinswoman, bringing with him John Brent, and James Andrea,
two eager defenders of the Augustane Confession against the Zuinglians, (whose
Doctrine was generally followed by the Protestants in France;) here they
conferred together three days. The Cardinal of Lorrain pretended to have a
great affection for the Duke of Wirtemberg, and the rest of the German Princes;
he said also, That since the Conference of Poissi, he had a good opinion of the
Augustane Confession, and that he had often persuaded the Protestants to
subscribe it, and they had ever refused it, because they did not so much desire
the Reformation of Religion, and of the Church Discipline, as the spreading
lewd and monstrous Opinions, which tended to the filling France and Germany
with new Tumults. That the King of Denmark wisely foresaw this, who
congratulating, by his Ambassador, the attempt, to reform the Church, expressed
at the same time his fear, that they should embrace the Zuinglian and Geneva
Confession, instead of the Augustane; and thereupon carefully advised the King
of Navar, to consider this. That the Duke of Wirtemberg, and the other Princes
of Germany, ought to fear the same thing, if they desired the Peace of Germany,
or that of the Church: For that as Germany and France were near each other, so
their Interests were so interwoven, that the Good or Evil would be common to
them. That as they were derived from one of the Illustrious Families of
Germany, and enjoyed one of the principal Stations in France; so they had left
that Kingdom to confer with him (the Duke of Wirtemburg), and to settle, by
mutual Consent, what might be useful and salutary to both these States, and
that they might conjointly oppose the Endeavors of the Zuinglians, and their
Doctrine. They pretended, they did not do this, with intention to hinder the
Reformation of Religion, and the Worship of God, For that they desired above
all things; but that they sought to prevent that Tempest, which these Sectaries
were raising, both in France and Germany: And therefore, they desired the Duke,
to interpose his Authority with the Princes of Germany, and to induce them to
have a good Opinion of their Designs.

The Duke of Wirtemburg (having consulted with Brent and Andrea, his two
Divines, who were very desirous, the Helvetian Confession should not be
entertained in France) commended the Cardinals affections toward himself and
the Empire; and said, he approved of his Counsel, for the hindering the
Reception of that Confession in France, which, without doubt, would cause great
Commotions. But then, he said, this was upon condition, that the Reformation
should be carried on in France in the mean time; and that no Severities or
Proscriptions should be employed against those, who had made defection from the Sea of Rome. The Cardinal was thought to have said this, to the intent, to
dispose the German Protestant Princes to send Supplies against the French
Protestants, when it should come to a War; or, at least, to make them less apt
to succor the Prince of Conde, and the Protestants. Thus that Conference ended

The Duke of Guise, The Duke of Guise called to Court by the King of Navar. The
Massacre of Vassy happened accidentally in that ^ourny.
and the Cardinal, returned to Joinville in Champaigne, where, soon after, he
received a Letter from the King of Navar, that he should come to Court as fast
as was possible, whither he forthwith went. In the Borders of Champaigne, there
is a Town, called Vassy, which has high Walls, and is the Capital of a
Prefecture: The Protestants had a Meeting Place in this Town, able to contain
twelve Hundred persons, in which, at times, they preached, and administered
Sacraments after their way, because they had, as yet, no settled Minister, but
procured one from Troyes; (The Bishop of which place was a favourer of them.)
But now there was one Leonard Morel come from Geneva, to settle there, which
was ill taken by Claude de Saints, the Governor of the Town, and by the
Prior, Curate, and Neighbors, who had frequently complained of it to Jerome de
Burgos, Bishop of Chaalon sur Marne in Champaigne, under whom, the place was.
The year before, the Bishop came thither, and had a disorderly Dispute with the
Minister, about imposition of Hands, managed by one of his Divines, which he
brought with him before the People, Governor and Bishop, which had no good
effect. Antonia de Bourbon, the Mother of the Guises, a zealous Roman
Catholic, was also much offended with the nearness of this place, and desired
very much to be rid of it; and she reproached her Son, for his overgreat
patience in a thing, wherein the Glory of God, her own Honor, and the Religion
of his Ancestors, was concerned. Hereupon, the first of March, he went to
Vassy, with Lewis the Cardinal his Brother, Du Brossay, and his Son, and a
great Retinue, designing rather to suppress and dissipate this Conventicle by
his Presence, than to offer Violence to any private person. As he went, he
heard a Bell ring at an unusual time, and asking the reason of it, was told, It
was to call the Protestants to their Meeting. Hereupon, his Footmen began to
make a Noise, as if there had been a Military Enterprise; but the Duke went on,
and entered Vassy, where there were 60 Horse ready to receive him, and he was to
dine that day at Sclaron. The Curate and Prior were very earnest with him, to
go by the Conventicle; but whilst he delayed them, and seemed unwilling to do
it, the meaner part of his Attendants ran thither, and began to call the
Protestants, who were there assembled, Dogs, and Rebels to God and the King.
The Protestants also returned their reproaches upon them: and so at last they
fell from words to flinging stones, after which those that were on Horseback
lighted and broke into the place where the Meeting was, which was a Granary,
and was for some time defended, by those within, but they at last prevailing,
drew their Swords, and began to stab and wound the Protestants. A great Cry
arising, Guise was forced to go thither, to put a stop to the Massacre, but he
by Accident receiving a small Wound, this so enraged his Retinue, that he could
not restrain them; in this Tumult about 60 persons were killed, and 200
wounded, amongst which last was Morell, who was sent Prisoner to Disier.

Though this Tumult happened against his will, and contrary to his expectation,
yet the Duke of Guise, to excuse himself and his Servants, The Duke of Guise
uses ill Arts to secure his Servants who began the Tumult.
sent for the chief of the Protestants who were taken, and severely chid them,
for having by this unlawful Meeting given occasion to this Tumult, and blamed
the Queen of Scots Bailiff, (for to her the Place belonged) for suffering such
Conventicles to be hold there. And caused several Depositions to be made, that
the Tumult was begun by the Protestants, though it was in truth begun by his
own Servants. Fame increased the Fact, and made it appear worse in all the
Circumstances than in truth it was, and every one judged of it as he stood
affected; the Protestants blaming it, and the Catholics defending it, as
necessary to put a stop to the Insolence of a few ill Men to prevent worse: But
Wise men saw, it would not stop here, but that Seditious Men would take the
same Methods throughout the Kingdom. The Prince of Conde complains of it to the
King.
The Duke of Guise went to Reims, and from thence to Nantueil, the King being
then at Monceaux, in the Diocese of Meax, whither Conde came and made a great
Complaint of the Massacre of Vassy, aggravating it above the Truth; adding,
That it was a thing of ill Example, and ought to be severely Punished. The
Queen on the other side was very much troubled, and wrote to the King of Navar
to take care of this Affair, who was then at Paris; and advised the Duke of
Guise not to go to Paris, till he had been with the King; to which he made no
other Answer, than, That he was so taken up with entertaining his Friends, that
he was not at leisure to wait upon the King. And his next care was to excuse it
to the Duke of Wirtemburg, to whom he sent a Letter to that purpose, laying the
fault on the Insolence of the Rabble, which trusting in their number, had begun
to fling Stones at his Servants. The King of Navar went to Monceaux in the mean
time, where he met with severe Complaints against this Tumult, and stiffly
averred, that the Protestants had been the beginners of the fray, excusing the
Duke of Guise, and entertaining those that complained of it, with very great
roughness. Beza, who was there, replied, That if it were so, the Duke of Guise
ought to have complained to the King, and not to have permitted his Servants to
have become their own Judges; and turning to the King of Navar, he said, He was
sent by the Church to complain of this wrong, which has ever been readier to
suffer, than to act Injuries; and that yet he ought to remember, that Anvil had
broke many Hammers; in the mean time, the Duke of Guise went to Paris, The Duke
of Guise enters Paris.
without taking any notice of the King, where he was entertained with greater
Ceremony and Respect, and had a greater Attendance than became a Subject; the
Queen began to fear the King of Navar, Guise, and Montmorancy, would, under the
Pretense of Religion, set up a Triumvirate, which would bring her and the King
under their Power; so that she had no other remedy, but to put her self and her
Son under the Protection of the Prince of Conde, and by her Letter, to desire
him to stand by them. The Queen upon this, puts her self and the King into the
Protection of the Prince of Conde.
But then she did this very privately, and by her Emissaries, that she might
not alienate the hearts of the People, and of a great part of the Nobility,
from her, by seeming to promote the new Religion, and by the Envy of that, be
excluded from having any share in the Government. In the mean time, that she
might consult her own safety, she went with the King of Navar to Melun, whither
M. de Marle, and Claude Martel, one of the Ae^ili^.
Officers of Paris, who was in great esteem amongst the People, came to her,
and represented the great Danger Paris was exposed to by the Forces of the
Prince of Conde, and said, it was necessary She and the King should come
thither forthwith, and he having many armed Men about him, he desired the
Citizens might have their Arms restored to them, which had been taken away by
Montmorancy: which last, she rather delayed, than denied, because she saw they
would have them whether she would, or no. From thence she went to
Fontain-bleau, to gain time to consider what was to be done, and was in
suspense whether she should go for Orleans, whither Conde was going, or trust
to the Regal Authority, and go to Paris. Navar went in the mean time from M^an
to Paris, and Lodged with Montmorancy, where, there was a Council held every
day, without the Prince of Conde: And the Government of the City was taken from
young Montmorancy, by the Advice of his Father, and given to the Cardinal of
Bourbon.

Every thing now tended to an open rupture, All things in France tend to a
Civil War.
and rumors were spread abroad, that the Catholics, in all Parts of the
Nation, were ill used by the Protestants, which Reports were (true, or false)
set on foot by the Cardinal of Lorrain. The Populace was exasperated, and
having regained their Arms, were the more enraged for the having had them taken
away; and therefore could no longer be kept in order. The Prince of Conde
seeing his Danger, that he might not seem to expose his own Party to the sury
of their Enemies (...) proposed to the Cardinal, that he would leave the City,
if Guise and the oth^^ ^onfederates would do so too at the same time, that it
might not be endanger (...) an intestine Sedition; which was accepted, and the
Duke of Guise went to ^^^tainbleau, with a great Retinue, to the King and
Queen, and the Prince of Conde, went to Meaux, and la Ferte Aucoulph upon the
Marne. As soon as they were thus gone, M. de Marle took into the City MD men
for its Security, which Montmorancy the younger had refused to do whilst the
City was under his Care: The Duke of Guise, when he went to Fontain-bleau,
carried with him many Armed men, that he might fright the Queen from her Cabals
with the Prince of Conde, and so draw her, by a secret Fear, to join with him;
The Queen out of Fear joins with the Catholic Lords commonly called the
Triumvirate.
and the Stratagem took. She had before carefully enquired into the Numbers and
Riches of the Protestants, that she might know, what she and the King might
expect from them, but she could not be assured of any thing, only that there
were 2150 Assemblies in the Nation, the Delegates of which proffered her and
the King their Services in case of Necessity; but when she desired a more
particular and exact account, they suspected, she had some ill design against
them, and declined giving her an exact account of their Secrets, reflecting on
her inconstancy which they much suspected.

In the mean time, Conde comes up toward Fontain-bleau.
Conde was coming to Court as the Queen had ordered him, and was at Pont Saint
Clou, within two Miles of Fontain-bleau; which when the Queen heard, all things
were put into Confusion, as if a Siege had been expected, the Populace running
into disorder, and the Magistrates conniving at it. Nor was the disorder less
in the Court. The Queen fearing, not without cause, that some mischief would
ensue if Conde came up; the Confederates being in possession of the King, and
resolving to carry him and the Queen to Paris. The Queen would gladly have
stood Neuter, but the Confederates told her plainly, they knew Conde was come
to get the King into his Power, The Tyiumvirate seize the King.
and they were resolved to carry him to Paris, and if she pleased, she might
follow him; and so they carried him to Melun, not giving her any time to
consider of it. The Queen followed, and took such Lodgings as they assigned her
in the Castle. Here she would have made her Escape with the King, if the
Jealousy of the Confederates had not prevented it; They knowing this would
give a great Reputation to the Party that could gain it, and make the opposite
Party look like Rebels. Next Morning the Queen fell to flatter the Confederates
to get them to go back to Fontainbleau, and that she might speak with Conde.
But the Duke of Guise disappointed all her Projects, and carried the King and
his Brother to the Castle de Vincennes, within two Miles of Paris, the King
weeping, as if he had been carried into Captivity by force.

The next Morning, Montmorancy entered Paris, pulled up the Seats and Pulpit of
the Protestant Meeting House near Port St. Jean in the Suburbs, and burnt them
publicly, the people rejoicing greatly at it. And in the Afternoon did the
same thing without Port de St. Antoine, to another such House, but here the
Fire took the next Houses, which abated the Joy, though there was at last too
much bestowed on so ridiculous an Enterprise. Upon this, many good Men were
injured by the Rabble in the Streets, as being suspected in the Point of
Religion, yet it came not to Blood.

The next day after, Montmerancy appears very zealous against the Protestants
at Paris.
the King and the Queen were brought up to the Louvre, the Confederates
pretending they were not safe elsewhere. And here they began to talk of
Declaring a War against the Prince of Conde, which was opposed by the
Chancellor, whose Judgment was slighted by Montmorancy, because he was a
Gown-man. But he replied, That tho he was no Soldier, yet he knew very well,
when War was fit, and when not; but the violence of the Confederates at last
excluded him from that Consultation.

The Prince of Conde was coming toward the Court, but hearing that the Queen
out of levity or fear was joined with the Triumvirate, and was gone to Paris,
The Prince of Conde betrayed by the Queen into a disadvantageous War.
he seeing the Enemy in possession of the King's Person, concluded they had got
a great Advantage over him, and yet that the Die being cast, it was too late to
go back, so he went to Orleans to meet d' Andelott, and sent to Coligni the
Admiral to come thither to him. Innocent Tripier de Monterud was then Governor
of Orleans for Charles de Bourbon Prince de la Roche-sur-Yon, he, in the
beginning had been very favorable to the Protestants, and had equally employed
them with the Catholics in the Guard of the City; but seeing the Queen was now
joined with the Confederate Catholic Lords, he changed his Mind and took in
more Forces by stealth, that he might thereby overpower the Protestants. But
Andelott entering the place with a small Attendance quickly got together 300 of
the Protestants, Orleans surprised by the Prince of Conde.
and seized St. John's Gate, and immediately sent to the Prince of Conde to
come up, so that though Mon. de Monterud endeavored to recover this Post, yet
it was in vain, and the Town fell into the Hands of the Prince of Conde, and
Monterud was forced to obtain the Prince's Leave to be gone.

The Seventh of April the Prince of Conde sent a Letter to all the Protestant
Churches and Nobility in France, Conde Justifies the War.
to bring to him all the Forces and Moneys they were able to raise, for the
Rescuing of the King out of Captivity, and the delivering him out of the Hands
of some great Men, who had first violated the Laws or Edicts of France, and
then, seizing the Person of the King by force, Abused his Authority, to the
breaking the Peace of that Kingdom. The next day he put out a Manifesto,
wherein he largely unfolded the Truth, that the bottom of their Design was, to
deprive the Protestants of France of that Liberty which had been granted them
by the King's Edict, The Catholics begin the War to deprive the Protestants of
the Liberty granted them by the Edict of January.
which he proved amongst other things by the Massacre of Vassy, which he said
was designed for a Signal to the whole Nation to do the like. He called God to
Witness his only Intentions were, to restore the King and his Brothers, and the
Queen and the Council, to their Liberty; to preserve the Veneration due to the
Royal Edicts, and especially that solemn Edict of January last, and to prevent
the Moneys given by the States in the last Assembly, for the payment of the
Debts of the Crown, from being misspent, or turned to other uses; for as for him
and his, they would manage this War at their own Charges. He desired, that
whilst the King was in their Power, no Credit should be given to any Edict,
Warrant, or Commission, though under the great Seal, or Signed by the King. As
for his Brother the King of Navar, he should pay him always the Respect that
was due to his Character and Place, but he desired, the Duke of Guise and his
Brothers, and Montmorancy should lay down their Arms, restore the King and his
Council to their liberty, and suffer the Edict of January to continue in force
till the King were of Age, and then he would lay down his Arms, and he and his
would return to their own homes. If they refused these just and equal
Conditions, and attempted any thing with force against him, he said, he would
not bear it, but would rescue the King and his People from their violence; and
they should answer for all the Calamities and Miseries which should follow. The
Prince of Conde and the Ministers write to the Princes of Germany.
He wrote two days after this to the Princes of Germany, and ordered the
Ministers to do so too, that the greater Credit might be given to his, to the
same purpose. And in the Conclusion, desired they would not be wanting to the
King, Queen and Kingdom at a time of so much need, nor suffer themselves to be
prejudiced by the false pretenses of his Enemies, but rather would support and
strengthen him in the War which he had engaged in, for the Glory of God, and
the Safety of the King and Kingdom. The 11th of April he caused the League
which the Protestants had entered into, to be printed also, which was to last
only till the King should be of full Age to undertake the Government of his
Kingdom in his own Name; and at the same time, he caused that entered into by
the Triumvirate to be printed, which they pretended was Confirmed by the
Authority of the Council of Trent, which was about that time opened.

The same Seventh day of April, The King and Queen affirm they were at Liberty
in their Declaration.
the King and Queen put out a Declaration at Paris, wherein they affirmed, that
the report of their Captivity was false, and scandalously feigned by the Prince
of Conde, for a color to his Seditious Practices: And that they came
willingly, and not by force, to Paris, that they might consult of the means of
settling this Commotion. The Third day after, another Paper was Published by
the Queen, Navar, Bourbon, the Cardinal and Duke of Guise, and Mentmorancy, by
the Advice of Aumale, the Chancellor, St. Andre, Brisac and Montmorancy the
Younger, for the Confirming the Edict of January, the Pardon of all past
offenses, and forbidding the troubling or endangering any Man on the account of
Religion. And giving liberty to the Protestants to meet and Preach any where,
except in Paris, and the Suburbs thereof. At the same time an Envoy was
dispatched to the Elector Palatine, and the rest of the Princes of Germany, to
consult them about the Council of Trent.

About the same time there was a Barbarous Massacre made of the Protestants at
Sens, by the Procurement of Hemar, President of Sens, and, as it was believed,
not without the knowledge of the Cardinal of Guise, The Massacre of Sens.
who was Archbishop of that See, who was thereupon said to have had a hand also
in that of Vassy. There was a report spread in the City, that the Protestants
had a design to surprise the City and deface the Images, whereupon the Rabble
rose and drowned in the River, and Slew, in all, 100 People of all Ages and
Sexes, Plundered and pulled down their Houses, and rooted up their Vines; of
which Conde made a grievous Complaint to the Queen, in a Letter of the 19th of
April. But there being many Complaints of the like nature, brought from other
parts of the Nation against the Protestants, the thing was neglected. And
Davila takes no notice of it. About the same time many Cities, throughout the
Kingdom of France, were surprised by the Protestants, which was in many places
not possible to be done without Slaughter and the Profanation of the Churches,
though their Captains at first carried themselves as moderately as they could.

The Prince of Conde understanding by a Letter he received from the Elector
Palatin, The Princes of Germany much divided about the true cause of this
French War.
That the Princes of Germany were much divided about the Causes of this War,
and Especially the Catholics: He wrote a Letter to Ferdinand the Emperor the
20th of April, to inform him of the Causes of these Tumults, asserting the King
and Queen were carried away against their wills, and that he had been forced to
betake himself to Arms, to restore them to their former Liberty; and therefore
he beseeched the Emperor to favor him, as an Asserter of the Royal Interest.

The 15th of April, Roan taken very easily by the Protestants.
Roan was taken by the Protestants almost without any Tumult or Resistance; And
when Henry Robert de la Mark Duke de Bouillon, Governor of Normandy, was sent
thither by the King of Navar, to Command them in the King's Name to lay down
their Arms, they slighted his Authority, and gave Reasons for what they had
done, alleging, amongst others, the Attempts upon the Protestants at Amiens
and Abbeville, which, they said, were sufficient to terrify the most Peaceable
from laying down their Arms; but then they were willing to deliver the Keys of
the City to him, and to keep it for his use, and in his Name. He leaving the
City thereupon, they took St. Catherine's, a Monastery without the City, and
put a Garrison into it. A Tumult arising the next Night, some of the Catholics
were slain, and others put into Prison. So from the Third of May till the City
was re-taken, the Exercise of the Romish Religion was totally omitted. And
after that Pont del' Arche and Caudebec.
Soon after they took Pont de l' Arche, which, being taken by the Roman
Catholics, the Protestants took Caudebec beneath Roan, and when they might
have demolished it, they endeavored to keep it, but it was soon after re-taken
by the Roman Catholics, and so the City was restrained on both sides. Upon
this, 300 Horse and 1500 Foot were sent against them, which for some time had
the better of the Citizens. Diepe.
The Protestants took Diepe the 21th of April without any Resistance, and
pulled down the Images and Altars in the Churches. The 21th of June, Aumale
left Roan and Besieged Diepe. In the County of Calais the Protestants were the
stronger. Caen and Bayeux.
Caen, Bayeux were also taken and Reformed by the Protestants.

Man's was taken by the Protestants the Third of April without Resistance, Man's
taken by them.
and in the mean time Forces were raised by both Parties, the Queen in her
Heart being pleased to see the Prince of Conde Espouse her Cause, and desiring
to abate the Pride of the Guises, and therefore she was earnest to have a
Treaty, hoping by this means to have both the Parties at her Devotion. The
Prince of Conde, the first of May, had sent her a Letter with some Terms for an
Accommodation, which were, That the Edict of January, which had been violated
by the Conspirators, should be observed. 2. The Injuries committed upon the
Protestants, severely punished by the Magistrates. 3. Guise and his Brothers,
and Montmorancy, etc. who had raised this War, should leave the Court, and
return to their several Governments, till the King was of Age to undertake the
Government, and determine himself this Controversy. And then he would lay down
his Arms, and retire to his home. The Fourth of May it was Answered, That the
King would observe the Edict of January every where but at Paris. That all
Slaughters, Spoilings and Injuries committed, should be inquired into and
punished, but he would not send Guise, Montmorancy, and St. Andre from the
Court, because he was satisfied as to their Loyalty, needed their Counsel, and
ought not to set any Mark of Dishonor on them. But then they were willing for
the sake of the Public Peace to retire, if those that were in Arms in Orleans
and all over the Nation would first go home, restore the Places taken by them
to their former Liberty, and yield that Obedience to the King they ought, and
that the King of Navar should still retain the Command of the Army. The Prince
of Conde perceiving by this Answer that the Triumvirate were resolved not to
leave the Court, and that they only pretended the Danger of laying down their
Arms before him, without taking any Notice of the Hostages he had offered fot
their Security in that case, suspected there was fraud in the bottom, and would
not comply neither, alleging, That the King's Presence was their security,
whereas he had nothing but the Equity of his Cause to Plead.

After this the Triumvirate put in a Petition to the King, The Triumvirate
desire no liberty should be granted to the Protestants.
Desiring that an Edict might be made, 1. That no Religion but the Roman
Catholic should be Admitted in the Kingdom. 2. That all the King's Domestics,
Captains, Governors and Magistrates should be of that Religion, and whoever
did not publicly profess it, should be deprived of all Honor and Public
Employments, saving to them their Estates. 3. That all Bishops and Clergymen
should profess the same, or be deprived of their Revenues, which should be
brought into the Exchequer. 4. That all the Churches which were destroyed,
spoiled, or defaced, should be restored, and those that were guilty of these
Sacriledges punished. 5. That all should lay down their Arms, upon what
pretense soever they had been Listed, or by whom soever. And they that had no
Commission from the King, should be treated as Traitors. That the King of Navar
only should have the Right of Levying Men, till these Troubles were ended by a
Treaty or a Victory, and they to be paid out of the Treasury. And on these
Terms they were willing not only to leave the Court, but the Nation, and to go
into Exile: And till this was done, they could not leave the Court. This was
Answered at large by another Paper Printed the 20th of May with great sharpness.

The 26th and 27th of May the King of Navar commanded all the Protestants to
depart from Paris, The Triumvirate draw out of Paris.
ordering that no injury should be done to them or their Goods in their retreat
or absence on pain of Death: And perceiving that nothing could be effected by
Treaties, the Triumvirate drew their Forces out of Paris, consisting in Four
thousand Foot and Three thousand Armed Horse, about which time the Queen
invited the Prince of Conde to a Conference, and they met in the beginning of
June at Thoury a Village in la Beausse, with all the Cautions usual in such
Cases. But that Treaty proving ineffectual, the Prince of Conde drew his Army
out too, which was then Four thousand Foot and Two thousand Horse. The Prince
of Conde had more of the Nobility of France in his Army than the other fide,
either out of Love to the Religion, or hatred to the Guises, or by the secret
Orders of the Queen. The Prince of Conde maintain great Order in his Army at
first.
Besides his Army had a severe Discipline, and Public Prayers were said
Morning and Evening at the head of each Company: There were no Oaths, no
Quarrels heard of, but the Psalms were devoutly Sung in the Camp, there was no
Dice, no Tables, no Rapines, all was Modesty, and the least Faults were
severely punished, so that the Country Man or Merchant might live or travel by
the Army in perfect security; and their great desire was, that they might be
led against Paris. The 21th of May the Army marched from Orleans, and there was
another Treaty for a Peace, and another Conference with the Queen, A second
Treaty between the Queen and Conde.
who thanked him and all the Great Men that came with him for the good Service
they had done her and the King, in a time of such great need; saying they were
worthy of the highest Rewards and Honors, and praying them to persevere in it,
and to Consult the good of the Kingdom. She excused what she had done in the
mean time for the other Party, by saying, They were more in number who embraced
the Roman Catholic Religion, and therefore it was necessary there should be no
other Religion suffered in France than that. At this Conde replied he could not
submit to so hard a Condition. For if the Peace of Religion were taken away, a
War would follow, which would be very difficult and lasting. This proving
ineffectual too, the Prince of Conde marched to La Ferte Alez, Boigency sacked.
Blois.
and took and sacked Boigency, a Town upon the Loire. The Triumvirats Army
marched right to Blois which the Protestants had taken not long before, and
Garrisoned, but the Place being weak, they retreated to Orleans, and left it to
the Catholics, who Exercised unheard of Cruelties, and put most of the
Protestants to the Sword, or drowned them in the River, though they recovered
the Town without one blow striking. From thence they marched to Tours, Tours.
which had but a little before been surprised and reformed by the Protestants,
contrary to the will of the Wiser People, who forclaw the ill consequence of
it. The Country in the mean time was exposed to Rapine, under pretense of
Extirpating Heretics, the great Men conniving at it, or being well pleased:
And a War was Proclaimed against the Protestants, and all Men were commanded to
treat them as the Enemies of Mankind, on the account of the Sacriledges
committed in the Churches, because the Church Plate was taken to be Minted for
Money to pay the Army, and the Images and Altars were generally beaten down
where the Protestants prevailed. Whereupon the Peasants left their Work, and
fell to Rob and Plunder their Neighbors, and to exercise unheard of Cruelties
and Barbarities, they thinking the Protestants were to be treated like Mad
Dogs. This forced the Gentry in a short time to Arm against them, and they
treated the Monks and Priests in their own Kind, and Hanged up those Catholic
Peasants.

The Protestants took Angers the 5th of April, Angers taken by the Protestants.
almost without any opposition, and both Parties lived peaceably to the 21th,
when they pulled down the Images in the Churches; which so incensed the Roman
Catholics, that, the 5th of May, they let in Succors in the Night; whereupon
followed a Fight, in which, the Protestants were worsted, and the Roman
Catholics prevailed. The other Party were plundered, whereupon some Women were
ravished, and others slain, to the Number of about eleven. Tours retaken by the
Roman Catholics.
Tours being retaken, all the Protestants were, by one means or another, made
away, the President of the City not escaping their Cruelty, because he was
suspected to be a Protestant, though he had never declared himself such; so that
the Governors were forced to erect Gallows, to put a stop to the bloody
Barbarity, which they themselves had raised in the People. The Protestants of
Man's were much affrighted, Man's deserted by the Protestants.
when they heard of the Massacre of those of Tours, because they also had
broken down the Images, and pulled up and defaced some of their Tombs.
Whereupon, the 12th of July, they left the City in the Evening, to the number
of 800, and went to Alenzon. The Bishop, upon this, put in 500 Roman Catholics
for a Garrison, who reacted all the Cruelties upon the Protestants, and suborned
Men to swear against such, as, they supposed, had defaced the Images, or
profaned the Churches, whereupon they were severely punished for others
Faults: The Bishop had a great hand in this, and was turned a Soldier, and
treated all such as he suspected, of the Clergy, very hardly; nor did he spare
the Churches Treasures more than the Protestants had done, but took them to pay
his Soldiers, raising, besides, great Contributions on the People for that
purpose. There were, in the Cathedral Church, the Images of the twelve
Apostles, of Silver, of great Weight, and adorned with many Jewels, and the
Bishop had carried them to his Castle de Trouvoy in Maine, for their greater
Security; but that being taken afterward, they were lost, and the Bishop was
suspected of having converted them to his own use; and going, after this, to
the Council of Trent, it was said, He must needs have the Holy Ghost, because
he carried the twelve Apostles with him:

The 13th of May, Amiens.
the Protestants were forbidden their Meetings at Amiens, their Books sought
out and burnt, and, amongst them, all the Bibles they found in French, and the
Pulpit with them, and some few of them were flain in the Tumult. At Abbeville,
there was a greater Tumult raised by the Roman Catholics, and many of the
Soldiers in the Castle, and of the Inhabitants of the Town, were murdered, upon
a pretense they favored the Prince of Conde's Interest, and the Governor of
the Town was assassinated in his House, and his naked Body was dragged about
the Town; and another Gentleman most barbarously murdered. At Senlis, Senlis.
many of the Protestants were assassinated, and some were put to death by the
Decree of the Parliament of Paris on other pretenses. I have transcribed only a
very few of the horrid and insufferable Villainies, committed by the Roman
Catholics of France, in this War, from Thuanus: For so madly did they dote
upon their Images and Altars, that when ever they got any of the Protestants
into their hands, they treated them with unheard of Cruelty and Rage; whereas,
all their Fury spent it self on the Statues, Pictures, Altars, and Relics, of
their Churches, or in some places on their Tombs; and if some few Slaughters
happened, in was in the Surprise, or taking of Places, before they were masters
of them; but the Roman Catholics raged most, where the Protestants were least
able to resist them.

The Prince of Conde hearing, that his Party was worsted in Normandy, sent
Lewis de Lanoy with three hundred Horse, who, with some difficulty, arrived at
Roan the 11th of June, and rectified the Disorders he found in that place;
Normandy.
the Protestants would have expelled the Roman Catholics out of the City, but
he persuaded them only to disarm them, and swear them to live peaceably. Roan,
in a short time after this, was besieged, from the 29th of June, to the 11th of
July, by the Roman Catholics, but then they were forced to withdraw, and the
City remained in the Protestants hands. In the interim, a Treaty was carried on
by the Vidame de Chartres, with Queen Elizabeth, for Succors, which displeased
many, though the Roman Catholics, in the mean time, had called in German and
Swifs Auxiliary Forces, to support their Quarrel. The Roman Catholic Army, The
Roman Catholics retake Poictiers and Bourges.
in the mean time, took Poictiers, after a sharp Siege, which yet might have
holden out longer, where they plundered the Protestants, and put many of them
to the Sword: And after that, Bourges, being besieged by the Duke of Guise,
was, at last, surrendered by the Cowardice or Treachery of Mr. de Yvoy, the
chief Commander, when the Roman Catholics had almost spent all their
Ammunition, and the Admiral had taken that which was sent to supply them from
Paris. The taking this place, so sar discouraged the Protestants, that a great
many places yielded upon the first Summons.

The Duke of Guise, and his Party, after they had taken Bourges, The Siege of
Roan resolved on.
were divided in their Opinion, some advising, the Army should march to the
Siege of Orleans, as the Capital of the adverse Party; and others, that they
ought first to take in Roan, as more easy to be reduced, and of no less
advantage, because preventing the English from powering great numbers of Men
into France: So at last this Party prevailed, and that Siege was undertaken.

Montgomery, who by misfortune slew Henry the Second, was, by the Prince of
Conde, appointed to command here in Chief, who entered the place the 18th of
September, with 300 Horse; and having added some new Works to St. Catherins, he
built a new Fort at St. Michaels, which he called by his own Name. The Terms of
the Protestants League with England.
About the same time, a League was concluded between the English and the
Protestants, at Hampton Court; by which, the Queen was to send 6000 men into
France, 3000 of which, were to keep Haure de Grace in the King's Name, for a
place of Safety for those of the Religion, and the rest were to be employed in
the Defense of Diep and Roan, and she was to supply 140000 Crowns for the
Charge of the War; the Forces were immediately sent from Portsmouth, and landed
at Haure de Grace, under the Command of the Earl of Warwick. The 28th of
September, the Forces of the Triumvirate came before Roan, being then 16000
Foot, and 2000 Horse. Montgomery had, besides the English and the Townsmen, 800
Veterane Soldiers, for the Defense of the City. The Besiegers would have
stopped the passage of the River, by sinking Ships in it; but the violence of
the Tide cleared the Chanel, so that the Frigates came from Haure de Grace,
with Canon, Ammunition, and Victual, notwithstanding. The 6th of October, St.
Catherins Fort was taken by Storm and Surprise, and 300 Townsmen beaten back,
who came to relieve it. The 9th of October, 500 English, under the Lord Gray,
entered the Town. The 13th of October, the Besiegers stormed the City, from 10
'till 6 at Night, the English and Scotch sustaining the brunt, and at last
repelling them, the next day they stormed it 6 hours more, to the loss of 600
men. The 15th of October, The King of Navar shot at the Siege of Roan.
the King of Navar was shot in the left Shoulder with a Musket Bullet in the
Trenches. The 25th of October, there was a sharp Fight at St. Hillary's Gate,
three Mines being sprung to small purpose. The next day, the City was taken by
Storm, the greatest part of the brave Men having been slain, or wearied out, in
the continual labors of the Siege. Montgomery, and the greatest part of the
English and Scotch, shipped themselves in a Galley, and breaking the Chain,
which the Besiegers had drawn cross the River, they escaped to Haure de Grace.
There were slain in this Siege, about 4000 Men on both sides. The 17th of
November, He dies.
the King of Navar died of his Wounds, having received the Sacrament according
to the Custom of the Church of Rome; but blaming his own wavering and
unconstant temper in the matters of Religion, and saying, If he recovered, he
would embrace the Augustane Confession, and live and dye in it. He was a person
of great Beauty, of a generous and liberal Disposition, a good Soldier, just,
and fit for business, but too much addicted to Pleasures, which at last proved
fatal to him, and drew him into this War.

The Queen had entered a Treaty with the Inhabitants of Diep, for the recovery
of that place, before Roan was taken, and they were amazed with the Dangers
that City was in, Diep surrendered to the King.
and the depredations the German and French Horse made upon them; that so soon
as they heard Roan was taken, they sent a Petition to the King, who granted
them all that they desired, but the public Exercise of their Religion:
Whereupon, part of them went away with the English, and the rest retired to
Antwerp, and other places in the Low Countries; So the Town was delivered up to
the young Montmorancy the second of November, who obtained leave from the
Queen, And also Caen.
for them to meet privately for the Exercise of their Religion. The same
Conditions were granted to them of Caen. The next Care, was, to clear Haure de
Grace of the English, whither the Earl of Warwick came, two days after the
surrender of Roan. Diep retaken by the Protestants.
The 20th of December, the Protestants surprised Diep again, without any
considerable opposition, the Inhabitants no way consenting to it, and excusing
it to the Queen, as done without their aid, knowledge, or consent, and
thereupon great numbers of them went into the Low Countries, fearing they
should be treated with the same Cruelty, as they of Roan had been, when that
City was taken, for which, they were ill used by Montgomery, who was the
procurer of this Surprise.

The News of the loss of Roan, The Protestants beaten in Guienne.
was brought to the Prince of Conde, when he was in great pain for Andelett,
sent by him into Germany, to bring him some Protestant Forces: This ill News
came attended with the defeat of Monsieur de Bury, in which, 2000 were slain
in the Field, and many more lost in the Retreat the 9th of October. The same
day this Victory was won at La Ver in Guienne; Monsieur de Bazourdan attempted
to surprise Montauban in the night, which proved ineffectual, and he lost 200
of his Men in this design. From thence, they marched to Tholose, which was then
also in the hands of the Protestants, and reduced to great Extremities; but the
Inhabitants being supported by the frequent Sermons of their Pastors, were
encouraged to hold out, and, on the contrary, the Sieur de Terride thought it a
great disparagement to be baffled here too, and grew stubborn in his Resolves
to carry this place, because his Forces had miscarried at Montauban, and so the
Siege was continued, till the Pacification in April following. In this Siege,
Sazourdan was slain, the 22th of October, by a Shot from the Town.

The Sieur d'Andelott, Andelot hardly obtains Succors in Germany.
who was sent into Germany to obtain Succors, met with great Difficulties, the
Court of France having sent one Envoy after another to break his Measures, and
render the Protestant Princes averse to War: And when the Emperor had called a
Diet to meet in November, for the choosing Maximilian, his Son, King of the
Romans, the Prince of Conde sent one Jaques Spifame, heretofore Bishop of
Nevers, an eloquent and brisk Man, who gave in the Confession of Faith,
published by the French Protestants in the Assembly of the States, for the
vindicating them from the aspersions of those monstrous Opinions, which their
Enemies had raised from them. He also made three elegant Speeches, one to the
Emperor, one to Maximilian in his Bedchamber, and one to the three Estates,
to purge the Prince of Conde of the Suspicion of Rebellion, and show, that the
War was began by the Order of the Queen, and for the delivery of the King out
of Restraint. The Landtgrave of Hess in the mean time, the 10th of October, had
assembled at Bucarat 3000 Horse, and 4000 Foot; to which, the Prince de Porcean
brought in 100 of the French Nobility on Horseback, as far as Strasburg.
D'Andelott was then afflicted with a Tertian Ague, yet he traveled with that
Industry, that he arrived at Orleans the 6th of November, bringing up with him
besides 300 Horse, and 1500 Foot, which had escaped from the Rout at Ver. And
very welcome they were, the taking of Roan, and the defeat of Ver, having
reduced their Reputation, Forces, The Prince of Conde takes the Field.
and Hopes, to a very low ebb: The Prince of Conde hereupon marching out of
Orleans the first of November, with the whole Army, and a Train of Artillery,
consisting of 8 Pieces, the 11th of November, he took Pluviers, in the Forest
of Orleans, Pluviers taken by the Prince of Conde.
a populous Town, by Surrender; and because they had presumed to defend it with
4 Foot Companies; he hanged two of the Captains, and all the Priests he found
in it, and disarmed the Common Soldiers, and made them take an Oath, that they
should not hereafter bear Arms against him. In this place, he found great
quantities of Provisions, part of which, he sent to Orleans, and reserved the
rest for the use of his Army. The Terror of this prevailed so far upon the
Garrison of Baugy, that they durst not stay for a Summons, but retired to
Chasteaudun. Montmorancy, and the Duke of Guise, were, by this time, returned
from Roan to Paris; and the Marshall de St. Andre having in vain endeavored
to stop the passage of Monsieur d'Andelott, was come back to Sens, a City he
suspected, from whence he went to Estampes; but hearing the Prince of Conde was
near, he left two Companies to defend that place, (who soon surrendered it) and
retired toward Paris. Here also the Prince found great quantities of
Provisions, which were of great use to his Army. Here the Prince of Conde
entered into a Consultation, whether they should march away for Paris, and take
and rifle the Suburbs of that great City: But the King, Queen, and a numerous
Army, being there, they concluded the City could not be taken; and
consequently, that this Ravage would turn to their damage and disgrace, and
make a Peace difficult, if not impossible, when so many innocent People had
been ruined and undone. To all this, Francis Lanoy added, that there was an
apparent danger, whilst the Soldiers were dispersed, and eager upon the Prey;
that the Army might make a Sally out of Paris, and cut them in pieces, with
little or no resistance. Having therefore taken La Ferte Aucoulph upon the
Mar, Dourdan, and Mont-Leheri, he sat down before Corbeil, Corbeil besieged
by the Prince of Conde.
which was under the Government of Monsieur Pavan, with the Regiment of
Picardy, and some Companies of that of Champagne; The taking of which place,
and cutting off the Provisions, would have very much incommoded the City of
Paris.

The 17th of November, the Prince of Conde summoned the place, and being denied
it, a small Skirmish ensued, and the next day S. Andre entered it with Succors
from Paris. About the same time, the News of the death of the King of Navar was
brought into the Protestant Camp; and the Queen's Emissaries began to give out
Speeches, that the Prince of Conde should succeed in his Post: And the Queen
her self sent to invite him to a Conference, which was rejected. The 22th,
there was another Conference desired, which served for a pretense to withdraw
the Army from Corbeil, which, by this time, was too well manned for the Prince
to deal with; whereupon he marched toward Paris, The two Armies come in view
of each other.
the Catholic Army being then come up, and in sight, so that the two Armies
pelted each other with their Cannon: Two days after, the Prince came to Juvicy,
and the next to Saussaye; there the motion for a Conference was again renewed,
and the Queen was to come as far as Port Angel for that purpose: But the Prince
either not being well, or fearing some Treachery, excused himself, and sent
Coligni to treat with Montmorancy, his Uncle. Montmorancy, on the other side,
to dissipate the Prince's Jealousy, crossed the Seyne, and came to him. From
thence, the Prince marched on toward Paris, and, three days after, Coligni,
who led the Vangard, attacked the Suburbs of St. Victor, which caused a
grievous Consternation in Paris; so that if there had been then no Garrison in
the City, the Inhabitants would have opened their Gates, and fled for their
Lives; and Jacques Gillis, President of the Parliament at Paris, a violent
Persecutor of the Protestants, died, for fear they were come to take Revenge on
him for the Blood he had shed, and he was succeeded by Christopher de Thou, a
person of great moderation and integrity, and a lover of his Country, but
addicted to none of the Factions that embroiled France; who was promoted by the
Queen. The Prince's Army consisted then in 8000 Foot, 5000 Horse, and 7
Cannons. The 2d of December, the Queen, attended by the Cardinal of Bourbon,
the Prince of Roche sur Yon, Montmorancy and his Son, and the Seigneur de
Gonnor, met the Prince, Coligni, Genly, Gramont, and Esternay, at a Conference.
A Treaty with the Queen, and the Terms proposed by the Prince of Conde.
The Prince demanded, that the Protestants might freely meet, wherever they
desired it, and not elsewhere. That then the English, and other Strangers,
should depart the Nation, and the Cities should be restored into their former
State. That no person should be called to account for any thing done during the
War. That there should be a free General Council held (if it might be had)
within six Months; and if not, then a National Council of France. The Queen, as
to the first, excepted Paris, Lions, the Cities on the Fronteers, all those
that had Parliaments, and all that had no Meetings since the Edict of January;
the Churches to be restored, and no Exercises in them, but what was according
to the ancient form, and Conde desired, they might meet in the Suburbs of the
Fronteer Cities. The Conference was continued four days, and then ended without
any Agreement, the Protestants, by that time, being resolved to try the Fortune
of a Battle.

The 10th of December, the Prince withdrew the Army from Paris, The Prince
marches toward Normandy, to meet the English Succors.
and retreated to Paloyseau; the next day, he marched to Limoux; and the third,
to Valenza, a place of Pleasure; the fourth, to St. Arnoul, the Inhabitants of
which, out of fear, shut their Gates, whereupon it was taken and plundered, and
the Priest severely treated, and here the Army stayed two days. The King's Army
(for so now it was called) marched to Estamps, and finding it Garrisoned by the
Princes Forces, they left it, and marched to Chartres, which was a stronger
place, and had a greater Garrison. The Prince of Conde was enraged, to be thus
deluded by a Sham-Treaty, and had some Thoughts to have returned to Paris,
which was wisely prevented by Coligni, who advised him to march toward
Normandy, and join with the English at Havre de Grace, who had a good Body of
Foot, which they wanted most of all, and where they expected Money from
England; which, though it was very difficult, yet the Germans beginning to be
mutinous for their Pay, it was resolved upon. The 15th of December he marched
to Ablium.
Ably, and the next day to Gallardon, which, refusing him entrance, was taken,
and the Inhabitants ill used; from hence, he went to Mintenon, where he crossed
the Seyne, and went to Aulnay. Here the King's Army overtook them, and passed
the Eure before him unperceived; The King's Army overtake the Prince.
there was in it 16000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, which lay encamped between the
Villages of L'Espine and Blainville, and the Horse, being fewer than those with
the Prince, was divided into four Squadrons, and placed between the Foot, which
were covered by these two Villages on both sides, and on the right hand with
Wagons too; but the Duke of Guise was with a Party of Horse on the left Wing.
The Battle of Dreux.
Andelot had that day a fit of his Tertian Ague, yet he took his Horse, and
went to view the King's Army, and finding it very dangerous to attack them in
that Post, advised they should turn toward Treon; but Montmorancy ordered the
Cannon to play just as they were going to march that way, which caused some
disorder in the first Troops of Conde's Army: Whereupon he fell in upon the
Swiss, whereas he ought to have charged the opposite Horse, and by this means,
besides, he exposed his own Foot naked to the Vanguard of the Enemy, which
passed by untouched; however, the Swiss were broken into, and dispersed, and
the German Horse made a great Slaughter of them. Danville, eldest Son to
Montmorancy, came thereupon with three Troops to their Relief, in which Action,
Gabriel Montmorancy his Brother was slain; Rochefoucault fell upon the next
Squadron of Swiss, but was repulsed by their Pikes, with loss. At the same
time, Coligni fell upon Montmorancy, who was in the Rere, Montmorancy taken
Prisoner.
and broke it all in pieces. Montmorancy had his Horse slain under him, and as
he mounted another, was wounded in the Face, and taken by one R. Sewart;
Beauvais was also taken, but died soon after of his Wounds: And Anglure de
Givry, and the Duke de Aumale, were beaten down, and trod to Death by the
Horse. The Regiment of Bretagne was also dispersed, so that there was only one
Squadron of Swiss entire, which repelled the Germans, and there were some
French Horse which make a Front; but at length they were charged in the Rere by
de Mouy, but then he also was charged by Biron, with three Troops in the Flank,
and soon after taken, his Horse being slain.

The Vanguard, in which the Duke of Guise stood, was all this while entire; he
was in the Army as a private Gentleman, and had no Command, because he would
not fight under Montmorancy: At his Advice, St. Andre fell then upon the Prince
of Conde, when all his Forces were weary and dispersed, and first broke the
Prince's Foot, which were very much slaughtered by the Spaniards that followed
the Gascongners and Germans, who first broke in upon them. After this, Guise,
Damville, St. Andre, by the advice of the Duke of Guise, turn the Fortune of
the day, and gains the Victory on the King's side. The Prince of Conde taken
Prisoner. St. Andre slain by Coligm.
and St. Andre, all united with the rest of the King's Horse, fell upon the
Prince's Horse, which, being disordered by three Fieldpieces fired upon them,
was soon broken, Andelot doing all that was possible to rally the Germans, but
it proving impossible, he rode to Teron, and at last escaped. Conde and Coligni
got together 200 Horse, but could not persuade the Germans to return to the
Charge, they pretending, their Pistols were lost: They also disordered and
discouraged the French Horse, so that the Prince of Conde was forced to flee;
he had received a wound in the Hand, and his Horse was shot in the Thigh, and
fell; and Danville coming up, as he was remounting, he was taken Prisoner: Soon
after this, Montmorancy was in vain endeavored to be recovered. In the
interim, Coligni rallying 300 Armed Horse, and 1000 Germans, charged St. Andre,
and the Duke of Guise, with greater Fury than they had showed in the first: In
this Rencounter, St. Andre was slain by one Baubigny, whom he had injured,
after he was taken and carried off. He was a Person of great Natural Parts, but
very lewd and wicked, though a Man of Courage; under Henry the Second he had been
in good Esteem, and was now employed on the account of his Abilities. 'till the
Divine Vengeance overtook him for his Crimes, and cut him off, by the Hand of
one he least feared of all the World; which may give great Men a good hint, The
Duke of Guise force Coligni to Re^^^^.
not to do Injuries, on presumption of their Power, but to revere Fortune. The
King's Army was again declining, when the Duke of Guise came up with a Party of
Foot, and charging Coligni in the Flank, he retreated, because not supported
with equal Numbers, but with a soft pace, and carrying off two Pieces of
Cannon. The Duke of Guise followed him a while, but Night coming on, he was
forced to give over the Pursuit. Coligni went to Neufville, and Guise returned
to the Camp. The fight lasted four hours. It was observed, there was no Forlorn
Hope, though the Armies faced each other an hour before the Fight began. That
both the Generals were taken, and the Victory changed several times between
them, and was at last doubtful, to whom it belonged. Coligni would have sought
the next day.
Coligni would have persuaded the Germans to fight the next day, which had
certainly ruined the King's Army, if they would have done it, but they would
not. The Duke of Nevers was mortally wounded by a Servant of his own, by
accident. There was about 8000 slain, of which, 3000 were Protestants. 1500
Germans were taken by the Duke of Guise, and sent home without Arms.
Montmorancy was hurried to Orleans, and Conde was kindly treated by the Duke of
Guise, who was now become General in the King's Army: That Night, they two lay
together in one Bed, as well as supped at one Table, to both their great
Commendations. The next day, the Duke of Guise sent an account of what had
happened to the Queen to Paris, who, by this time, was sufficiently afraid of
his prevailing Fortune, though she had no great Good Will for the Prince of
Conde; but then she rarely dissembled her Thoughts, and ordered public Thanks
to be given to God for the Victory, and sent the Duke of Guise a Commission, to
be General of the King's Forces.

The day after the Fight, Coligni General of the Protestants.
Coligni drew up the remainder of the Protestant Army in Battle array, and
marching toward the Enemy, that he might obscure the Fame of the overthrow,
and recollect such as had escaped: He lodged that Night at Gailard, and the
next at Aunea, a Castle in Beause, where he was by common Consent made General,
during the absence of the Prince of Conde. From thence, he marched to Puiset,
and so to Patey, where he stayed two days, and then designed to surprise some
Forces he heard were sent to Blois; he followed them as far as Freteval in
Vendosme, and arrived at Baugy, with a design to repair the Bridge, and
disperse his Forces into Winter Quarters in Sologne and Berry, whither he heard
the Duke of Guise intended to send his, that they might be the nearer to
besiege Orleans in the beginning of the Year.

Though there are some Particulars relating to the Year 1562, which I shall
hereafter return to; yet I think it the best way, to carry on the Thread of the
French Affairs to the end of the War here, and then return back to the other.

The Duke of Guise, in the beginning of January, Frederick Rolshouse, a Subject
of the Landtgrave of Hesse, who said, He was sent by his Master, an old Friend
and Allie of the Crown of France, to deliver the King from the Restraint he was
put under by the Enemies of his Government, and to assist the faithful
Defenders of the French Interest: Thereupon, the 22th of January, the Queen
went to Bloise, where she published a Declaration in the King's Name and her
own, to assure the Landtgrave, That all those Reports, which had been spread
abroad of the Restraint of her and her Son, were false, and set on foot by the
Protestants only, as a color of their Sedition, that they might arm and raise
Forces in Germany; and therefore she hoped, that when he, and the rest of the
German Princes, should understand the truth of this, they would not aid or abet
the Rebels of France against their lawful Prince, contrary to the Oaths given
by their Ancestors. This Declaration was signed, for the greater confirmation,
by Alexander, the King's youngest Brother; Henry, Prince of Navar; Charles,
Cardinal of Bourbon; Lewis de Bourbon, Duke de Monpensier; and Charles de
Bourbon, Prince de Roche-sur-Yon. Soon after the Fight also at Dreux, there was
a General Pardon published, to all that should return to their Allegiance to
the King. The Pope fondly overjoyed with the Victory at Dreux.
When the Pope heard of this Victory, he was strangely joyed at it, conceiving,
this one Battle would put an end to the Power of the Protestants in France, he
expecting that effect from Force and Violence, which the French hoped for only
from a Council. But however, he thought himself now delivered from a great part
of his Cares, and made it his business to precipitate the Council, though he
knew, the Germans would protest against it, whom he did not at all regard; and
as for the King of France, he thought, the Joy of the Victory would give him
satisfaction enough. The Council was as much joyed as any body, but especially
the Cardinal of Lorraine, for his Brother's good Fortune in this Battle, to
whom all was ascribed in a Speech made there the 10th of January.

Coligni entering Berry, led his Army to Ceel, the second of January, a place,
which the Priests of that Province had chosen, to secure the Church Treasures
in, which now, to their great damage, they persuaded the Townsmen to defend, it
being soon taken, and all that Plate melted down, and the Inhabitants very
severely used for their Resistance, and several of them hanged, the Priests
escaping in the Tumult. In Beausse, the Duke of Guise took Estampes, after
which, he besieged Pluviers with 800 Horse, who took the Suburbs; the Garrison
of which, sallying out, retired to Orleans, leaving their Carriages behind
them. Whilst the Duke of Guise was busy in preparing Necessaries for the Siege
of this great City, Andelot, who had undertaken the Defense of it, was as
intent in fortifying and storing the City with all things that were necessary.
There were in it 14 Companies of Germans, and 4 of Townsmen, and many of the
Nobility, all well Armed.

The Queen, The Prince of Conde carried to Blois.
when she had stayed a while at Chartres, went with the King to Blois, (as is
said) carrying with them the Prince of Conde under a strong Guard; from whence,
she sent him to the Castle of Onzain, a strong place in Angoumoise. Coligni
was, in the mean time, wholly intent on the appeasing of the Germans, fearing
they would mutiny for their Pay, which, he said, would be sent in a short time
from England; so that, at last, he obliged them to promise, they would not
desert him. The Duke of Guise, having quitted Beausse, was by this time come to
Baugy, where there were some Skirmishes of no great consequence between him and
the Protestants. Some mention was made also of a Peace, the Princess of Conde
proposing, That her Husband, and Montmorancy, should be set at liberty to that
end, but there was nothing done in it. The Sieur Boucart, a Commander under
Coligni, was coming before, Trimoville, a Town upon the Loire, which was under
one Potin, commanded it to surrender; which being refused, he took it by force,
and put the Inhabitants to the Sword; amongst whom, were 36 Priests: From
whence, he went to Gien, which was preserved out of his hands by three
Companies of Spaniards, who were sent thither for the approaching Siege of
Orleans. Coligni, in the mean time, left Gergeau, and went to Orleans, to
consult with the other Commanders what was best to be done, and there it was
resolved, the Germans should be sent into Normandy, to be ready to receive
their Pay out of England, which their Commanders readily accepted; Coligni went
with them, and Gramont undertook the defense of Orleans, Andelot being sick.
Coligni was all the way plied with Messages from the Queen, for a Peace, to
hinder his Journey: The first of February, he arrived with 4000 Horse at Trcon,
and took a view of the place, in which the late Battle was fought, from thence
he went to Eureux: He took soon after St. Pere de Melun, a rich Monastery, and
finding great Riches in its Church, which had been given by the Seamen, he
took its Wealth, and, which was worse resented, destroyed those Images which
were most addressed to in Distresses. Soon after, eight English Ships came to
Havre de Grace, in which, were five English Companies, eight Cannon, great
quantities of Ammunition and Money; whereupon he resolved to take the Castle of
Caen, before he went back to Orleans, and, the first of March, raised a Battery
of four Cannon against it, and took it in a few days, though the Duke of Elboeuf
was Commander of it, who must have been taken too, but that Coligni was in have
to relieve Orleans.

The Duke of Guise began the Siege of Orleans the 7th of February, The Siege of
Orleans.
and attacked the Suburb de Olivet, which Andelot had ordered to be deserted;
but, by the negligence of the Germans, had like the next day to have proved the
loss of the City, Guise his Forces getting into it, before the Germans and
French could withdraw, and fire the Houses; many of them perished in the Crowd,
at the passage of the Bridge which led to the City, and was then imbarassed
with the Goods the Germans had heaped up there: But Andelot making a sharp
Sally at the Head of a Troop of Gentlemen, opened the way, and kept off the
Enemy; it is said however, 800 of the Besieged perished in this Tumult; others
say, not half the number: But yet, however, it was a great loss, and much
incommoded the City. Two days after, the other Suburbs were taken. The 18th of
February, the Duke of Guise wrote to the Queen, That the Siege was very
forward, and that, in a few days, he should send her the joyful News it was
taken; but the same day, toward night, as he was riding with some Officers,
The Duke of Guise wounded by one Poltrot.
he was shot in the Side by one John Poltrot, near his Armpit. This person was
a Gentleman of Engoulesme, and brought up as Page in the Family of Francis
Boucart Baron d' Aubeterre, and having in his Childhood lived in Spain, could
imitate that Nation to a wonder, and was commonly called, The Little Spaniard,
he had long since resolved to be the death of this great Man, and had foretold
it publicly, and was so much the less suspected, because he was thought a
close dissembling Fellow. Being sent by his Master to learn an Account of the
Battle of Dreux, he found Coligni at the Siege of Ceel, who gave him Money to
buy a fleet Horse; after which he never returned to his Lord, and this made
Coligni suspected, as conscious of the Design. From thence he went to the Duke
of Guise his Quarters, and contracted an Acquaintance with his Servants, and
this day after a Prayer to God to direct him, lying in wait, Shot him as he was
returning home in the Evening. Poltrot fled into the next Wood, and they who
pursued him could not find him; and when he had rode all night, and quite tired
his Horse, next morning he came to Pont Olivet by Orleans; which being unknown
to him, and therefore thought by him to be very distant from the place he fled
from, he laid him down to sleep, and was taken upon suspicion by the Searchers,
and being known, was brought to the Queen to St. Ilario, and Examined
concerning the Fact, and by whose Procurement he did it. He said, he had been
twice solicited to it by Coligni, and had at last consented to it upon the
persuasion of Beza and another Minister, but he said, the Prince of Conde,
Andelot, and the Sieur de Soubieze knew nothing of it. He advised the Queen to
have a care of her self too, because the Protestants were ill affected to her
since the Battle of Dreux, and that Monpensier and Sansac were also designed to
be cut off: An Account of which Confession being sent to Cologni by a German
Prisoner, the 12th of March he published a Paper in his own defense, in which
he called God and Man to Witness, that he never saw nor knew Poltrot before the
last January, and he had given him Money and employed him as a Spy in the Duke
of Guise his Camp, That when he went into Normandy, he had given him 100 Crowns
to acquaint Andelot with what passed there; and that all he had said besides
were lies and falsehoods; That though he was not much concerned for the death
of the Duke of Guise, who was an Enemy to the King, and to the Reformation, and
all that Embraced it, yet he ever detested these ways of Proceeding, and had
never by himself or any other asked any such thing of Poltrot, though he had
before this discovered, and could prove such designs were entered into against
Conde, Andelot, and himself, before the Queen and Montmorancy, to whom he had
produced good Assurances of it. Beza also in the same Paper, said, he never saw
Poltrot in all his Life; and Rochefocault said the same. Coligni sent the same
day a Letter to the Queen to entreat her to keep Poltrot, that the truth of his
innocence might be made out from him, before he were Executed. The Death and
Character of the Duke of Guise.
The Duke of Guise in the mean time died the 24th of February, having purged
himself of the Massacre of Vassay, and Advised the Queen to make a Peace as
soon as was possible. He was a Great Man in the Opinion of his Enemies, a good
Soldier, and both fortunate and prudent in his Actions, but falling into a
divided Factious State, he was by his Brother Charles, a violent Man, misled,
though he often detested his Advises. Though he had no Command in the Battle of
Dreux, yet he alone procured the Victory, this made him the sole General, and
being terrible to the Protestants, it hastened his Ruin, but then it had ill
Consequences (though at first it occasioned a speedy Peace) in after times. The
Children of the Duke growing up in the Civil Wars which followed, inherited the
popularity of their Father, and under the Pretenses of Religion, and the Sloth
of the Kings of France, endeavored first to Revenge their Fathers Death on the
Protestants, and at last turned their Arms against the Royal Family, to the
great hazard of its Ruin and their own too.

Soon after the Duke of Guise was wounded, the Queen sent Henry de Cloet, The
Queen earnestly desires a Peace.
and the Bishop of Limoges, to the Princess of Conde and Andelot, to treat of a
Peace several times. And when he was dead, she yet more earnestly desired it,
fearing Conde and Montmorancy, the Heads of the two Parties. Or, as Davila
says, being desirous to drive out the Foreign Forces before they could settle
themselves, and above all, the English out of Havre de Grace. Besides she
wanted a General to Head the Kings Forces, Montmorency being then a Prisoner,
and none of the rest being equal to the Prince of Conde, Coligni, or Andelot;
besides, the Royal Revenues were by the War reduced to so low an Ebb, that they
were forced to borrow of their Neighbors to support the War. In the mean time
Francis de Briqueville Baron de Columbiers was employed by Coligni to take
Bayeux, before which he came the 12th of February, and though at first
repulsed, yet upon the bringing four Cannon from Caen, he took the City the
Fourth of March, the Garrison helping him to plunder it, and many of the
Inhabitants, especially of the Clergy, were slain, because they were thought to
have occasioned the resistance which was made. Soon after St. Lo was deserted,
and fell into the hands of the Protestants, and after it Auranches. Vire had
expelled the Protestants, and pretended to defend it self, but was taken by
Storm toward Night, which increased the Calamities of the Inhabitants.
Honfleur was taken by De Mouy, the Fourteenth of March. About this time Coligni
having made Montgomery Governor of Normandy, went from Caen with a gallant Army
toward Lisieux, where he was excluded by the Garrison, and from thence to
Bernay, which presuming to do so too, he took the Town and made a great
slaughter of the Inhabitants, destroying all their Images and Altars, and
handling their Priests very severely. The 7th of March the Prince of Conde and
Montmorancy were brought to the Island Boaria near Orleans under strong Guards,
The Treaty of Peace between the Prince of Conde and Montmorancy.
and a Treaty of Peace was opened: And Montmorancy declaring he would never
consent to the Edict of January, other Conditions were proposed, to the great
dissatisfaction of the Protestants. Conde, upon his promise, had leave given
him to enter Orleans, where he treated with the Protestant Ministers, but
finding them resolved to stand to the Edict of January, the 12th of March he
came to an Agreement with the Queen, which was subscribed by the King the 19th
of the same Month. The Terms of which were, The Articles agreed on.
That, 1. All the Nobility should permit what Religion they pleased, who had
Sovereign Authority, in their Jurisdictions. That all Noblemen should have the
free Exercise of Religion in their Families, if they did not live in Corporate
Towns. That in every Generalite or Prefecture one City should be assigned for
those of the Religion. And, that wherever they had at this day a Liberty, they
should still enjoy it. All Offenses were remitted, and the Royal Moneys spent
in the War; and Conde was acknowledged the Kings faithful and Loyal Kinsman;
and the Nobility, Captains, and all others who had assisted him, were
pronounced to have done all things for the Kings Service, and with a good
Intention.

Coligni was kept in Normandy by the Flattering Prosperity of his Arms, Coligni
not pleased with the Peace.
and though he was, by many Letters from the Prince of Conde, pressed to hasten
his Journey to Orleans, yet he did not arrive there before the 23 of March. The
next day he could not dissemble his discontent at the Terms of the Treaty of
Peace, telling the Prince publicly, That he wondered, how they could be
prevailed upon to clap up a Peace upon such disadvantageous Conditions, when
the Affairs of the Protestants were in so flourishing a state. That they ought
to have remembered, that in the beginning of the War, the Triumvirate had
consented, that the Edict of January should be restored, and that now two of
them (the King of Navar and the Duke of Guise) were slain, and Montmorancy was
their Prisoner, and consequently a Security for the Prince of Conde; Why should
not they have had the same Terms? That the restraint of the Profession of the
Protestant Religion to one place in a Province, was to give up that by a dash
of the Pen, which their Sword could never have obtained. That what was granted
to the Nobility could not be denied; and they would soon see it was safer to
serve God in the Suburbs of great Cities, than in their Private Families; and
that it was uncertain whether their Children would be at all like them. But
however nothing could rescind an Agreement made by common consent. Thus ended
the first Civil War of France.

I have transcribed this whole Account of the first Civil War of France from
the great Thuanus, abridging it as much as was possible, and pursuing the
Actions only of the great Armies; because if I had taken in all he relates of
the various Actions between the two Parties in the several great Cities and
Provinces, it would have swelled infinitely beyond the design of this Work, or
otherwise have been so dark as not to be easily intelligible. And if the Reader
compare this short Account with that given by Davila, he will soon see, how
little the sincerity of that Historian is to be relied on, and how small the
Reason is, for him to treat the Huguenots as Rebels in all the Course of this
War.

When the War first began, the Protestants acted purely on the defensive, but
after several local Massacres, they began to pull down Images and Altars in
Revenge, for the bloodshed of the other Party, and finding, to their cost,
this did but enrage the Roman Catholics against them, and made them the more
cruel, they fell next upon the Priests and Monks, as the Authors of their
Calamities, this more incensing the Roman Catholics; And they again using the
most horrid barbarities that were ever practiced by Men, the Protestants rose
likewise in their Executions on them; so that if this War had continued a few
years, France must have been depopulated. Now though in all this the Roman
Catholics were the first Agressors, and forced the Protestants to this
severity in their own defense, yet their Writers cunningly omitting the
Provocation, or softing the Actions of their own Party, set forth at large the
Cruelties of the Heretics, (as they call them) and many times aggravate them
above what is true; but Thuanus, though a Roman Catholic, was too great a Man
to be guilty of so false a representation, and who ever pleases to consult
him, will find, I have been very favorable to the Roman Catholics in this
Abstract, and have not sought occasions to make them odious without cause.

A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK IV.
The CONTENTS.
The Cardinal of Ferrara leaves France. The Causes of the Delay of the Council.
The Pope's Legates sent to Trent. The Prohibition of Books taken into
Consideration. The French Ambassadors arrive at Trent. The French King's
Reflections on the Proceedings of the Council. The French Clergy arrive there.
The Pope's Fear of them. Maximilian Son of Ferdinand the Emperor chosen King of
the Romans. The Emperor dislikes the Proceedings of the Council. The Spanish
Ambassadors received in the Council. The Fathers of Trent much Displeased with
the Peace made in France. The Queen of Navarr cited to Rome, and many of the
Bishops by the Inquisition. The French King's Declaration against these
Proceedings. The Queen Mother of France complains of the Council. The Pope
Gains the Cardinal of Lorrain to his Side. That Councils have no Authority over
Princes. The Ambassadors of France Protest against the Council, and retire to
Venice. The Council ended. The Censure of the Council. The State of Religion in
Piedmont. A Tumult in Bavaria for the Cup. The Romish Reasons against granting
Marriage to the Clergy and the Cup to the Laity. The Siege and Surrender of
Havre de Grace. Charles the IX. declared out of his Minority. The Scotch
Affairs.

HAVING thus dispatched what concerns the first French War, Trent. Whilst the
recalling this Council was agitated with great heat, The Cardinal of Ferrara
leaves France.
the Cardinal of Ferrara, the Pope's Legate in France after the Revocation of
the Edict of January, seeing all things there in the state he desired, he took
his leave of the King and returned into Italy. Before he went, however, he took
care to furnish the King with Money to carry on the Siege of Orleans, which he
took up of the Bankers of Paris. He had raised a vast Expectation of this
Council in the minds of all those who had yet any Kindness left in their Hearts
for the Sea of Rome; and the more, because they thought the Edict of January
which had caused the War, would then fall of Course, it being made only by way
of Provision till a Council should determine otherwise. As the Cardinal was in
his Journey Fifty Horsemen came out of Orleans under the Command of one
Monsieur Dampier, and surprised all his Mules, Horses, and Treasures, and when
he sent a Trumpeter to demand them again, the Prince of Conde made Answer, That
this magnificent and warlike Equipage did not befit Pastors and the Successors
of St. Peter, but rather Commanders and Generals of War who were in Arms for
Religion. Yet if he pleased to recall the 200000. Crowns which he had furnished
the Triumvirate with to carry on the War against him, and the Italian Forces
out of France, he would then restore all he had taken to his Eminence.

The Council which was appointed to meet at Easter of the former Year, was
delayed to the beginning of this; The Causes of the Delay of the Council.
the Pope putting it off, because he was as much afraid of the Spanish Bishops
as of the French National Council. He had been necessitated to grant great
Contributions to King Philip to be levied upon his Clergy, and he thought the
Bishops would on that score come with exasperated Minds to the Council; and all
his Thoughts were bent on the keeping the Papal Power undiminished, rather than
on satisfying the just Compaints of the Nations. At last being forced by an
unresistable necessity he sent Hercules Gonzaga, The Pope's Legates sent to
Trent.
Jerome Seripand, and Stanislaus Hosio out of his Bosom, to be his Legates at
Trent. And not long after he added to them James Simoneta, and Mark Sitico
Bishop of Altemberg in Transylvania, who had orders to open the Council again
the Eighteenth of January 1562. That those things might be therein treated of
which the Proponentibus Legatis.
Legates should propose, and in the same Order, for the taking away the
Calamities of these Times, the appeasing the Controversies of Religion, the
Restraining deceitful Tongues, the Correcting the Abuses of depraved Manners,
and the obtaining a True and Christian Peace, by such means as the Holy Council
should approve of. The French Clergy insisted, That mention should be made of a
Free and General Council to be called for the Quieting of their Differences,
because their Protestants would never submit to the Determinations of the
former Sessions. On the contrary, the Spaniards professed they would only
continue the former Council; and therefore they used a middle way, and decreed,
A Council should be Celebrated. The Spanish Bishops were as much dissatisfied
because all the Power of proposing was given to the Legates, and taken from the
other Bishops, and complained of it to King Philip; who Ordered his Ambassador
to treat the Pope about it, that the Council might be free. The Pope Answered
the Ambassador, That he was not at leisure to dispute about Ablative Cases
Positive, and the Genders of Words, and that he had something else to do. And
in private he spoke of the Calamities and Dangers of France with the same
unconcernedness. For when one of the French Cardinals deplored the Danger the Sea of Rome was in of losing that Kingdom, he replied, What then? if as long as
I am Bishop of this City I shall not be forced to abate any thing of the
Greatness of my Table, and the Magnificence of my Buildings. And when they
insisted to have the Manners of Men and the Discipline of the Church thoroughly
Reformed, he said, In that Particular he would satisfy France to the full, and
take such Care in it, that they should all of them Repent that they had
mentioned a Reformation. Adding, That he foresaw that the Kingdom would be
divided on the account of Religion, but he did not value the loss of it a
Farthing. All which Expressions says Thuanus, Are in the Letters of the French
Ambassador that was then at Rome, out of which I have faithfully Transcribed
them; and the Letters are now in my Hands. The History of this Council is so
well described by Petro Soave Polano, a Venetian, which is in English, that I
need the less insist upon it; but I shall however remark some few things from
Thuanus and others, for the Enlarging or Confirming the Credit of that History,
which is much cried down by the Roman Catholics; as certainly they have good
Reason to be offended with that Author, who with so much Truth and Impartiality
has discovered the Artifices of that Assembly, for the keeping up the Grandeur
of the Court of Rome, and the Suppression and Baffling that Reformation, which
the most Learned of the Church of Rome then so much desired and panted after.

The Second Session was held the Twenty sixth of February, The Prohibition of
Books taken into consideration.
in which a Decree passed against Reading Books suspected of Heresy, and a
safe Conduct and an Invitation was given to all that would come to the Council.
Seventeen Bishops were by Name appointed to bring in a Catalogue of such Books
as were intended or thought fit to be Prohibited. Polano observes, that they
carried this so high as to deprive Men of that Knowledge which was necessary to
defend them from the Usurpations of the Court of Rome, by which means its
Authority was maintained and made Great. For the Books were Prohibited and
Condemned, in which the Authority of Princes and Temporal Magistrates is
defended from the Usurpations of the Clergy; and of Councils and Bishops from
the Usurpations of the Court of Rome, in which their Hypocrisies or Tyrannies
are manifested, by which the People, under pretense of Religion are deceived.
In sum, a better Mystery was never found out than to use Religion to make Men
insensible. However this may help to keep those in their Church which they now
have; it does certainly by Experience render them very Contemptible to all
others, and unable to defend their Religion; which is especially true of their
Laity.

The Fourth of March the business of the Safe Conduct was dispatched in a
Congregation; A debate whether Episcopacy and Residence are of Divine Right.
and a Debate was raised and pursued with great Heat by the Spanish Bishops,
That Episcopacy was instituted by God without any Medium; and that Residence
and their Pastoral Deligence, in feeding their Flock, was of Divine Right,
which they desired might be Confirmed by the Decree of the Council. But because
this tended to the Establishing the Authority of the Bishops, and the Abating
that of the Pope, his Holiness was much concerned at it, and having consulted
the Cardinals about it, they by common consent Delayed, and by ambiguous
Answers deluded the Fathers at Trent, and at last totally baffled them in this
Point. The Second Session was appointed to be the Twelfth of April, which was
then prorogued to the Fourth of June, and from thence to the Fifteenth of the
same Month. In the mean time the King of France sent Lewis de Sanct Gelais
Sieur de Lanssac, The French Ambassadors Arrival.
Arnold de Ferrier, Presiders of Paris, and Guy du Faur Sieur de Pibrac, his
Ambassadors to the Council, who arrived at Trent the Nineteenth of May. Lanssac
soon after wrote a Letter to give an Account of their being come to the French
Resident at Rome, in which he said he thought they ought in the first Place to
take care that an Event contrary to their Expectation might not attend the
Council; that the Pope should Order his Legates to show great patience to those
who spoke, proceed slowly in all things, attend the Arrival of those Bishops
who were coming, and allow a Liberty without condition to all that were to Vote
or Speak, and not fall under the old Reproach of having the Holy Ghost sent
them from Rome in a Portmanteau; and lastly, that they should take care that
what was Decreed at Trent to the Glory of God, should not be malignantly
Interpreted and Traduced; or, it may be, Corrupted at Rome by a Company of Idle
Men: He desired therefore he would endeavor to obtain these things of the
Pope, as he did; but the Pope took this Liberty very ill, and desired, That no
Prejudice might be done to his Authority by the French Bishops. Adding, That he
reserved the Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Discipline, and of the Court of
Rome to himself; and that he might with greater Convenience attend this and the
Transactions at Trent, he intended to go to Bononia. The pretense of this
Journey was the Crowning of the Emperor in that City, who was said to be coming
thither for that purpose: But the reality was, the Pope was afraid the World
should think him more solicitous for the preservation of the Papal Power, than
for his Pastoral Cure. The Demands of the French Ambassadors in the Council.
The Twentieth of May the French Ambassadors were admitted in a Congregation,
where they made an unacceptable Oration, an abstract of which is in Polano:
Thuanus says, The Speech was made the Fourth of June, and that amongst other
things they desired, That the Missals and Breviaries might be Reformed, and the
Lectures which were not taken out of the Holy Scriptures might be cut off; That
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper might be allowed in both Kinds according to
the desire of many Nations; And also the Liberty of eating Flesh, and that the
Severity of their Fasts might be abated; That Marriage should be allowed to the
Clergy of some Countries; That the multitude of Humane Constitutions should be
retrenched, and Prayers in the Vulgar Tongue faithfully Translated, mixed with
the Latin Hymns. Before this the Ambassador of the Duke of Bavaria had also
demanded the giving of the Cup in the Lords Supper to the Laity as absolutely
necessary for the Preserving those who had not yet separated themselves from
the Communion of the Church of Rome, but were much offended with this denial,
and for the Recovery of those who had left it. And accordingly there were about
Fifty of the most Learned of the Fathers of the Council who were for granting
it, and amongst them Gonzaga President of the Council, though all his Colleagues
dissented. But the Spanish Bishops opposed it, and others thought it was fit
first to send Legates into Germany who should see and report it to the Council
whether it were necessary, and how it might be done. This was debated in a
Congregation the Twenty eighth of August; but in the Twenty second Session held
the Seventeenth of September it was rejected, and all were Anathematized, That
did not allow the Church to have taken away the Cup from the Laity, etc. upon
just Grounds. When the Germans still insisted that it might be granted again to
some People; the Council to free themselves from their importunity, turned them
over to the Pope, who according to his Prudence was to do what he thought
Useful and Salutary. Before this the Pope being pressed to Grant the Cup by the
French Ambassador about a Year since, had referred it to the Conclave of
Cardinals, and they and he had referred it to the Council; and now the Council
sends it back to the Pope. Oh the stupid Patience of these Men!

When Lanssac gave the King of France an Account of what had been done, he said
in his Answer, That he liked what had been done as yet at Trent; but could not
but observe that they went very slowly about the Reforming of the
Ecclesiastical Discipline, The French Kings Reflections on the Proceedings of
the Council.
and the Manners of the Clergy; and in the mean time were in great haste to
Establish the Points of Doctrine; That therefore it was suspected when this was
with Levity enough performed, there would be an end put to the Council, and no
care be taken for the former, that so this procedure would afford no Benefit to
the Church in this distracted State of Christendom, and especially to France.
That about Thirty Years since, when Fire and Sword had so unsuccessfully been
employed to Cure the Disease, all Men looked upon a General Council as the
Sheet-Anchor: That he wished nothing had been done in the beginning of this
Council for the Alienating the Minds of the Churches Enemies, but rather that
they had by all means been allured, and invited to it; and if any had been
prevailed upon to come, that they should have been treated by the Fathers of
the Council with Kindness and Humanity as Children. For to what end were all
these careful and diligent Disquisitions and Disputations concerning the
Doctrine, seeing there was no debate but between the Catholic and Protestant
in these Points? And as to the Protestants their Definitions signified nothing,
but only gave them Occasion to say their Opinions were condemned by the Council
without hearing what they had to say for them: That therefore it seemed more
advisable to have endeavored to have brought them into the Council; for fear
they should in time withdraw all those who adhere to the Church: For it was a
vain furmise that the Protestants would ever submit to those Decrees which were
made when they were absent. That therefore he was of Opinion, That the
Reforming the Manners of the Churchmen, and the Discipline ought to be their
first and greatest Care, and the other to be for a time suspended; for this
would be acceptable to all Men. And lastly, Lanssac was ordered to get the next
Session Prorogued to the latter end of October, 1563. that the French Clergy
might be present at it; or at least that the publishing of the Canons might be
deferred till then. When Lanssac had represented all this to the Council, he
desired in the King's Name, That seeing in the former Sessions some things had
been decreed to the prejudice of the Liberties of the Gallicane Church, it
being an ancient Privilege belonging to them to represent by their Kings, or
their Ambassadors, what they thought useful or necessary for them, that this
Liberty should for the future be preserved; and that if any thing were Acted to
the contrary of it, it might be recalled. In the mean time, the Thirteenth of
November, The Cardinal of Lorrain and the French Clergy arrive at Trent.
the Cardinal of Lorrain, and about Forty of the French Bishops came to Trent
with some Divines, who were met without that City by the Pope's Legates, and
some of the other Bishops, and of the Ambassadors. In this Journey the Cardinal
of Lorrain went to Inspruck to meet the Emperor before he went to the Diet at
Francfort where he had some Conferences in private with that Prince about the
Affairs of Religion.

The Pope and the Cardinals at Rome were alarmed at this coming of the French
Clergy, The Pope alarmed at it, as if so many Enemies had invaded him.
as if so many Enemies had invaded them, and all things were in an Hurry to
make Preparations against them. There were new Legates, and a new Squadron of
Italian Bishops, who might out number the French, presently to be sent to
Trent. And the Pope wrote to King Philip to Order the Bishops of his Dominions
to unite their Counsels and Votes with the Italian Bishops, that neither the
Reasons nor the Votes of the Vltramontane Bishops might prevail against them.
And in his private Audience with L' Isle the French Resident at Rome, he
ridiculed the Cardinal of Lorrain, by calling him, The other Pope who had Three
hundred thousand Pounds the Year Revenue, out of several Ecclesiastical
Benefices, when he (good Man) was content with the single Bishopric of Rome;
and it is an easy thing (says he) for the Cardinal with his belly full to
praise Fasting, and admonish others to be content with one Benefice. The French
King had sent Francis de Bolliers, Sieur de Manes, to dissipate and remove this
Jealousy of the Pope's, at the approach of the French Bishops, and to acquaint
his Holiness with his Intentions. For that it was commonly said, That the
Cardinal was sent to get the Transactions in the Conference of Poisey last Year
confirmed by the Synod, That the Cup might be granted to the Laity, That the
Clergy might be allowed Matrimony, That the Liturgy might be in the Vulgar
Tongue, That the Bishops might have but one Diocese, and that none should be
Elected to that Dignity who could not Preach to the People. As to the first
Manes excused the Conference of Poisey, and said, It was appointed by the Queen
and the Cardinal for the gaining time, and the retarding or keeping back those
intestine Commotions they foresaw, and for the stopping the Mouths of the
Sectaries, who complained every where that their Reasons had never been heard;
That they designed in the Interim to levy Forces so that if they could not
convince the Sectaries by Reason, they might by force reduce them to their
Duty. That nothing was done in that Conference. And as to the other Points the
Cardinal and French Clergy had no other Instructions than what had been sent to
the Ambassadors of France, and that they brought no prejudged Opinions with
them to the Council. The Pope was much concerned upon the Account of a Report
that the Bishops of France had moved their King to stop the Payment of First
Fruits by the Clergy of France to the Sea of Rome. And he said this was
contrary to their Pacts and Agreements with him; which was, That this Affair
should be transacted with the Pope only in a friendly way. But then after all,
nothing so much startled the holy Man as a Report, that a Peace was treating
secretly with the Protestants, and that they would have Liberty given them to
Preach and he foresaw, that if France were once quieted, the Council could not
be hurried to a Conclusion, but things would be well considered, and perhaps
the Protestants must be heard in it, and amongst them Queen Elizabeth of
England, which he feared beyond Expression. For he thought the Cardinals of
Lorrain and Ferrara were so Useful and Necessary to the King of France, that he
could never have spared them to attend the Council, where there was no need of
them if he had not had some such pestilent Designs to promote. Whereupon he
mustered up all the Prelates he could possibly, not admitting any Excuse, The
Popes fears of the French Bishops never to be stopped.
and sent many also who had resigned their Benefices to the Council, together
with the Coadjutors of other Bishops, that so he might have the more Votes,
believing he was now in the utmost degree of Danger; and as if he had not had
enough of his own he borrowed some Prelates of his Friends too: And amongst
them he got leave of the Duke of Savoy that Anthony Bobba Bishop of Cassale,
who was then that Princes Ambassador in the Court of Rome; and Lewis Vanini de
Teodolis Bishop de Bertinoro, a Person of great Learning and Eloquence, who had
excused his Attendance in the Council upon his want of Health, should now
forthwith be dispatched to Trent. When this last was going thither, he is said
to have consolated and strengthened the good Pope in his Anxiety and Fears of
the Event, with an Assurance, That he would certainly get the Victory over the
Council, which was a very Acceptable Saying to the Pope; and that he for that
good News Kissed the Bishop of Bertinoro, when he took his Leave to go to
Trent, bidding him be careful to get the Victory he had promised him. And when
after this some flying Reports came to Rome, that some Questions were moved in
the Council to the prejudice of the Papal Authority by the Bishops, he was so
moved at it, that in the Consistory before all the Cardinals, he cried out, he
and the Romans were betrayed, whilst he maintained an Army of Enemies at Trent
with great expense. By which expression he aimed at the Italian Bishops, who
were his Pensioners, and kept there by him in great numbers. And Jo. Baptista
Adriani writes, He was just upon the Point of inhibiting the Council, and had
done it if Cosmus Duke of Florence had not averted him from that dangerous and
shameful project.

The 8th. Maximilian Son of Ferdinand chosen King of the Romans. Polano in his
History of the Council of Trent, says the Election was made the 24th. of
November. So that the first date seems to be the day of the opening of the Diet.
day of September Maximilian the Eldest Son of Ferdinand the Emperor was chosen
King of the Romans at Francfort upon the Maine, in a Diet there assembled for
that purpose. Stroschen a Polander by birth, who was then Ambassador for
Solomon the Emperor of the Turks, was present at Francfort, and saw this
Ceremony, being sent to settle a Truce for eight years between those Princes,
which had been a long time sought by Busbequius at Constantinople. The Emperor
was by this League to pay Thirty Millions of Hungarian Ducats for a Tribute by
the year. In this Diet the Princes of the Augustane Confession, and their
Allies gave in their opinion concerning the Council in Writing, as they
promised they would in the Convention at Naumburg. They said they could not
come to this Impious Council which was Indicted by Pope Pins the Fourth,
because not so assembled as was prescribed in their Appeals to a pious, free
and lawful Council, given in heretofore in several Diets of Germany. This Diet
ended about the end of December, and the Emperor went by Worms, Spire,
Weissemburg, Strasburg, Schlestat, and Basil, to Friburg in Brisgow, being in
all places received with great Honor; and in the last of these places he held
a Diet for Alsatia, and then by Constance he went in February to Inspruck,
where he staid some time on the account of the Council of Trent, which he hoped
might be ended in the less time if he were near it.

The French Ambassadors when they came to the Council of Trent were furnished
with certain Instructions what they were to ask, but had Orders to suppress
them till they had conferred with the Emperors Ambassadors, which happened to
have much what the same demands. But by this time the Court of France seeing
there was no care taken to satisfy the Emperor, and that things were carried
with great slowness, ordered their Ambassador to open their Grievances, which
were contained in Thirty four Articles, January; as they may be seen at large
in Polano his History, Page 609. I shall not here trouble the Reader with them.
The 10th. of January the King of France ordered his Ambassador to assure the
Pope that the Annals which were taken away in the Assembly of the States of
France, lately held at Orleans, should for the future be paid to the Pope; he
hoping by this means to have him more ready to grant his desires, tending to
the peace of the Church, which the Pope's Ambassador largely promised. On the
14th. of February a Decree was made concerning the Residence of Bishops and
Pastors with great difficulty and opposition, which all tended to the obtaining
the Judgment of the Council, That the Pope has full power to feed, and govern
the Universal Church. The French who hold that a Council is above the Pope,
were contented to conceal their opinion in this point, for fear the Pope should
take that opportunity to dissolve the Council, without any good done by it. But
then they were resolved to defend their said opinion if it were opposed
whatever happened, and upon no terms to lose or yield it. King Philip also
labored very hard that the power of the Bishops should be raised, and that of
the Pope and the Conclave brought lower; which they of the Pope's party
interpreted as a design to diminish the Spanish Liberties, because the Bishops
and Chapters of Spain would be more subjected to the will of the King than the
Court of Rome would. By which means they at last prevailed so far upon that
jealous Nation, that the power of the Bishops in the end was very much abated,
and that of the Pope was enlarged and exalted; and the Bishops were contented
to act as the Popes Delegates, and by his Authority, and in his Name to
exercise their Functions. About this time it was that the Cardinal of Lorrain
went again to the Emperor to Inspruck, which caused a great fear in the Pope's
party in the Council, for that they suspected he went to adjust with that
Prince the ways to bring the Papal power under.

In the beginning of March the Emperor wrote a Letter to the Pope (after he had
consulted the Bishops of Quinque Ecclesiae, The Emperor dislikes the
Proceedings of the Council.
who went to Inspruck to him) wherein he signified to his Holiness, That after
his Son in the last Diet was Elected King of the Romans, and Crowned, and that
he had visited his Cities upon the Rhine, he was come to Inspruck to promote
the Affairs of the Church in the Council as became the Supreme Advocate and
Procurator of the Church; but that to his great grief he understood that things
were so far from going as was to be desired, and as the public State of
Affairs required, that it was to be feared, if speedy remedies were not
applied, the Council would be ended in such manner, as it would give offense to
all Christendom, and become ridiculous to all those who had made a defection
from the Church of Rome, and fix them more obstinately in those opinions they
had embraced, though very differing from the Orthodox Faith. That there had not
been any Session celebrated for a long time, and that it was commonly given
out, the Fathers and Doctors in the Council, had contentions and differences
amongst themselves, which were unworthy of that moderation which they ought to
have, and tended very much to the detriment of that concord which was hoped for
from them; and yet these contests frequently broke out to the great
satisfaction of their Adversaries: That there was a report, That the Pope
intended to dissolve or suspend the Council; and he advised him not to do it,
because nothing could be more shameful or damageable; and which, besides, would
certainly cause a great defection from the Church, and bring a great hatred on
the Papacy, and from thence cause an equal contempt of all the Clergy; That
this dissolution or suspension would certainly procure the Assembling of
National Councils, which the Popes have ever opposed as contrary to the Unity
of the Church, and which those Princes which were well affected to the Sea of
Rome, had hitherto hindered in their Dominions; but after this they could find
no pretense to deny or delay them any longer. Therefore he desired the Pope to
lay aside that thought, and to apply himself seriously to the celebration of
the Council, allowing the Ancient Liberty to all in its full extent, that all
things might be dispatched rightly, lawfully, and in order, and thereby the
mouths of their Adversaries, who sought an opportunity to calumniate, might be
stopped. That it would become his Holiness to attend the Council in person if
his health would permit it; and he earnestly desired he would, That he (the
Emperor) if the Pope thought fit, would also come thither, that they both by
their presence might promote the Public business. That the Pope might compose
and decide many difficulties which had arisen from his absence. The Emperor
sent a Copy of this Letter to the Cardinal of Lorrain also, and desired he
would promote those things which tended to the Glory of God, and the good of
Christendom.

The 21th. of May the Count de Luna, Ambassador for the King of Spain, The
Ambassador of Spain received in the Council.
was received in a Congregation; and there was a Speech made in the behalf of
that Prince in the Assembly, by one Pedro Fontidonio de Segovia a Divine, who
extolled above measure the care of his Master in the Affairs of Religion, and
especially his severity shown toward Sectaries; he said this Prince Married
Mary of England, only to the end he might restore the Catholic Religion in
that flourishing Kingdom. He Reproached the French and German Nations, for
thinking that much was to be indulged to the Heretics, that being won by these
Concessions they might be reduced into the bosom of the Church. At last he
said, That they ought so to consult the Salvation of Heretics, and the Majesty
of the Church, that all things might be done for the promoting the latter,
rather than for gratifying the former. And he exhorted all Princes to imitate
the severity of his Master in bridling Heretics, that the Church might be
delivered from so many Miseries, and the Fathers of Trent from the care of
celebrating Councils.

A little before this time the news of the Peace made with the Protestants of
France, came first in Generals, and soon after the particular Articles. The
Fathers at Trent much dissatisfied with the Peace made in France.
This was blamed by the greater part of the Fathers in that Council, who said
it was to prefer the things of the world before the things of God; yea to ruin
both the one and the other. For the Foundation of a State, which is Religion,
being removed, it is necessary that the Temporal should come to desolation;
whereof the Edict made before was an example, which did not cause Peace and
Tranquillity, as was hoped, but a greater War than before. The truth is, these
men would have all the world fight out their quarrel to the last man, and then
if their Catholics perish, they are as unconcerned as for the Heretics; and
accordingly ever since that time they have made it their business first to
hinder all Treaties of Peace, wherein any liberty was granted to the
Protestants; and when they could not gain that point, to make them be broken as
soon as was possible; tho this too has for the most part turned in the end to
their great loss and shame. The French Court show their Reasons for it.
The French Court perceiving how the Fathers of Trent took the Peace, Ordered
the Cardinal of Lorrain to show the great Dangers which from the Civil War
threatened that Kingdom; and to assure the Council that it was the intention of
the King to dissipate the Factions of France by a Peace, that he might be at
leisure to attend seriously the restitution of the Peace of the Church. But
when this would not be allowed neither, the Queen sent Renate de Birague,
President of Dauphine, to assure the Fathers, That their Intentions were not to
settle a New Religion in France, nor to suffer it to grow up and increase, but
that having disarmed their Subjects, and quieted the Tumults, they might with
the less trouble return to the Methods used by their Ancestors, for the
reducing their people into the way, and the Unity of the same Catholic
Religion. That this could never be done but by the Authority of a lawful and
free, either General or National Council: that a General Council seemed the
safer way, but then it was necessary that a liberty and security should be
given to all that would to come. That though this had been done by the Pope and
the Fathers; yet the place was such; and so situate, that being rather in Italy
than Germany, the Protestants could not think themselves sufficiently secure.
For they desired a Council in Germany, and thought they were not safe if it
were any where else: That not only they of Germany, but the English, Scotch,
Danes and Swedes, were of the same mind, and it was very unjust to condemn so
many Nations unheard, and besides it was unprofitable too, for whereas all good
men hoped that this Council would procure an Unity, on the contrary it would
cause a greater opposition and enmity, when these Nations saw themselves
neglected; and by the inconvenience of the place, as it were excluded out of
the Council. For it was fit for none but weak and credulous men to think they
would ever submit to the Decrees of a Council in which they had never been
admitted, nor heard; but it was to be feared on the other side that their minds
being exasperated, their patience would turn to fury, and they would traduce to
Posterity the Decrees of the Council; and in the present age treat them with a
virulent sharpness in their Writings. Therefore Birague was Ordered to desire
the Council might by the consent of the Fathers and Pope be transferred into
Germany, to Worms, Spire, Basil or Constance. This Discourse would not edify
at Trent, and he was sent on the same Errand to Inspruck to the Emperor, and to
Vienna to his Son Maximilian. There were two others sent at the same time, one
into Spain, and another to Rome; but this latter found the Pope enraged to the
utmost with the Peace, so that he was resolved to treat France without any
favor.

In order to this, The Pope's Bull to the Inquifitors.
the Pope puts out a Bull dated the 7th. of April, by which he grants power to
the Cardinals, appointed Inquisitors General for all Christendom, to proceed
smartly and extrajudicially, as shall seem convenient to them against all and
singular the Heretics, and their Abettors and Receivers, and those who are
suspected to be such abiding in the Provinces and places in which the filth of
the Lutheran Heresy has prevailed; and to which it is notorious, there is not
a safe and free entrance; though the said persons are adorned with the Episcopal,
Archiepiscopal, Patriarchal Dignity, or Cardinalate, without any other proof to
be made of the safety or freedom of the Access. But so that Information be
first made, and that they be cited by an Edict by them to be affixed to the
Doors of the Palace of the Holy Inquisition, etc. admonishing and requiring
them to appear personally, and not by their Proctors, before the said
Inquisition, within a certain and limited time, as the said Inquisition shall
think fit, upon pain of Excommunication denounced, Suspension, and other lawful
pains. And if they shall not so appear, they shall be proceeded against in the
secret Consistory, and a sentence decreed against them (though absent) as
convict, and confirmed with a clause of Derogation. Though this Bull was contrary
to all Laws, Several French Cardinals and Bishops cited to Ronte;
yet the Inquisitors presumed upon it to cite some Bishops of France, and with
them Odet de Coligni Cardinal de Chastillon, who had embraced the Opinions of
the Protestants, and was now called Count de B^auvais, he having been formerly
Bishop of that City; St. Roman Archbishop d'Aix, John Monluck Bishop of
Valence, Jean Anthony Caracciolo Son of the Prince de Melphe; Jean Brabanson
Bishop of Pamiez, And the Queen of Navarr also.
Charles Guillart Bishop of Chartres. And as if this had been intended but for
a step to her; the Princess Joan Labrett Queen of Navarr, Relict of Anthony
late King of Navarr. All which I say, by a Bull dated the 28th. of September,
and affixed at Rome, were cited to appear before the Inquisition, within six
Months, and the Queen was told, That if she did not, she should be deprived of
her Royal Dignity, Kingdom or Principality, and Dominions, as one convicted:
and the same should be pronounced to belong to whosoever should invade it. The
King and Queen of France, and all the Nobility were extremely exasperated with
these proceedings of the Pope; and the Bull being read in the Council of State,
D'Oisel the then Ordinary Ambassador in the Court of Rome, The French King
declares against these Proceedings against the Queen of Nevarr.
was ordered to acquaint the Pope, That the King could scarce give any credit
to the first reports which were spread in several Pamphlets in France, till the
Citation which was fixed up in several places in Rome, was read to him; at
which he was much troubled, because the Queen of Navarr was in Majesty and
Dignity equal to any other Prince in Christendom; and had from them the Title
of Sister. 2. That the danger which threatened her was of ill example, and might
in time be extended to any of them, and therefore they were all bound to assist
and defend her in this common cause, and the more because she was a Widow. 3.
But the King of France above all other, because nearly related to her, and her
late Husband, who was one of the principal Princes of the Blood Royal, and had
lost his Life in his service in the last War against the Protestants; leaving
his Children Orphans, the Eldest of which was now in the King's Court, and
under his care: That the King could not neglect the cause of this sorrowful
Widow, and her Orphan and Children, who appealed to his fidelity, and the
Memory of his Ancestors; who had in all times of affliction succored the
Princes of Germany, Spain, and England. That Philip the Bold, the Son of St.
Lewis, had with a potent Army defended an Orphan-Queen of Navarr, and brought
her into France, where she was after Married to Philip the Fair, from whom Joan
the present Queen of Navarr was lineally descended. And that John Labrett the
Grandfather of this Queen being in like manner persecuted by one of the Popes,
and driven out of a part of his Kingdom; the rest had been defended and
preserved by Lewis the Twelfth, and his Successors. That the Popes themselves
have heretofore fled to the French for protection when they have been expelled
out of their Sees, who had often restored them, defended and enriched them with
the grant of many Territories: That this Queen was so near a Neighbor, and
such an Allie to the Crown of France, that no War could be made upon her
without the great damage of France: That all Princes were Interested in the
Friendship and Peace of their Neighbors, and obliged to keep all Wars at a
distance from them for the preservation of their own quiet and security. Since
therefore his Majesty saw by this Bull that there was a design to deprive his
Ancient Allies of their Dominions, and at pleasure to set up others in their
stead, he had just reason to fear that as the Spaniards had heretofore on such
pretenses possessed themselves of all the Countries to the Pyrenaean Hills, so
that in time they might pass them too, and descend into the Plains of France,
and so a dismal and destructive War might be rekindled between these powerful
Princes, to the great hazard and ruin of Christendom. Lastly, the Queen of
Navarr being a Feuditary of the Crown of France, and having great Possessions
in that Kingdom, was under the Protection of the Laws of it, and could not be
drawn out of it to Rome, either in Person, or by Proxy; no Subject of France
being bound to go to Rome; but if the Pope had any cause against them, he was
obliged to send Judges to determine upon the place even in those Cases that
came before him by Appeal. That therefore this Citation was against the
Majesty, Law, and Security of the Crown of France; and tended to the
diminishing of the esteem of that King and Kingdom. That if the Form of this
Proceeding were considered, what could be more contrary to the Civil Law than
to force a man out of his proper Court, and condemn him in another without any
hearing? For there are Laws, That no accused person shall be cited out of the
Limits of the Jurisdiction in which he lives, and that the Citation shall not
be obscure and perfunctory, but declared to the proper person, or to his
family. And the Constitution of Pope Boniface the Eighth, That Citations set up
in certain places of Rome should be of force, was recalled by Clement the
Fifth, and the Council of Venna, as hard and unjust, or at least mitigated; and
it was decreed that they should not be used, but when there was no safe coming
to the person accused: But in France, where the Queen of Navarr resides, it
cannot be pretended that there is no safe coming to her. And what can be more
contrary to Natural Equity than to condemn unheard? It is forbidden by the
Canons and Decrees of Councils, and there is a noble example of this in
Ammianus Marcellinus, where Pope Liberius, being urged by Constantius to
condemn Athanasius, chose rather to be banished, than to sentence him without
hearing. And in the Judgment against Sixtus the Third, who was accused of
Incest, Valentinian the Emperor observed the same method, and made him appear
and answer in a Synod before Fifty Bishops. For the same reason the Sentence of
Nicholas the First, against Lotharius the Son of St. Lewis, for having two
Wives, was thought void and null. Nor was this Sentence against the Queen of
Navarr of better force, because she was absent and unheard. That the Popes have
always shown that respect to Crowned heads, as to admonish them by their
Legates, before they decreed ought against them. So Alexander the Third sent
two Cardinals to Henry the Second into England, when he was accused of the
Death of Thomas a Becket A.B. of Canterbury, That he might purge himself before
them of this crime. So of late Clement the Seventh, did the like in the case of
Henry the Eighth, to whom he sent Cardinal Campeius. And if it were granted
that the Judgment were rightly passed, how could the Dominions of the Queen be
exposed for a prey, and given to the first Invader, they belonging to the King
as Lord of the Fee? Therefore the King believes that the Pope is deceived by
false reports, and instigated by the craft of his Ministers, who not regarding
the public peace, have drawn him from his natural goodness, to Counsels which
are dishonorable to his Holiness, and destructive to his Authority, and to
that of the Sea of Rome, tending to the alienating of the hearts of his friends
from him, and the disturbing of the Peace of Christendom. And his Majesty is
the more persuaded of the truth of this, because his Holiness so earnestly
espoused the Interest of Anthony the Husband of this Queen in his lifetime;
and endeavored to persuade King Philip to restore to him the Kingdom of
Navarr, or at least to give him the Island of Sardinia as an Equivalent. But
then there is nothing more offends the King than the considering that whereas
so many Kings, Princes, and Free States above Forty years since have defected
from the Sea of Rome, and committed the offense charged upon the Queen, and so
by the rule of Justice ought to be first punished as first offending; yet the
Pope has not proceeded in the same way, or with equal severity against any of
them; so that from hence it is clear that an occasion is sought by her enemies
to oppress and ruin her by surprise, whilst she is a Widow, her Children
Orphans, the King of France who ought to protect her being a Minor, and
disturbed by Civil Wars; and for this reason the King is the more obliged to
defend her from injury, and himself from contempt, seeing without acquainting
him with it, they have begun this Process against a Queen so nearly related to
him. That if this Accusation had been made on the account of Religion, and for
the Glory of God, the Pope ought in the first place to have shown his care of
her soul, and from the Word of God to have administered fitting Remedies, and
not to have proscribed her Kingdoms and Dominions, The Deposing of Princes, and
disposing of their Dominions, the cause of great Calamities.
and given them for a prey to the first Invader. The Pope has a Supremacy given
him, That he may consult the Salvation of Souls, and the repose of Christendom,
and not that he may deprive Princes of their Kingdoms, and dispose of their
possessions at his pleasure; which the former Popes have never been able to do
in Germany and other places, without bringing great reproach and dishonor on
the Church, and disturbances upon the World. That therefore the King desired
with the greatest humility that he could or ought, that the Sentence against
the Q. of Navarr should be revoked, and all the Pope's Ministers should be
inhibited from proceeding in this cause by a public Act; and if this were not
done, the King should be forced against his will to make use of the same
remedies his Ancestors had employed in the like cases, according to the Laws
and Rights of his Kingdom. But before all things he protested he should do this
unwillingly, and therefore they only should bear the blame who by their
rashness had forced him to use the power God had given him, in so just a cause,
and to implore the assistance of his friends against them.

There was at the same time distinct Memorials, and larger Instructions sent to
the French Ambassador for the Defense of the Bishops, The Bishops defended by
the King also.
and D'Oysel who was an active Minister, prevailed upon the Pope to have the
Proceedings against the Bishops stopped, and the Sentence against the Queen of
Navarr revoked and abolished. So that at this day it is not to be found amongst
the Constitutions of Pope Pius the Fourth. The 18th. of May there having been
no consideration had of the XXXIII. Articles put into the Council the 4th. of
January, The Queen complains of the Proceedings of the Council.
the Queen wrote to Lanssac her Ambassador, complaining very bitterly of the
delays and shifts which had been made in this business, and said that the hope
good men had hitherto had of the success of this Council, and the opinion of
their sincerity who met in it, would both vanish without any fruit, and their
dissimulation and connivance would more and more inflame the wrath of God
against us, who had now made it manifest unto all men that the affairs of the
Church needed a Reformation, and a severe correction; and to that purpose had
invited and brought together from all parts of the Earth, so many men famous
for their Piety and Learning to this Council; and if after all this he shall
see us still stubbornly resist his will; he will be necessitated to punish
those men who have hindered so good a work, and so necessary to the peace of the
Church: That therefore the King had wrote to the Cardinal of Lorrain to
assemble a Congregation of the French Clergy, and after a mature deliberation
had amongst themselves to demand earnestly of the Fathers of the Council that
these things might be considered and determined as soon as was possible. But
the Cardinal was by this time won over to the Pope's side, The Pope gained the
Cardinal of Lorrain to his side,
and was willing to sacrifice the safety of France, and the King's Will, to the
Interest of the former. In order to this he delayed the Execution of his Orders
from day to day; and at last that he might totally disappoint them, asked leave
of the King to go to Rome, believing the Kings Ambassadors would do nothing in
his absence. And not long after Lanssac obtained leave to return into France.
Who went to Rome.
The Cardinal of Lorrain went from Trent toward Rome the 18th of September,
and with him five of the French Bishops: But the other French Ambassadors did
nevertheless insist stoutly to have the Articles considered by the Council;
who, that they might elude this pursuit, made some Decrees which had some
respect to those things the French had desired, but which aimed at the granting
a Liberty and Immunity to the Clergy against all the Laws, Privileges,
Liberties, and Jurisdictions, and Lawful Authorities of all Kingdoms, States
and Princes; which being seen by La Ferriere and Du Faur the King's Ambassadors
at Trent they by their Master's Order opposed the said Decrees. The 27th. of
September, the King by a Letter having commanded his Ambassadors to insist upon
their first Demands; and to assure the Council, that as none of the Christian
Princes should exceed him in the fervor of true Piety, and a desire to promote
the Affairs of the Council, so if they still went on to cure the desperate
wounds of the Church with a light hand, or rather to plaster them over, and
conceal, than cure them, whilst they omitted the proper and most necessary
remedies, and instead of considering the Reformation of the Church, turned the
edge of their Authority against the Power of Princes, and the Decrees of
Councils, he would not have the Presence of his Ambassadors add Authority to
such unjust Decrees to the great prejudice of his Royal Dignity, and to the
Damage of the Liberties of his Kingdom. He said also that he had been informed
that the Council had entertained a design to declare the Marriage of Anthony de
Bourbon King of Navarr, and Joan his Queen unlawful, and to declare Henry his
Son a Bastard; and he commanded them not to be present at any such Act. Lastly,
he commanded them to repeat their former demands; and if the Fathers of the
Council would not grant them, then to leave Trent, and go to Venice, and stay
there till they had further Orders from him. He told them also that his
principal desire was by a serious Reformation of Church Affairs and manners,
(the corruptions in which had caused so many to make defection from the Church
of Rome) by the Authority of a General Council, to unite the divided minds of
men in the matters of Religion. That his Ambassadors and Proctors had often
treated with the Pope, and the Fathers of the Council about this; and to that
end had exhibited the said XXXIV. Articles, to which no satisfactory return had
been made, but on the contrary, they having lightly touched the business of
Reformation, had exercised an Authority which belonged not to them, against the
Rights, The Council has no Authority over Princes.
Liberties and Power of Sovereign Princes. That they neither could nor ought to
inquire into the Civil Administration, which was not subject to their Court,
nor to derogate from those Constitutions and Customs which had been long
enjoyed by Princes; nor to Anathematize Kings; all which things tended to
Sedition, and the interruption of the public Peace: That he would not suffer
that Authority which he had received from his Ancestors to be weakened by their
unjust censures. Yea, he commanded them to tell the Fathers, That if they
presumed any more to undermine the Authority of Kings, and the Prerogatives of
their Betters, that they should then also protest against their proceeding, and
leave Trent: Advising the Bishops and Divines of France, who were in the
Council to promote the Reformation of Religion as much as was possible for the
good of his divided Kingdom, and to that end to stay still at Trent. But then
the King did trust to their wisdom and conscience, that they would not approve
of by their presence, or consent to any thing which was prejudicial to the
Royal Authority, Prerogative or Dignity of the King or Kingdom of France. But
however the Council still persisting in their former Methods, La Ferriere came
into the Council, and made a sharp Oration against the Pope and the Council.
Polano Page 721.
in his History of the Council of Trent, has the sum of this Oration; and
Thuanus says it was pronounced the 22d. of September. But however, I will not
trouble the Reader with it here, because of its great length; this Oration
pleased none of the Fathers; the French themselves not excepted, because he set
Princes as the Ministers of God, above the Anathema's of the Clergy, and made
both their persons and revenues subject to the Laws and Authority of Kings;
telling them too plainly of their great prevarications, obstinacy and
unwillingness to reform, or be reformed.

But however, all the Fathers could do, was to bring the Faith of the
Ambassadors in question, which they soon discussed by producing their
Instructions. This failing, they cavell'd at the parts of the Oration, and
endeavored to pervert the sense and meaning of it; so that Ferriere was forced
to publish an Apology for it. And soon after this they mended the matter by a
sharper Oration, in which amongst other things they told the Council plainly,
The Ambassadors of France put a severet Protestation into the Council.
That Hadrian the Sixth was in the right when he told the world, That what care
soever was taken of the lower members of the Church, that body could not be
restored to its health, if the Head also (the Pope) were not reformed. Toward
the end they said, They protested only against Pius the Fourth; They Venerated
the Apostolic See, the great Pontiff, the Holy Church of Rome, for the
increase of whose Dignity their Ancestors had so often shed their blood, and of
late had fought in France; but it was against the Sovereignty of Pius the
Fourth, that they protested; all whose Decrees and Sentences they refused and
despised; and seeing there was nothing done at Trent, but all was dispatched at
Rome; and what was here published, was rather the Dictates of Pius the Fourth,
than the Decrees of a General Council; they denounced and testified, That
whatever was decreed in that Convention, or should hereafter be decreed or
published, they being only the Decrees moved by Pius the Fourth, they should
not be approved by the Most Christian King, nor the French, nor be taken for
the Acts of a General Council. And then commanded all their Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots and Divines to return into France till God should restore to
the Catholic Church the ancient form and liberty belonging of right to General
Councils, and to the Most Christian King his just Rights. Thuanus says, he can
hardly believe this Oration was made, though he finds it Printed in the
Commentaries of Jacques de Bourdin Secretary of State. But however it shows the
sense great men had of the Council of Trent, at that time when it was best
understood.

A little before this time the Emperor being about leaving Inspruck, The
Emperor opposes the intended Proceedings of the Council against Queen
Elizabeth.
discovered that they consulted at Rome and Trent about proceeding against
Queen Elizabeth of England; and he wrote to the Pope and the Legates, that if
the Council would not yield that fruit which was desired that they might see an
Union of Catholics to reform the Church; yet at least they should not give
occasion to Heretics to unite themselves more, which they would do in case
they proceeded against the Queen of England. For undoubtedly they would then
make a General League against the Catholics, which would be the cause of great
Inconveniences. We may see by this how hardly this Holy Council was kept from
giving the world a Cast of its office in deposing Princes, and disposing of
their Dominions, and absolving their Subjects from their Allegiance; though we
are now told, this is none of the Doctrines of that Church; but however, it is
undoubtedly her practice. This Admonition was so effectual that the Pope
desisted at Rome, and revoked the Commission given to that purpose to the
Legates at Trent.

When the French Ambassadors had put these two Rubs in the way of the Council,
The French Ambassadors leave Trent, and go to Venice.
they retired, as the King their Master had before commanded them, to Venice;
and gave an account of what they had done to the Cardinal of Lorrain at Rome,
and to the King of France; this last approved it, but the former having made
his private Market with the Pope, who extremely flattered this proud,
turbulent, vainglorious Prelate, was very much displeased with what the French
Ambassadors had done in his absence at Trent. But when he came there and found
the Ambassadors were supported by the King, and that there was no fetching them
back from Venice till the things proposed by the Council were revoked, he
persuaded the Legates to compound the difference, and the Infallible Council
laid by these Decrees which displeased the Crown of France, and passed only a
general Decree against the Violaters of the Ecclesiastical privileges and
Immunities in the Twenty fifth Session. This was the last Session of this
Council, The last Seffion of the Council of Trent.
and was held the fifth and sixth of December. In it was determined the points
concerning Purgatory, the Invocation of Saints, the Worship of Images and
Relics, the Prohibition of Duels, and all that pertain'd to the Reformation
of the Manners of the Clergy. All that had been done under Paul the Third,
Julius the Third, and two Years before this, in this Convention were then also
ratified and confirmed. And the Pope was desired to approve the same, and so
the Council was dismissed with Acclamations. The Pope made a grave Oration in a
Conclave of the Cardinals, and giving God unfeigned thanks that the Council was
ended, he commended the Emperor, the Apostolic Legates and the Bishops; and
said, Though he was tree from the obligation of all Laws, yet he would cause
these to be exactly and inviolably preserved, and if any thing was omitted he
would supply it. The Protestant Ministers of Germany at the same time put out a
Protestation against this Council, subscribed by many of them.

Thus ended the Council of Trent, The censure of the Council.
which was desired and procured by Godly men to reunite the Church which began
to be divided, but has so established the Schism, and made the parties so
obstinate, that the discords are become irreconcilable. And being intended by
Princes for the reformation of the Ecclesiastical Discipline, has caused the
greatest corruption and deformation that ever was since Christianity began: The
Bishops hoped to regain the Episcopal Authority, usurped for the most part by
the Pope; and it has made them lose it altogether, bringing them into greater
servitude. On the contrary it was feared and avoided by the Sea of Rome as a
potent means to moderate their exorbitant power, which from small beginnings
mounted by diverse degrees to an unlimited excess; and it has so established
and confirmed the same over that part which remains subject unto it; that it
was never so great, nor so soundly rooted. Thus far Polano.

The Emperor who was come as far as Inspruck to promote the Council, The
Emperor goes from Inspruck before the Council was ended.
finding that his being there did not only no good, as he thought it would, but
rather the contrary; the Popish Prelates suspecting his designs were against
the Authority of the Court of Rome, and were accordingly afraid of every thing,
so that the Difficulties and Suspicions did turn into bitterness, and increase
in number. Therefore having other business which would turn more to his
Advantage, he left that place and returned home; but he wrote first to the
Cardinal of Lorrain, His sense of the Council.
That the Impossibility of doing good in the Council being palpable, he thought
it was the duty of a Christian and wise Prince, rather to support the present
evil with patience, than by laboring to cure it, to cause a greater. By which
he seems to mean that any enormities were to be endured from the Sea of Rome
rather than to forsake it, and so correct them.

The Catholic Princes being blinded and misled by their Education, The Reasons
why the Council had no better success.
and not understanding that the right of calling Councils was in themselves, as
it was of old in the Christian Emperors, who called all the Ancient General
Councils, thought that they should by force of Arguments and modesty, extort
some Reformation from them, but when they saw they could not agree amongst
themselves what was absolutely necessary, France and the Empire asking more
than King Philip was willing to admit, and the Pope being as stoutly resolved
whatever happened not to suffer his Power, Grandeur or Wealth to be abated.
Lastly, when they all saw that the Protestants would never submit to any
Council that was called and managed by the Pope or his Legates, they all became
weary of it, and desired it might be ended as soon as was possible, and any way
to deliver themselves from the charge, trouble, and vexation of this
unprofitable, or rather mischievous Conventicle.

But then as to the Roman Catholics of this Age, who would fain persuade us
that nothing was amiss; that there was no need of any Reformation; that all the
differences arose from misrepresenting the Doctrines and Practices of the
Church of Rome; and that this Council was one of the most holy Assemblies of
Learned, Impartial and Religious men that ever sat. These I say are a a
pleasant parcel of Gentlemen, and presume that we are as ignorant of, and
unconcerned for the Histories of former times, as those who profess to be led
by an implicit faith in all they have the confidence to teach them; which is a
great mistake.

From this day forward the Protestants renounced all commerce and friendship
with the Church of Rome; and she has by this Council put her self out of the
power of a Reconciliation; so that now the Quarrel is put entirely into the
hands of God, and all humane wisdom is baffled for ever. Time, the Sword, or
the Providence of God may perhaps at last put an end to it, but no Counsel or
Device of men ever shall.

I should here have ended this Continuation, The State of Religion in Piedmont.
but that I have been forced to leave some things unspoken to continue the
thread of my Relation, which I will now go back to and gather up, that the
Story may be the more complete and perfect. Whilst the Council was sitting,
the Cardinal of Ferrara traveling through Piedmont and Savoy, found the
Affairs of that Country as to Religion not much other than in France. In diverse
places of the Marquisate of Saluzza, all the Priests were hunted away; and in
Cherie and Cuni, places belonging to the Duke of Savoy, and in many other
Cities near unto them, many were of the same opinions with the Hugonots, and
many even in the Duke's Court also did profess them, and more were discovered
every day. And however the Duke had set forth a Proclamation a Month before;
That all that followed those opinions should within eight days depart out of
the Country, and some did thereupon depart, yet afterward he commanded there
should be no proceedings against them, and pardoned many who were condemned by
the Inquisition, and made their Process void, as also those who were in the
Inquisition, and not condemned; and gave leave to some that were departed to
return.

About the same time there happened a great tumult, and popular commotion in
Bavaria, because the Cup was not allowed, nor Married men suffered to preach; A
Tumult in Bavaria for the Cup.
which disorder proceeded so far, that to appease them, the Duke promised in
the Diet, That if in all the Month of June a resolution were not made in the
Council of Trent, or by the Pope, to give them satisfaction, he himself would
grant both the one and the other. The news of this coming to the Council, the
Legates dispatched Nicholas Ormonet to persuade the Duke not to make that
Grant. To whom the Duke replied, That to show his obedience to the Apostolic
See, he would use all means to entertain his people as long as he could,
expecting and hoping that the Council would resolve that which they saw to be
necessary, notwithstanding the Resolution made before by it. Reasons against
granting Marriage to the Clergy.
But the Council had good reason to deny this last, because (say they) it is
plain that Married Priests will turn their affections and love to their Wives
and Children; and by consequence to their House and Country, and so that strict
dependence which the Clergy has on the Apostolic See, would cease; and to
grant Marriage to Priests would destroy the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and make
the Pope to be a Bishop of Rome only. And in another place they tell us that
having House, Wife and Children, they (the Clergy) will not depend on the Pope,
but on their Prince; and their love to their Children, will make them yield to
any prejudice of the Church; and they will seek to make the Benefices
Hereditary, and so in a short space the Authority of the Apostolic See will be
co^fined within Rome. Before Single Life was instituted, the Sea of Rome
received no profit from other Nations and Cities; and by it, is made Patron of
many Benefices, And the Cup to the Laity.
of which the Marriage of the Clergy would quickly deprive her: And that all
would become Heretics if the Cup were granted to the Laity, and so a gap would
be opened to demand the Abrogation of all positive Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, by which only the Prerogative given by Christ to the Church of
Rome, is preserved; for by those which are of Divine appointment, no profit
does arise, but that which is spiritual: So that the Princes who expected any
redress from them were in a fine case.

Camden in his History of Queen Elizabeth assures us, The French Affairs after
the Peace till the end of the Council.
the true reason why the Prince of Conde clapped up this Peace upon such easy
and disadvantageous terms, was because he had been deluded by the Queen with
the vain hopes of succeeding his Brother the King of Navarr, as General of all
the Forces of France; and that he should marry the Queen of Scotland too, which
he afterward refused.

The English were then possessed of Havre de Grace, The Siege of Havre de Grace.
and had a Garrison in it; and now both the Protestants and the Roman
Catholics united their Forces to deprive them of it, without repaying any of
the Money the Queen had expended in the War, or considering what need they
might after have of that Princess's protection and assistance. Both parties on
the contrary protest, That if the English do not forthwith restore that place,
they should forfeit their Right to Calais, which was reserved to them by the
Treaty of Cambray; and when this would not do, they proclaimed a War against
the English in France the 7th. of July; which was returned them by the English
till they should restore Calais. The Earl of Warwick who was then Governor of
Havre de Grace, finding the French well disposed to betray the English in that
Town into the hands of their Countrymen, and that they had entered into a
Conspiracy to that purpose with the Rhinegrave, who lay not far off with some
German Forces: He thereupon turned all the French both Protestants and Papists
out of the Town without any difference, and seized upon all their Ships. The
French thereupon (without ever reflecting on their own Conspiracy against the
English) began a loud complaint, That the English came not to protect the
French in their distresses, but to get the possession of the Town, dealing with
them not as with Brethren, but as Foreigners. And hereupon the French resolved
to take this place upon any terms from the English; and the King sent a Trumpet
to the Governor to demand the Town; who returned for an Answer, That if the
King of Spain would pass his word that Calais should be restored according to
the Treaty of Cambray, at the time by it appointed; and that the King of
France, the Queen Mother, and the Princes of the Blood Royal, would confirm the
same by their Oaths, and Register it in all the Parliaments of France, and then
give them Hostages of the Prime Nobility of France, he would then deliver up
the Town. This being rejected, the 22d. of July, Montmorency the Constable took
the field, all things being by that time prepared to reduce it by force. The
next day they summoned the Town again. Warwick replied, he would suffer death
rather than deliver up the place without the Queen's knowledge. The Protestants
fight against the English.
His Messenger whom he sent with this Answer happened to meet one Money a
Protestant French Captain, with whom he had been familiarly acquainted in the
Siege of Roan, to whom he said, He much wondered to see the Protestants of
France, who were of the same Religion with the English, and for whose relief
they came into France, in the Camp against them. Le Money replied, As you fight
for your Queen so we for our King; the contest is now for our Country, and
Religion is no way concerned. The business of Religion is now determined and
settled by the King's Edict once for all; and therefore you, Sir, are not to
wonder if of Friends we are suddenly become your Enemies, and resolved to
destroy you if you do not deliver up the place to the King. When the Earl of
Warwick heard this he sent presently into England for Supplies. There was then
a Plague in the Town which discouraged the English more than all their Enemies
without. There came some Ships with Relief from Eugland, but the Plague
continuing, the Queen to preserve so many brave men, gave order to the Earl of
Warwick to surrender the place, upon as Honorable Terms as he could get. The
28th. of July the Articles were Signed; the next day there came sixty Ships,
and 1800 men to the Relief of the place, but it was too late; so the English
that remained, Havre de Grate surrendered to the French.
were sent on Board the Fleet, who had the misfortune to carry this Plague with
them into England, and within one year there died in London only, A Plague in
London.
21530 persons of this Disease. There was so much joy in France for the
recovery of this small place, that the Chancellor of France said openly, That
now the most malicious must needs confess, That the granting Liberty of
Conscience had at once delivered France from a most destructive Civil War,
united the Princes of the Blood Royal, and enabled them to recover too what had
been seized by their Enemies during the War, and that chiefly by the help of
the Protestants, who before were so dreadful to them, whilst they fought for
their Religion.

The Queen, to cut off all pretenses to the Guardianship of the King, by the
advice of the Chancellor, Charles the Ninth declared out of His Minority by the
Parliament of Roan.
resolved to have him declared out of his Minority by the Parliament of Roan;
pursuant to a Constitution of Charles the Fifth King of France, made in the
year 1373, though he had then entered only into the Fourteenth year of his age;
which was accordingly done the 19th. of August; when he declared again, That he
was resolved not to suffer his Edicts to be disputed by his Subjects, as had
been done during his Minority; and especially the last, for the peace of
Religion, which he was resolved to make all his Subjects obey, till it was
otherwise settled by a Council. This Decree met with some opposition from the
Parliament of Paris, which pretends to be the Supreme Court of that Kingdom;
and said, they ought to have had the honor of declaring the King of Age, and
no other, which was soon overruled.

The desire I had to prosecute the Affairs of France, The Scotch Affairs in
1562.
and the Story of the Council of Trent, has kept me from mentioning Scotland
and its Affairs; so that I am behind hand with that Kingdom two years. In the
beginning of the year 1562, Mary Queen of the Scots, took her Progress toward
the North: At Sterling she was Petitioned by certain Commissioners of the
Church for the Abolishing of the Mass, and other Superstitious Rites of the
Roman Religion, the punishing Blasphemy, the contempt of the Word of God, the
Profanation of the Sacraments, the Violation of the Sabbath, Adultery,
Fornication, and other like Vices condemned by the Word of God, but not
punishable by the Laws of Scotland. That all Suits for Divorce should be
remitted to the Judgment of the Church; or at least, trusted to men of good
knowledge and conversation; and that Popish Churchmen might be excluded from
places in the Session and Council. This Petition being read by the Queen, she
replied, That she would do nothing to the prejudice of the Religion she
professed, and that she hoped before a year was expired to have the Mass and
Catholic Profession restored through the whole Kingdom. And so in a rage
turned her back and left them.

In January 1563. John Hamilton Archbishop of St. And 1563.
Andrews was committed to the Castle of Edinburgh, for saying and hearing Mass;
the Abbot also of Corsragnal, John Hamilton Archbishop of St. Andrews committed
for hearing Mass.
and Prior of Withern, had the same treatment; and diverse Priests and Monks
were censured for the same cause. The Scots thought by these Severities to
terrify the Queen into a compliance with their Religion. And it is certain
that in a Parliament held at Edinburgh in May this year she passed many Acts in
favor of the Reformation. However certain it is, some of the Protestants made
her an ill requital: For in August following, certain of the Queens Family
remaining in the Palace of Edinburgh called Holy-Rood House, and having a
Priest to attend them, and perform the Romish Service in the Chapel, diverse of
the Inhabitants of Edinburgh, out of curiosity or devotion resorting thither,
great offense was taken at it, and the Preacher began to complain of it as a
disorder. Whereupon some of the Citizens went thither to see if it were so;
these being denied Admittance, they forced the Gates of the Queens Palace; took
several of those who were there assembled and carried them to prison; the
Priest and some few others escaping by a Postern, or Backdoor. This Uproar was
very great, and yet it was related to the best advantage to the Queen, who was
then out of Town; she was very much incensed, as she had good reason, against
these Zealots; and swore she would shortly make them Examples of her Royal
Indignation. The Earls of Murray and Glencarne however wisely interposed and
appeased her anger for the present. Soon after John Knox was called before the
Council, John Knox called before the Council for Sedition.
and charged as the only Author of this Insolent Sedition, and likewise for
stirring up the people by his Circular Letters to Tumults, whenever he thought
fit. He answered, That he was never a Preacher of Rebellion, nor loved to stir
up Tumults; contrariwise he always taught the People to obey their Magistrates
and Princes in God. As to the Convocation of the Subjects, he had received from
the Church a Command to advertise his Brethren when he saw a necessity of their
Meeting, especially if he saw Religion to be in peril: And had often desired to
be discharged of that burden, but still was refused. Then speaking to the
Queen with wonderful boldness: His bold Answer.
He charged her in the name of Almighty God, as she desired to escape his heavy
wrath and indignation, to forsake that Idolatrous Religion which she professed,
and by her power maintained against all the Statutes of the Realm. He was going
on when the Earl of Morton, then Chancellor of Scotland, fearing the Queen
might be yet more exasperated against all the Protestants of her Kingdom, by
his indiscreet zeal, commanded him to hold his peace and go away. After this,
things were carried more peaceably between the Queen and the Church, the Earl
of Murray making it his business to propound their Petitions to her, and to
return her Answers to them.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE Principal Matters Contained in this HISTORY.
A.
ADiaphorists, who, Page 478, 481. Adolph Count Schawenburg is made Archbishop
of Cologne by the Pope, 417. Enters upon the Resignation of the Archbishop,
418. His first Mass, 457. Makes his public Entry into Cologne, 499. He leaves
Trent, 543. He makes a League with the House of Burgundy, 560. Adrian succeeds
Leo X. 50. Sends a Legate to the Diet of Nuremberg, 54. And a Breve to
Frederick, Ibid. Writes a long Letter to the States assembled at Nuremberg, 55.
And to Private Persons against Luther, 56. As also to the Senate of Strasburg,
Ibid. An account of his Life, Ibid. He is chosen Pope, 57. Writes to the
College of Cardinals, Ibid. And to the People of Rome, Ibid. Goes to Rome,
Ibid. His Instructions to the Diet at Nuremberg, 58. Desires an Answer to them,
60. Dies, 66. Agricola, vide Islebius. Aix, Parliament of Aix make a Cruel
Decree against the Waldenses, 343. Albert of Brandenburg, Bishop of Mentz and
Magdeburg, 2. Luther writes to him. Vide Luther. Is made Cardinal, 4. His
Speech to the Electors at Frankfort, 14. He Proclaims Charles the Fifth's
Election, 18. Answers Luther 's Letter kindly, 31. Makes a Speech to Charles
the Fifth, 37. Is concerned in the Ban by which Luther was Proscribed, 49.
Sends Ambassadors to the Protestants at Smalcald, 153. Dies, 354. Albert of
Brandenburg, Grand Master of the Teutonick Order, wars with Sigismund King of
Poland, 99. Demands Succors from Germany, Ibid. Swears Allegiance to
Signismund, Ibid. Marries and is made Duke of Prussia, Ibid. What he did is
rescinded by the Emperor, 139. He is Proscribed, 161. He assists Osiander, and
Banishes those Ministers who refuse his Doctrine, 511. Albert Marquis of
Brandenburg assists Duke Maurice, 417. He keeps Rochlitz, 420. Is taken
Prisoner by the Duke of Saxony, Ibid. Set at liberty, 428. Goes into France to
mediate a League between the French King and Duke Maurice, 549. His Declaration
of War against the Emperor, 551. He joins D. Maurice and the Landgrave 's Son,
555. He wastes the Country about Ulm, 556. He is very cruel to the Norembergers,
561. Fines the Bishops of Bamberg and Wurtzburg, 562. Makes Peace with the
Norembergers, Ibid. He writes to the City of Ulm to yield to him, 563. He
deserts the Confederates, and wars in his own Name, 567. Breaks in upon the
Bishops of Mentz and Triers, Ibid. Demands his chief Castle of the Bishop of
Triers, Ibid. He falls upon the Bishops upon the Rhine, 571. His Demands of the
Strasburgers, Ibid. He besieges Frankfort, 572. Makes War against the Bishops
of Mentz and Spire, Ibid. And robs the Churches of those Bishoprics, 573. Is
received at Triers, Ibid. Marches into Luxemburg, 574. Makes a Peace with the
Emperor, 575. Beats the French at Pont a Mousson, Ibid. Complains to the
Franconian Bishops, 577. Refuses an Accommodation at Heidelberg, and declares
War against the Bishops of Franconia, 578. Takes Bamberg, and spoils the
Country, Ibid. Makes War upon Duke Maurice, 581. War is declared against him,
Ib. His Answer to their Declaration, 584. His Territories are invaded, Ibid. He
is routed by D. Maurice, 585. Writes a Letter to D. Maurice 's Subjects, 586.
Renews the War against the D. of Brunswick, 591. Is routed by him, Ibid. He
retires toward France, 592. He is Proscribed, 594. Sues in vain to have it
taken off, 595. He Remonstrates to the Diet of Ausburg against the
Norembergers, 599. By continuing the War he is at last Outed of all, 601. Goes
into France, 604. Writes to the Diet at Frankfort, Ibid. Albert Count Mansfield
goes against Muncer's Rabble, 84. He routs them, Ibid. Albert of Brunswick
killed, 404. Albertus Magnus, vide Aquinas. Aleander (Hieronymus) sent against
Luther to Frederick by the Pope, 38. Made a Cardinal, 39. Alexander de Medicis
recovers Florence, 132. is killed by his Kinsman Lorenzo Medicis, 209. Alaski
sent by Ferdinand Ambassador to Solomon, 270. Imprisoned by him, 271. Aloisia
Mother to Francis I. writes to Pope Clement during his Captivity, 98. Makes a
League with Henry the VIII. 102. Amstorfius, vide John Frederick Elector of
Saxony. Anabaptists, their Original, 110. Their Doctrines at Munster, 190.
Their Book called the Restitution, 196. Their Supper, Ibid. their 28 Apostles,
Ibid. Who were all Executed, 197. They write to the Landgrave, 198. Their
Hellish Doctrines, Ibid. Their Book of the Mysteries of Christ, 199. Angelical
Doctor, vide Aquinas. Anne Boleyne Wife to Hen. VIII. Beheaded, 208. Anthony D.
of Lorrain forbids his Subjects to read Luther 's Books, 75. Defeats the Boors
in his Country, 81. Kills 18000 of them, Ibid. Of which many after Promise of
Life was granted, Ibid. He negotiates a Peace between the Emperor and French
King in vain, 320. Dies, 327. Antinomians, their Original, 244. Apparition of
Ghosts frequent in the times of Popery, 172. Aquinas (Tho.) chiefly quoted to
prove Indulgences, 3. Studied at Cologne and Paris. 4. Scholar to Albertus
Magnus, Ibid. Sainted by Pope John XXII, Ibid. Dies, An. 1274. Ibid. Called
Angelical Doctor, Ibid. Arbitrators, Elector of Mentz, and Prince Palatine
chosen to mediate between the Protestant Princes, and the Emperor, 154. Their
Answer to the Prince's Propositions, 158. Aristotle better used by the Lovain
Doctors than Luther, 29. Arnstadt, a Town in Thuringia, a Convention of
Protestants there, 251. Arras, vide Anthony Perenot Granvell. D'Avalos (Ferd.)
Marquess of Pescara, heartens the Imperialists to Fight at Pevia, 79. Accuses
the French King, 295. Augsburg a Diet there, 4. The Diet at Ausburg removed to
Spire, 97. They embrace the Protestant Religion, 109. Commissioners to frame a
Decree there, 135. The Tenor of it, Ibid. The Decree of that Diet, 139. They
publish a Book against the Ecclesiastics, 212. They promise to lend no more
money to the Emperor, 389. They capitulate with the Emperor, 418. A Diet called
to Ausburg, 435. It is an Armed Diet, 437. It is opened, Ibid. A Decree there
about a free Council, 467. Another Armed Diet at Augsburg, 499. The Decree of
the Diet about a Council, 512. Their Divines examined of a sudden by Granvell,
and sent out of Germany, 516. Is surrendered to D. Maurice and the Confederate
Princes, 555. Great Contests about Religion in the Diet, 621. The Allegations
of the Papists against the Protestants, 622. The Decree of the Diet, 626.
Augsburg (Cardinal of) vindicates himself, 633. Augustane Confession read to
Charles the Fifth, 129. Oppugned by the Popish Divines, 130. Augustine Monks at
Wittemberg forbear saying Mass, 49. Two Augustine Friars examined at Brussels,
63. Burnt, 64. Augustus succeeds his Brother Maurice in the Electorate of
Saxony, 587. Calls a Convention of his States; what is their Answer to his
Proposals, Ibid. Refuses to appear at the Diet of Ausburg, 612. Austrian
Nobility Petition Ferdinand for Liberty of Conscience, 285. They renew their
Instances, 287. They Address again, 628. Their Reply to Ferdinand 's Answer,
630. Ferdinand 's Answer to their Reply, 632.
B
BAden, a Disputation there of both Parties of Switzers, 105. The Points
disputed of, Ibid. Bamberg (Wigand Bishop of) Quarrels with the Elector of
Brandenburg, 152. Barbarossa the Turkish Admiral takes Castlenovo, 251. Lies
with his Fleet at Thoulon, 314. He Besieges the Castle of Nizza, Ibid. When he
could not take it, he retires to Thoulon, 316. As he retires from Thoulon,
makes sad ravages in Italy, 326. Barnes (Rich.) Burnt at London, 269. Basil-
Council asserted the Superiority of Councils to a Pope, 10. Occolampadius
Preaches there, 76. Great Dissentions about Religion, 116. Images broken down
and burnt upon Ash Wednesday, 117: Mass abolished there, Ibid. The Form of the
safe Conduct which was granted at the Council of Basil, 539. Bavaria, the Dukes
oppose the Election of Ferdinand King of the Romans, 158. The D. of Bavaria
intercedes for the D. of Brunswick, 307. Beaton (David) Cardinal, Archbishop
of St. Andrews killed, 382. Becken (Otho) gives the Landgrave of Hesse an
Account of a Confederacy of the German Princes, 114. Beghardi, vide Picards.
Belgrade, vide Solomon. Bellay (Sieur de Langey) sent by K. Francis to
Smalcald, 183. His Speech to the Protestants there, Ibid. Dies, 309. S.
Bernard, his Letter to P. Eugenius, 24. Bern, the Cantons of Bern desire a
Public Dispute at Bern, 110. They Publish Theses of Disputation. 111. There is
a Disputation held, Ibid. They abolish Popery, 112. They join with the
Zurichers to stop Provisions to the other Cantons, 155. They are slack in
sending the Zurichers Relief, 156. Bichling (Count) condemned to die for siding
with the French, 326. Is pardoned, Ibid. Blancer (Ambrose) disputes at Bern,
111. Preaches up the Reformed Religion at Constance, 112. Leaves his Monastery,
Ibid. Assists Bucer in constituting a Protestant Church at Ulm. 149. Bohemians
Communicate in both Kinds, 26. Their Suppression consulted about in the Fourth
Lateran Council, 27. Sects amongst them, 53. They invade Saxony unwillingly,
408. They return Home, 409. They refuse to Fight against the Elector of Saxony,
417. The Nobility of Prague desire a Convention to be called, 420. A League
amongst them, Ibid. They Write to Ferdinand and Duke Maurice, 423. They Write
to the Moravians to defend their Liberties, 424. They Write to Ferdinand,
interceding for the Duke of Saxony, 425. And prepare for War. Ibid. They stand
by the Duke of Saxony, 426. They promise to comply, 427. Pope Boniface the 8th.
appointed a Jubilee every 100 Years, 9. Book Printed in French against the
Hucksters of Sacred things, 178. An Account of it, Ibid. Boors rise in Swaben,
76. Are quieted, Ibid. Rise again there, 79. Publish their Demands, Ibid. They
treat with the Deputies of the Empire at Ulm. 80. They are Routed by George
Truchses at Lippen, Ibid. The Boors in Algow disperse themselves, Ibid. They
Rise in Franconia, Ibid. Killed Count Helfenstein at Winsperg, Ibid. Are Routed
by Truchses, 81. He punishes those who killed Count Helfenstein, Ib. Another
body takes Wirtzburg, Ibid. Are Routed by Truchses, Ibid. Up in Lorrain. Ibid.
There Defeated. Ibid. And every where else in Germany, Ibid. Many killed
Treacherously, after Promise of Life, Ibid. The demands of the Boors in
Schwabia, 90. Bourbon, vide Charles D. of Bourdeaux, a Sedition there, 474.
Quelled and the Inhabitants Punished Severely, 475. Brandenburg (Duke of)
Appeals to a General Council from the Bishop of Bamberg. 152. Brandenburg
(Elector,) vide Joachim; the Marquesses of Brandenburg act against the
Protestants, 376. Bremer's Answer to the Proposals made to them by the Princes,
502. Brentius (John) in great Distress at Hall about the Interim, 461. Received
by the D. of Wirtemberg, 462. He draws up a Confession of the Divines in the
Duchy, and is esteemed by the Duke, 515. Bruly (Peter) Preaches the Reformed
Religion in the Netherlands, 341. Is seized upon at Tournay, Ibid. The
Protestants in Germany intercede for him, Ibid. He is Examined, 342. Burnt.
Ibid. Brunswick (Hen. D. of) hot against the Protestants, 239. His Letters to
the Bishop of Mentz and Eldo, intercepted by the Landgrave, 246. He Quarrels
with the Elector of Saxony, 247. Accuses the Protestants, 267. Hires
Incendiaries to burn some Towns in Saxony, 275. Who is accused of it to the
Emperor, Ibid. He is thrown out by the Saxon, and the Landgrave, 298. Appeals
to the Imperial Chamber, 304. Protestants in the Diet of Spire, 319. The Story
of the Dukes Mistress, Eve Trottine, 322. He answers the Caluninies of the
Confederates, 323. His Country sequestered into the Emperor's Hands, 326. He
cheats the French King of his Money, 351. His Duchy sequestered to the Emperor,
352. He is Obstinate, Ib. Raises an Army, 352. Makes great spoil in the Duchy
of Brunswick, Ibid. Is opposed by the Landgrave, 353. Emploies D. Maurice to
Mediate for him, Ibid. Breaks the Truce, Ibid. Fights the Landgrave, 354.
Surrenders at Discretion, Ibid, Offers to betray the Popish Councils to the
Landgrave, 388. Is set at Liberty, and goes to the Emperor at Hall, 432.
Commences his Actions against the Landgrave in the Imperial Chamber, 474.
Besieges Brunswick, 500. Outed of his Country by Volrat Count Mansfield, 576.
Complains of it to the Emperor at Metz. Ibid. Leagues with Maurice, 578.
Plagues his Westphalian Neighbors, 579. Routs Albert, 591. Besieges Brunswick,
593. Makes an Agreement with John Frederick D. of Saxony, Ibid. Prosecutes the
War in Albert 's Country, 594. Raises Money from the Cities in the lower
Saxony, 602. Bucer (Mart.) meets Luther at Marpurg, 121. Endeavors to unite
Luther and Zuinglius, 141. Constitutes a Church at Ulm, 149. Goes to Cologne at
Gropper's Invitation, 288. Is kindly received by the Bishop, Ibid. Preaches at
Bon, 310. Is opposed by the Clergy of Cologne, 311. Opposes Malvenda about
Justification at Ratisbon, 359. Goes from the Conference, Ibid. Is sent for to
Ausburg, 454. Rejects the Interim, 457. Goes into England, 479. And dies at
Cambridge, 513. Buda Besieged by Ferdinand, 284. Taken by Solomon by a Trick,
285. Budaeus (Will.) dies, 269. Bull de Coena Domini, what, 42. Bull (Golden)
what, 19. Buren (Maximilian Count of) comes to assist the Emperor, 397. He
joins the Emperor, 403. Takes Darmstadt, 414. And Frankfort upon Composition,
Ibid. Dies, 478.
C
CAden (Mich.) sends an Account to Nuremberg of their Ambassadors being
confined at Piacenza, 125. Presents a Protestant Book to Charles, ibid. For
which he is in danger, ibid. But makes his Escape, ibid. Caesar (Leonard) Burnt
for Religion, 110. Calvin (John) Preaches at Strasburg, 241. Answers Cardinal
Farnese 's Speech against the Protestants, 266. Writes an Antidote against the
Sorbon Doctors, and a Book of Relics, 314. Is expelled Geneva, 616. Campegio
(Cardinal) goes to Nuremberg, 66. Writes to the Elector Frederick Duke of
Saxony, 67. His Speech to the Princes of the Empire, 68. His Reply to their
Answer, 69. His Answer to the Deputies from Strasburg, 73. makes a Speech at
the Diet at Worms, 271. Capua (Nich.) Archbishop of Capua against Reformation,
238. Sends a Copy of the Draught into Germany, ibid. Caracciolus (Martinus)
sent to Frederick by the Pope against Luther, 38. Made a Cardinal, 39.
Cardinal. The Delegate Cardinals draw a Model of Reformation, 233. The
Cardinals at the Council of Trent answer Mendoza 's Speech, 360. Carolostadius
(Andrew) disputes with Eckius at Leipzick, 22. Pulls down Images at Wittemberg,
52. Goes over to the Enthusiasts, ibid. Writes against Luther about the
Eucharist, 97. Excuses himself from being engaged with the Boors, ibid. Begs
Luther 's Protection, ibid. Capnio, vide Reuchlin. Cajetan (Tho. Card.) sent by
Pope Leo to the Diet at Ausburg, 4. Exhorts the Princes of the Empire to defend
it against Selymus the Turk, ibid. Treats with Luther at Ausburg, 7. Commands
Stupits to treat privately with Luther, 8. Exclaims against the Council of
Constance in the Council of Lateran, 10. Writes to Frederick, complaining
against Luther, ibid. Publishes Leo 's Bull at Lintz, 12. Sends it to the
Bishops of Germany, ibid. Exasperated the Breach of Luther, 24. Casa (John)
Archbishop of Beneventum, the Pope's Legate at Venice, 475. Writes in defense
of Sodomy, 477. Prince Casimir of Brandenburg raises Troops upon Charles the
Fifth's Election, for his Service, 18. Catharinus (Ambrosius) writes in defense
of the Pope's Supremacy against Luther, 40. Catharine of Austria Wife to Henry
the Eight, dies, 202. Catharine de Medicis Married to Henry the second of
France, 168. Chabot Brian (Philip) Admiral of France Condemned, 272. Restored,
277. Chamber (Imperial) Delegates appointed to Reform it, 161. They Prosecute
the Protestants with Vigor, 184. They Proscribe Minden, 245. Vide Imperial
Chamber in I. Charles the Fourth Emperor, made the Golden Bull, An. 1356. 19.
Charles Duke of Bourbon, besieges Marseilles, 76. Takes Rome, 109. Blocks up
the Pope in the Castle of St. Angelo, Ibid. His Soldiers commit great
Insolences, Ibid. Dies, 110. Is attainted by the French King, Ibid. Charles
the Great made Emperor at Rome, 150. Charles King of Spain Competitor for the
Empire, 13. His Answer to Prince Palatine, 18. His Genealogy, 19. The
Conditions which were imposed upon him as his Election, 20. Goes into England,
25. Thence into the Low Countries, ibid. Summons the Electors to Aix la
Chapelle, 36. Meets them there, 37. Enters the Town in state, ibid. The
Ceremonies of his Coronation, ibid. His Oath, ibid. Goes to Cologne, and calls
a Diet to Worms, 38. Promises Luther a public hearing at the Diet, 41. Writes
to Luther, and gives him safe Conduct, 42. Writes to the Princes against
Luther, 44. Proscribes him 48, 49. Makes War with Francis I, 50. And takes
Milain, ibid. Returns into Spain, 51. Goes into England by the way, and makes a
League with Henry VIII. ibid. Answers the Complaints exhibited by the free
Cities against the Diet at Nuremberg, 66. Complains to the Diet, that the
Decree of Worms was not observed, 73. Chides the States and Princes for
attempting to call a General Council, 75. Takes King Francis Prisoner at Pavia,
79. Desires that a Diet may be called at Ausburg, 96. Treats a Peace with
Francis, 102. The Articles of Peace, ibid. Writes to the Diet at Spire, that
the Decree at Worms should be kept, 103. Marries the King of Portugal 's
Daughter, 105. Answers Pope Clement 's angry Letter, 106. His Letter to the
College of Cardinals, 107. He answers the Confederates Proposals, 109. He
leaves off public Sports, when he understood that Rome was taken, 109. Accuses
the French King of Breach of Faith, 112. Answers the French King's Challenge,
115. Calls a Synod to be held at Spire, ibid. Answers the Protestant
Ambassadors at Piacenza, 124. Confines the Protestant Ambassadors to their
Lodgings, 125. Calls a Diet at Augsbourg, 126. Is Crowned at Rome by the Pope,
ibid. Makes his Entry into Augsbourg, 127. Makes a Speech to the Princes of the
Diet, ibid. Consents at last that the Augustane Confession should be read to
him, 129. His Speech to the Princes, 133. He threatens the Protestant Princes,
134. Debates with them about a Decree. 135. As also with the Deputies of
particular Cities, 138. Denies the Liberty which the Protestants demanded, 139.
Rescinds Albert of Brandenburg 's Transactions with the King of Poland, ibid.
Calls the Electors together to choose a K. of the Romans at Cologne, 142. His
Reasons for choosing a King of the Romans, 143. He commands the Protestants to
acknowledge Ferdinand King of the Romans, 148. He gives them notice of a
Turkish Invasion, ibid. Calls a Diet at Spire, 152. Removes it to Ratisbon,
155. And confirms a Peace there to all Protestants, 160. Sollicites for aid
against the Turks to little purpose, 161. Goes to Italy, 162. Writes into
Germany to obey Ferdinand, ibid. Makes a League with Pope Clement, ibid. His
Ambassador goes with the Pope's Legate to the D. of Saxony, ibid. His
Ambassador's Speech to the Duke, 163. Stands to the determination of Ferdinand
concerning the D. of Wirtemberg, 174. Goes into Africa, 180. Takes Goletta,
ibid. Restores Muley Hazem to the Kingdom of Tunis, ibid. Encourages the
Prosecutions of the Imperial Chamber, 184. His Speech against the French King,
204. Writes to the Protestants in Germany, 208. Is unsuccessful in France,
ibid. Sends Eldo his Ambassador to Smalcald to treat with the Protestants, 212.
Makes a Truce with the King of France, 232. Meets Francis at Aigues Mortes,
239. Accommodates with the Protestants at Francfort, 248. Goes through France
into Flanders, 252. His Answer to the Protestants Ambassadors, 255. He punishes
the City of Ghent for its Insurrection, 262. He writes to the Elector of
Saxony, and the Landgrave about a Peace, 263. Denies the D. of Cleve's
Petition, 266. Confirms the Decree at Haguenaw, 269. Invites the Protestants to
meet at Worms, ibid. He dissolves the Conference at Worms, 272. Appoints
Persons to conferr at Ratisbon, 276. His Exhortations to them, ibid. Referrs
Religious Matters to a Council. 282. He makes a Private Grant to the
Protestants, 283. Complains of the D. of Cleve, ibid. Sails into Africa, 285.
Loses his Fleet by a Storm, ibid. Writes to the Senate at Metz to allow no
Change in Religion, 298. His Manifesto against the French King to the Pope,
300. His Answer to the Cardinals of the Mediation who were sent by the Pope,
303. His Soldiers waste Juliers, and take Duren, ibid. Writes to the
Protestants from Genoa, 311. Has an Interview with the Pope, 312. Refuses to
Confirm Parma and Piacenza to the Pope's Son, ibid. Delivers Leghorn and the
Castle of Florence to Cosmo Medicis, ibid. Makes his Son King of Spain, ibid.
Makes a League with the K. of England, ibid. Answers the Protestants
Ambassadors from Smalcald, ibid. Refuses to make up the Business with the D. of
Cleve, 313. He threatens the Hildesheymers, ibid. Writes to the Senate of
Cologne, ibid. Goes to Bonne, 314. Makes a prosperous War upon the Duke of
Cleve, 315. Restores him upon his Submission, ibid. Sends to the City of Metz
to renounce the Reformed Religion, 316. Goes into Guelderland, 317. Makes the
French yield at Landrecy, ibid. Answers the Saxons and Landgrave's Letter,
ibid. Opens the Diet of Spire with a Speech, ibid. Waves the Controversy
between the D. of Brunswick and the Confederate Protestants, 319. His
Expedition into France, 326. Makes a Pacification with the French King, 327.
Makes Severe Edicts against the Lutherans in the Netherlands, 342. Comes to
Worms, 348. His Ambassadors to the K. of Poland, ibid. Endeavors a Treaty of
Peace with the Protestants, 349. Makes a Truce with the Turk, 351. Takes the
Clergy of Cologne into his Protection, ibid. Cites the Archbishop of Cologne,
ibid. Writes to the Doctors of the Conference at Ratisbon, 359. Answers the
Protestant Ambassadors about the Elector of Cologne, 360. He goes to Spire, on
his way to Ratisbon, 367. Treats with the Landgrave and the Elector Palatine
there, 368. Comes to Ratisbon, 374. Opens the Diet, ibid. Sends the Cardinal of
Trent to Rome to solicit for assistance, 375. Makes Preparation for War,
ibid. Answers the Protestant Deputies, 376. Writes to the Protestant Free
Cities, ibid. Writes to the Duke of Wirtemberg, 377. He sends an Embassy to
the Switzers, 380. Makes a League against the Reformed, 381. Acquaints the
Elector Palatine with the Reasons why he made War upon the Protestants, 383.
His Letter to the Archbishop of Cologne, 385. His Forces at Ratisbon, 389. He
Outlaws the Elector of Saxony, and the Landgrave, ibid. Invites D. Maurice to
take Possession of the Landgrave's and the Saxon 's Territories, 391. Refuses
to hear the Protestant Messengers, 394. And answers their Objections, ib. Is
joined by the Pope's Troops, ibid. An account of his Army, 395. He marches to
Ratisbon, ibid. His great Courage, 398. He and the Pope pretend different
causes of the War, Ibid. His Letter to the Protestant Switzers, Ibid. He takes
Donawert by Surrender, 405. Is Master of the Danube, 406. Is oppressed at
Gienghen a Town on the Danube, and uses Tricks to get off, 407. The Plague in
his Camp, Ibid. Removes his Camp, 410. Recovers by Surrender several Towns in
Frankenland, 412. Writes a severe Letter to the Duke of Wirtemberg, Ibid.
Commands his Subjects not to obey him, 413. Takes Ulm by Surrender, Ibid. Is
reconciled to the Duke of Wirtemberg, 415. Several Protestant Cities yield to
him, 416. Goes to Ulm, 417. He receives Lindaw and Esling into favor, Ibid.
Commands the Archbishop of Cologne to stand by the Popes Sentence, Ibid. He
raises Forces against the Elector of Saxony, 419. He receives the Strasburghers
Submission, 423. His Letters to the States of D. Maurice, Ibid. And to those of
Prague, Ibid. Another Letter of his to the States of Bohemia, 425. His
Expedition against the Duke of Saxony, 426. His celerity in overtaking him,
427. Defeats him and takes him Prisoner, Ibid. Condemns the Duke of Saxony to
Death, Ibid. Proposes conditions of Peace to him, and calls a Diet at Ulm, 428.
Proposes Conditions of Peace to the Landgrave, 430. Answers the Landgrave at
Hall, 432. Detains him Prisoner treacherously, 433. Intends to fall upon
Magdebourg, but is diverted by Vogelsberg's raising Troops in Germany, 434. Is
reconciled to some Towns in Saxony, 435. Publishes his Pacification with the
Landgrave, Ibid. Squeezes Money from the Germans, 436. And proscribes
Magdebourg, Ibid. Solicites the Switzers to make a League, 437. Makes a Truce
with the Turk, Ibid. Moves the College of Princes to desire the Pope to remove
the Council to Bononia, 439. Answers the Proposals made by the Cities of the
Empire at Augsbourg, 441. Sends an Embassy to the Pope about the Council, Ibid.
Excuses the Landgrave's Confinement, Ibid. Refuses to set him at Liberty, 442.
Confines him closely, 443. He makes a Report to the States concerning a
Council, 453. Raises Money of the States at the Diet, 460. Makes a Reformation
in Ecclesiastical Matters, 463. Which is approved of by the Bishops, 464. His
answer to the States about Disbanding of the Army, 466. He Writes to the
Princes about receiving the Interim, 468. Proscribes several who served under
the Protestants, Ibid. Changes the Government of Augsbourg, 469. Determines for
the Count of Nassaw against the Landgrave, 470. Sends Spaniards privately to
Constance, Ibid. Answers to the desires of the Strasburghers, 471. Outlaws the
City of Constance, Ibid. And will hear no Plea's in their behalf, Ibid. He
dissolves the Government of Ulm. 472. Goes to Spire and so into the Netherlands
with the Saxon and the Landgrave, 473. He detains the Duke of Saxony, 474.
Sends the Popes Indult to the German Bishops, 483. Writes to the States out of
the Netherlands, and appoints a Diet, 493. He comes to Augsbourg with his Son,
496. His severe Decree against the Lutherans in the Netherlands, 497. Which is
very injurious at Antwerp upon account of Trade, 498. His Army besieged
Tripoly, 500. He commands the Duke of Brunswick to lay down Arms, Ibid. He
complains of the Magdebourghers and Bremers, 501. Moderates the Edict of
Religion in the Netherlands, lb. He is very earnest that the Magdebourghers
should be Prosecuted, 503. And desires to know why the Interim is not observed,
Ibid. His Edict against the Magdebourghers, 504. Is very severe upon the
Landgrave after his fruitless endeavors to escape, 505. Quarrels with his
Brother about a Successor to the Empire, Ibid. His Edict against all that
Assist the Magdebourghers, 512. He pronounces sentence against the Landgrave
for the Lordship of Dietz, 513. Publishes a Declaration against Octavio
Farnese, 515. Calls the States to the Council of Trent, Ibid. Accuses the
French King of Assisting the Turk, 518. Publishes a Declaration against him,
522. His answer to the Ambassadors who intercede for the Landgrave, 534. He
answers the complaints of the Spiritual Electors, 535. His Ambassadors have
long and frequent Conferences with the Saxon, Wirtemberg and Strasburg, Agents
at Trent, 538. Raises Soldiers to oppose the Confederate Princes, 557. His Men
make an Incursion into Champaigne, 558. He flies from Inspruck to Villach, 560.
Sets the Duke of Saxony at liberty, Ibid. His Letter to the Princes Mediators,
568. His answer to their Letter, 569. His answer to the French Ambassadors
Letter, 570. Changes the Government of Augsbourg, 573. He charges the
Franconians to appose Marquess Albert, 574. goes into Lorrain and to
Strasbourg, Ibid. Lays siege to Metz, 575. His Army in the Netherlands takes
Hesdin, 576. He rises from the siege of Metz, Ibid. He Writes to Marquess
Albert, 577. His answer to his own Ambassadors about the Controversy between
Albert and the Franconian Bishops, 579. Befieges and takes Terouanne, 580.
Retakes Hesdin, 586. His advice to the Princes of Germany, Ibid. He Furnishes
Albert with Money underhand, 591. Carries the War into Picardy, Ibid. Ratifies
the Proscription of Albert, made by the Imperial Chamber, 598. His Letter to
the States of Germany, 606. His answer to the German Princes, 616. Makes the
Duke of Alba his General in Milan, Ibid. His Fleet engages the French Fleet,
618. He resigns the low Countries to his Son Philip, 620. Goes into Spain. 638.
Charles Prince of Spain Born, 350. Christian I. King of Denmark dies, 62.
Christian II. King of Denmark overthrows Steno Stura. 62. Burns his dead Body,
Ibid. Loses Sweden, Ibid. Is banished from Denmark, Ibid. Appeals to the Diet
at Nurenberg, Ibid. Is taken Prisoner, 161. His Son dies, Ibid. Christian, Wife
to the Landgrave, Sollicites for the Landgrave's Release, 441. Dies for Grief,
485. Christopher Succedes his Father Ulric in the Duchy of Wirtemberg, 502.
His Duchy is rid of the Spaniards, 528. He sends Ambassadors to the Council of
Trent, Ibid. They are gulled in the Council by the Cerdinal of Trent, and the
Emperors Ambassadors, 530. They apply themselves to Count Monfort, 537. They
join with the Saxon Ambassadors, and the Deputies to Solicit a hearing of the
Protestant Divines in the Council of Trent, 537. etc. They leave the Council,
541. New Ambassadors are sent from the Duke of Wirtemberg to Trent, 543. The
Wirtemberg Divines go to Trent, Ibid. Who exhibit their Confession, Ibid. They
Publish their Protestation there, 544. At the breaking up of the Council, the
Wirtemberg Ambassadors give in their Opinion of it, 547. Cheregatus
(Franciscus) Legate to P. Adrian at Nuremberg, 57. Cities of the Empire
complain against the Diet at Norimberg, 65. and in the Diet of Spire against
the Decree of Worms, 103. They complain against Mendicant Friars, 104.
Immunities of the Clergy, Ibid. And against Holy days, Ibid. Cities for the
Reformed Religion Protest against the Decree of Spire, 120. Are for
acknowledging Ferdinand King of the Romans, 151. Some Cities quarrel at the
Taxes laid at Coblentz to carry on the War at Munster, 198. Catholic Cities
Complain that they are Excluded from the Princes Councils at Ratisbon, 282.
Some Cities refuse at Spire to grant subsidies against the French, 326. They
refuse to submit to the Council of Trent at Augsbourg, 440. Clareback (Adolph)
Burnt at Cologne for Religion, 121. Clement the V. inserts into the Canon Law
that Emperors are Subject to the Pope, 38. Clement the VII. succedes to Adrian,
66. Sends Cardinal Campegio to the Diet at Nuremberg, Ibid. Writes to D.
Frederick of Saxony, Ibid. Sends a Golden Rose to Henry the VIII. of England,
75. Writes to the Parliament of Paris, 97. Enters into a League with Charles
the V. 105. Writes expostulatory Letters to him, 106. Writes to the King of
Poland to be ready to send Deputies to a General Council, 142. Sends a Legate
to the Duke of Saxony, 162. His Legate's Speech to the Duke of Saxony, Ibid.
Goes to Marseilles to meet Francis, 168. Marries his Neice, Catharine de
Medicis, to his Son Henry, Ibid. Dies, 174. Cleve: Duke of Cleve sues to the
Emperor for Guelderland, 266. His Treaty with the French King, 277. Marries the
Queen of Navarre's Daughter, Ibid. Retakes Duren, 304. A Pacification Attempted
between him and the Emperor, 307. Submits to the Emperor, 315. Renounces his
League with France, and demands his Wife, 316. Intercedes with the Archbishop
of Cologne to lay down his Bishopric, 418. Coblentz, a Town in the Bishopric
of Triers, upon the Confluence of the Rhine and the Moselle, 13. Some Princes
meet there to quiet the Stirs of Munster, 197. Cologne University Condemns
Luther's Writing, 27. Condemn and burn Reuchlin 's Book, 30. The Elector of
Cologne (Herman) calls a Provincial Council, 209. Endeavors a Reformation,
310. Confers with Bucer, Ibid. Opposed by the Clergy, 311. Who Publish their
Anti-Didagma, Ibid. And oppose Bucer, Ibid. The Bishop Mediates for the Duke of
Cleve, 313. The Clergy plead against their Arch-Biship, 340. They appeal to the
Pope and Emperor, Ibid. The Archbishop Answers their appeal, Ibid. They
Subscribe the Appeal, 341. The Archbishop is cited by the Emperor and the
Pope, 351. Answers to his Citation to the Emperor, 352. Appeals to a Council,
411. The Archbishop is deposed by the Pope, 417. He is Persuaded to resign his
Bishopric, 418. Vide Adolph Count Schauwenbourg. Herman the Old Bishop dies,
573. Conclave: The Ceremonies there practiced in the choosing of Popes, 489.
Confederate Princes against Charles the V. propose conditions to him, 109. Vide
Maurice. Consecrations of all Sorts, Bells, Churches, Altars, etc. 481, 482.
Constance Council decreed a Pope subject to a Council, 9. That safe Conducts
should be Null to declared Heretics, 47. That the Laity should Communicate in
one Kind, Ibid. The Bishop of Constance (Hugh) opposes Zuinglius, 51. Sends a
Book about Images to the Senate at Zurich, 72. They abolish Popery, 112. They
send Deputies with humble Submission to the Emperor, 469. Their Bishop dies of
an Apoplexy, Ibid. They repulse the Spaniards who would seize the Town, 470.
Upon their being proscribed, they desire the Switzers to intercede for them,
471. They surrender entirely to the House of Austria, 474. The Conditions upon
which K. Ferdinand receives them, ibid. Contarini (Card.) the Pope's Legate at
Ratisbon, his Opinion at the Diet, 279. His Exhortation to the Bishops, 280.
His Speech is communicated to the States, ibid. He gives in other Papers to the
Diet, 281. Protests by Letter against a National Council, 282. Accused to the
Pope, and dies, 299. Cosimo succeeds Alexander de Medicis in the Duchy of
Florence, 210. Marries Eleanor Daughter to the Viceroy of Naples, ibid. Cosmus,
vide Cosimo. Coyre, Bishop of Coyre recalled by the Grisons from the Council of
Trent, 529. Cranmer (Tho. A. B. of Canterbury) calls Bucer and Fagius into
England, 479. Vindicates himself from the aspersions of the Papists, 590. Is
sent to the Tower, ibid. Burnt at Oxford, ibid. Crescentio (Cardinal) the
Pope's Legate at the Council of Trent, 518. Dies at Verona, 548. Falls sick
with seeing an Apparition of a Black Dog, ibid. Cronberg (Walter) Grand Master
of the Teutonick Order, 99. Sollicites Char. V. for aid against Albert the late
Grand Master, 139. Which was granted, ibid. The Emperor in the Diet of
Ratisbon ratifies Cronberg 's Title, 161. Cusanus (Nicolaus Cardinal), vide
Sigismund.
D
DEcius (Philip) writes for the Council of Pisa, 27. Denmark, vide Christiern
K. of Denmark sent no aid to the Protestants, 415. His Ambassador intercedes
for the Landgrave, 534. Deux-Ponts, vide Wolfgang D. of Deux-Ponts. Diazi
(John) goes to the Conference at Ratisbon, 365. Is earnestly persuaded by
Malvenda to turn Papist, 366. And by his Brother Alfonso Diazi, ibid. Goes to
Newbourg, ibid. Is Assassinated there, 367. The Ruffians fled to Inspruck,
ibid. Ditlebius (Valentine) his Letter to Frederick, 33. Doria (Andrew) a
Genoese, Char. V's Admiral, restores Liberty to his Country, 416. His Kinsman
Joannin Doria is killed in an Insurrection, ibid. Dragut a Pirate forced from
Tripoly by Char. V. flies to Constantinople, 500.
E
EBleben (Christopher) Negotiates a Peace for the Landgrave, 430. Dies for
Grief that the Conditions were so treacherously kept, 434. Eckius (John) Writes
against Luther, 3. Disputes with him at Leipzick, 21. Maintains the Pope's
Supremacy against him, 22. Exasperates the Quarrel, 24.34. Disputes at Baden
with Oecolampadius, 105. Disputes with Leonard Caesar, 110. Answers the
Augustan Confession, 130. Answers the Confession of the Confederate Cities,
139. Is rewarded for his zeal in oppugning Heresy, Ibid. Is displeased with
the Book which was presented to the Diet at Ratisbon, 278. Writes to the
Prinoes against the Collocutors, 282. Eckius, a Lawyer draws up Luther's
charge, at Worms, 42. Questions him if he will defend his Books, Ibid. Replies
to Luther 's Plea, 44. Commands him to leave Worms, 46. Edward VI. of England
born, 232. Succeeds his Father, 418. Beats the Scots by the D. of Somerset,
440. Establishes the Reformation in England, 443. Publishes a Declaration about
the War in Scotland, 454. The Mass is abolished in England, 463. The Admiral,
the D. of Somerset 's Brother, is Beheaded for Treason, 479. Troubles in his
Reign, 485. Concludes a Treaty of Peace with France, 492. And a Peace
concluded, 495. Bologne Restored to the French, ibid. He dies, 585. Egmont
(Charles Count) dies, 240. Eldo (Mathias) Vice Chancellor to Char. V. sent
Ambassador to the German Princes, 212. His Speech to them at Smalcald, 213. His
Reply ex Tempore to their Answer, 218. He sollicites a Holy League amongst the
Popish Princes, 245. Loses his Interest in the Emperor's Court, 255. Elector,
vide Albert, 14. The Elector's Answer to the Emperor at Ratisbon, 281. The
Electors of the Rhine meet about the Elector of Cologne, 356. The Electors
separate their Councils at the Diet of Ratisbon, 375. Ecclesiastical Electors
severe for the Interim, 477. And hold Synods wherein the Trinkets of Popery are
restored, 481. They complain of the Soldiers who came from Magdebourg, 535.
Emperor, how chosen, 19. Now subject to the Pope in his Election, 38. Empire,
vide Princes. English refuse to pay First Fruits for Benefices of small value,
63. English Bibles Printed at Paris, 241. Enthusiasts begin to Preach in
Germany, 52. Erard Bishop of Liege dies, 240. Erasmus writes to Frederick in
Luther 's behalf, 21. And to Luther Encouraging him to go on, but calmly, ibid.
And to Rome in favor of Reuchlin, 31. Writes about Free Will, 75. Writes
against the Reformers under the Title of Gospel-teachers, 122. Writes to
Campegio to promote Unity in Germany, 133. His Jest upon Eckius and Faber, 139.
Quarrels with Luther again about Free Will, 170. Dies, 209. His Colloquies
forbidden by the Delegate Cardinals, 236. Erixon (Gustavus) wrests Sweden from
Christiern King of Denmark, 62. Marries Steno Stura 's Daughter, ibid. Ernest
D. of Brunswick taken Prisoner by the Emperor, 427. Is set at liberty, 428.
Exorcisms with the Cermeonies, 481. Eysenach, a Town in Thuringia, a Convention
of the Protestants there, 244.
F.
FAber (John) Deputy to the Bishop of Constance at Zurick, 57. Faber (Jacobus)
Stapulensis persecuted by the Sorbonists, 98. The King of France writes on his
behalf out of Spain, ibid. Farel (William) Preaches at Metz, 290. Farnese
(Cardinal) his Speech to the Emperor against the Protestants, 264. Retires from
the Emperors Court, 266. Goes to the Diet of Worms with the Emperor, 348. Goes
from thence to Rome, 349. Farnese (Octavio) General of the Pope's Troops which
helped the Emperor against the Protestants, 394. Has Parma secured to him by P.
Julius the III, 492. Puts a French Garrison into Parma, 513. Is Cited to Rome,
ibid. Pursues the Business of Parma, 514. Being supported by the French King it
occasions a War, ibid. Ferdinand Archduke of Austria Marries, 50. Executes
the Ban severely against the Lutherans, 54. Claims the Kingdom of Hungary,
after K. Lewis 's death, 105. Is made K. of Bohemia, 110. His Claim to Hungary
what, 114. Made K. of the Romans, 144. The Terms upon which the Protestant
Princes promise to acknowledge him, 157. Makes a Treaty of Peace with the D. of
Saxony, 173. Allows Ulric to be D. of Wirtemberg, ibid. Inhibits the
Prosecutions of the Imperial Chamber, 184. Suspends them till the Meeting of
the next Diet, 185. Sends an Embassy to the Switzers not to aid the French
against the Emperor, 207. Is routed by the Turks, 231. Goes to the Diet at
Haguenaw, 267. His Proposals to the Protestants there, 268. His Answer there
about the Proceedings of the Imperial Chamber, 269. Prepares to invade Hungary,
270. Sends Alaski his Ambassador to Solomon, ibid. Is overthrown at Buda, 284.
His Answer to the Austrian Nobility, 287. His Speech to the Diet at Spire, 288.
Opens the Diet at Nurenberg, 298. Makes an unsuccessful War in Hungary, 304.
Opens the Diet at Nurenberg, 305. His Answer to the Protestants Petition, 307.
Is acknowledged King of the Romans by the D. of Saxony, 325. His Daughter is
Betrothed to the D. of Saxony 's Son, ibid. Opens the Diet at Worms, 343.
Answers the Deputies of the Protestants, 345. Goes to the Diet at Ratisbon,
374. Denounces War against the Saxons, 409. His Answer to the Bohemians, 417.
His Demands to the Bohemians, 420. His Letters to the Bohemians, 423. He
Answers their Letters, 424. He writes to them again, 425. His Commissioners to
the Convention of States in Bohemia, 426. His Army, ibid. Writes again to the
Bohemians, 428. Writes to them again from Leutmeritz, 431. Goes to Prague and
forces the Bohemians to submit, 434. Obtains vast Sums of Money from the Free
Towns, 436. Raises Money of the States at the Diet, 460. Receives Constance,
and imposes strict Conditions upon them, 474. Complains at the Diet of
Augsbourg of the Irruptions of the Turks, 511. Aid is granted him by the
Princes at Norimberg, 512. Treats with D. Maurice about Peace at Lintz, 556.
Goes to Passaw to Mediate a Peace, 563. Presses D. Maurice to stay a while for
the Emperor's Answer, 568. Goes again to the Emperor to Villach, ibid. Brings
the Emperor's Answer back to Passaw, 569. He there answers the French
Ambassador in the Emperor's Name, 570. Opens the Diet of Augsbourg, 598.
Publishes an Edict about Religion, 602. Which is answered by the States of his
Country, ibid. He comes to Augsbourg, 607. Opens the Diet with a Speech, ibid.
What effect it had upon the Diet, 610. Banishes two hundred Protestant
Ministers out of Bohemia, ibid. Invites the Princes to the Augsbourg Diet, 612.
Mediates between Papists and Protestants at Augsbourg, 624. Answers those
Papers that were dispersed in the Diet, 625. His Answer to the Protestants
Reply, 626. Sollicites the Princes of Germany against the Turk, 628. Answers
the Address of the Austrian Nobility, 630. Replies to the Austrians Answer,
631. Is Solicited by the Bavarians for Liberty of Conscience, 633. He goes
into Bohemia, ibid. Fevre d'Estaples, vide Faber Stapulensis. Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, Beheaded for not acknowledging King Henry Supreme Head of the
Church, 180. Made Cardinal in Prison, ib. Flisted (Peter) burnt at Cologne for
his Religion, 121. Florentines aid the French against Charles, 131. Send
Ambassadors to him with Submissions, 132. They yield to him after a years
Siege, ibid. Fox (Edw.) Bishop of Hereford, his Speech to the Protestants at
Smalcald, 188. Desires a Private Conference, 189. Which is allowed, ib. France,
a Persecution of the Lutherans there, 175. Francis King of France, Competitor
for the Empire, 13. Is troubled that Charles V. is preferred, 19. Makes a
League with the Switzers, 48. Takes Milan, 76. Besieges Parma, ibid. Is taken
Prisoner there, 79 Writes into France in Favor of Faber Stapulensis, 98 Falls
sick in Prison, 102. Treats a Peace with Char. V. ibid. Leaves two Sons
Hostages in Spain, 103. But makes a League with the Pope and Venetians against
the Emperor, 105. Writes to the Princes of the Empire, 108. Publishes an
Apology for engaging in War with Char. V. ibid. Sends Letters of Defiance to
Char. V. 112. Makes a League with Henry VIII. ibid. Challenges Char. V. to a
Duel, 112. Concludes a Peace with him at Cambray, 121. The Articles of it,
ibid. His Letter to the Protestant Princes, 149. Marries Catharine de Medicis
to his Eldest Son Henry, 168. He goes in Procession to St. Genevieve, 178. He
writes to the German Princes to take off Misunderstandings, 179. Sends Bellay
to Smalcald to the Protestants, 182. His Opinion about the Points of
Controversy in Germany, 186. He offers to enter into a League with the
Protestants, 187. Makes War upon Savoy, 203. Defeats Charles 's Armies in
Provence and Picardy, 208. Writes to the Princes of Germany, inveighing
against the Emperor, ibid. Marries his Eldest Daughter Magdalen to James V. of
Scotland, 209. Complains of the Emperor in the Parliament of Paris. 210. His
Auswer to the Protestants Letter, 230. Chides the D. of Wirtemberg by his
Ambassador at Francfort, 249. Gives private Assistance to the D. of Cleve, to
whom he proposes a Marriage with his Niece, 266. He is displeased with the
Emperor, ibid. Sends an Ambassador to Haguenaw, 267. Persecutes the Lutherans,
ibid. Commands Supplications for Peace to be made throughout his Kingdom, 269.
Sends Ambassadors to the Diet at Spire, 289. Their Harangue there, ibid.
Prepares for a War against the Emperor, 292. Purges himself of Pescara 's
Accusations, 296. Appoints Prayers for success to his Army, ibid. Declares War,
ibid. Sends Longueville and Van Rossem into Flanders, ibid. Attaques Charles in
five places, ibid. With not much Success, ibid. He demands aid of the Turk,
ibid. His Speech to the Rochellers, 305. His Answer to the Emperor's Letter to
the Pope, 307. Takes Luxembourg, 316. His men retire from Landrecy, 317. He
sends an Embassy to Spire, 319. His Herald is ill received at Spire, ibid. He
beats the Emperor at Carignan, 323. The Speech of his Ambassadors, who should
have gone to Spire, 324. Concludes a Peace with the Emperor at Soissons, 327.
His Answer to the Switzers about the Waldenses, 347. He makes a Peace with King
Henry VIII. 382. He refuses to assist the Protestants, 403. He suffered the
Protestants to be Persecuted, and 14 Burnt, 411. He dies, 424. Was a great
Patron of Learning, and Learned himself, ibid. Gave 100000 Crowns apiece to the
Landgrave, and the Saxon, ere he died, 425. Is Buried, 429. Francis the Dauphin
dies suspected of Poison, 208. Francfort upon the Oder, a City in the
Electorate of Brandenbourg, 2. Francfort upon the Mayn, a City in Franconia,
13. A Diet held there, 247. Where things are accommodated with the Protestants,
248. Reconciled to the Emperor and Fined, 414. A Diet held there, 604. Their
Answer to the French King's Letter, 605. Franciscan Friars at Orleans, their
Imposture about the Provost's Wife, 170. A Franciscan Freaches a Bloody Sermon
before the Emperor at Worms, 349. Franco (Jerome) the Popes Legate Sollicites
the Switzers against the Protestants, 390. Franconian Bishops commended by the
Emperor to submit to Marq. Albert, 575. They appeal to the Imperial Chamber,
577. Cannot conclude with him at Heidelberg, 578. Are invaded by him, ibid.
Frederick K. of Denmark publishes a Declaration against Christian II. 62. Is
called to the Danish Crown from the Duchy of Holstein, ibid. Frederick (
Prince Palatine) goes Ambassador to Char. V. upon his Election, 18. Desires the
Emperor to go into Germany, ibid. Represents him at the Diet at Nuremberg, 63.
Writes to the Senate at Strasbourg to desist from Innovations, 76. Restrains
the Soldiers from Cruelty to the Boors at Worms, 81. Succeeds his Brother
Lewis in the Electorate, 321. Establishes the Protestant Religion in the
Electorate, 356. Goes to Spire with the Landgrave to meet the Emperor, 368.
Treats with Granvell, 372. Demands to know the Reasons of the War against the
Protestants, 383. Endeavors a Reconciliation amongst all sides, 384.
Reconciled to the Emperor, 413. Receives the Interim, 461. Helps the
Confederate Princes against his will, 569. Frederick D. of Saxony Connives at
Luther, 2. Intercedes with Cajetan for him at Augsbourg, 7. Answers Cajetan 's
Letter, 11. Sends Cajetan 's Letter to Luther, ibid. Reads none of Luther 's
Books, nor hears his Sermons for some time, 12. Gives his Vote for Charles K.
of Spain to be Emperor, 18. Refused it when offered, ibid. Would take no Money
of the K. of Spain 's Ministers, ibid. Falls sick, 25. His Suit at the Court of
Rome, 33. His Answer to Ditlebius, ibid. His Answer to Aleander and
Caracciolus, 39. Conveys Luther away privately, 49. Writes to the University of
Wittemberg to act calmly in taking away the Mass, 50. Dies 84. Frederick of
Brandenbourg, made Archbishop of Magdebourg, 526. Frederick ( Son to John
Frederick) of Saxony, Marries Duke Maurice's Widow, the Landgrave's Daughter,
616. His Wife dies, 628. Fregoso and Rink Ambassadors from Francis to Solomon
killed upon the Way, 284. Frisius (John) Answers Popish Questions at Wurtzburg,
603. Friars, Great Men desire to be buried in Friars habits, 251.
G
GEneva, Popery abolished there, 112. Disturbances there upon Calvin 's
Expulsion, 616. Genovefe or Genevieve the Patroness Saint of Paris, 178. Six
Lutherans burnt on a Procession day to her, ibid. Genoa, vide Doria. George
Duke of Saxony writes to Henry the VIII. against Luther, 65. His discourse with
Muncer, 86. Returns a Spiteful answer to Luther 's Letter, 101. Disowns any
Confederacy against the Reformed Religion, 114. His Tricks against the
Lutherans, 167. He complains of Luther to the Elector of Saxony, 168. Quarrels
with John Frederick Elector of Saxony, 206. Dies and leaves his Duchy to his
Brother Henry, 249. George Duke of Mecklenbourg makes War against the
Magdebourgers, 500. Defeats them, Ibid. Is taken Prisoner by them, 505. Is
killed with a great Shot after he had joined Duke Maurice, 569. Germany, a
Plague in Germany, 285. German Bishops write to the Pope about the Council of
Trent, 439. Gerson, what he was, 10. Ghendt, a City in Flanders an Insurrection
there, 251. They are Punished for it, 262. Gonzaga (Frederick) made first Duke
of Mantua by Charles the V. 127. Gonzaga (Ferdinand) siezes upon Piacenza upon
Petro Aloisio 's death, 439. Reduces it to the Emperors Obedience, Ibid.
Granvel outs Eldo from his Interest in Charles 's Court, 255. He sends
Ambassadors to the Protestant convention at Smalcald, 255. Goes to Worms, 270.
His Speech at the Diet, Ibid. Presents a Book to the Diet at Ratisbon, of the
heads of the Conference, 276. His Speech at Norimberg in the Emperors Name,
306. Answers the Landgrave's Letter about the War intended against the
Protestants, 357. Treats with the Landgrave and the Elector Palatine at Spire,
370, 372. Treats with the Deputies of the Protestant Cities at Ratisbon, 377.
He urges the Strasburghers to receive the Interim, 464. and insists upon it,
465. Dies, 499. Granvel (Anth. Perenot) Bishop of Arras succedes his Father in
the Ministry, 499. Gray (Jane) Married to Guilford Dudley, 580. And proclaimed
Queen of England pursuant to King Edward 's will, 588. Grignian (Francis Amb.)
his Speech at Worms, 350. Gritti (Lewis) Councellor to Solomon, 175. His Son
Andrew made Bishop of Five-Churches, Ibid. He is beheaded, Ibid. Gropper (John)
and Phlugius vindicate themselves from Eckius 's Aspersion, 282. Invites Bucer
to Cologne, 288. Falls off from the Bishop and Writes the Anti-Didagma as it
was thought, 311. Is very insolent in the Council of Trent, 535. Guelderlanders
rebel, 232. Custavns King of Sweden alters Religion, 391. Guteling 's
(Balthazar) Speech to his Soldiers, 381.
H
HAguenaw, a Diet there, 267. The Acts of the Assembly there, Ibid. The decree
at Haguenaw, 266. Heideck, takes several Towns for the Protestants, 388. Routed
by Duke Maurice, 504. Taken into the service of Duke Maurice. Assists the
Magdeburghers, 514. Henry the VII. Emperor refuses to pay Allegiance to the
Pope, 38. Henry the VIII. Writes against Luther, 50. Is called defender of the
Faith, Ibid. Is Pensioner to Charles the V. 51. His Daughter Mary is Betrothed
to Charles, Ibid. Writes to the Princes of the House of Saxony against Luther,
65. Receives a Golden Rose from the Pope, 75. Writes a Scornful answer to
Luther's Letter, 101. Makes a League with France, in the absence of King
Francis, 102. Makes a League with Francis against Charles, 112. His answer to
the Protestant Princes of Germany, 150. Is dissatisfied about his Marriage with
Catharine, 169. Sues to be Divorced, Ibid. They are Dilatory at Rome, Ibid. He
Marries Anne Boleyn, 170. Is declared in Parliament head of the Church, Ibid.
Revokes Peter Pence, Ibid. Sends Fox Bishop of Hereford Ambassador to the
Protestants at Smalcald, 188. His Ambassadors winter at Wittemberg, 205. His
Letter to the Protestants, Ibid. He beheads Anne Boleyn, 206. Quells a rising
in England, 209. His Reasons against the Council of Mantua, 231. His Reasons
against the Council at Vicenza, 250. He enacts in Parliament several things
about Religion, 251. Marries Anne of Cleve, Ibid. His Answer to the Elector of
Saxony's Ambassador, 255. Beheads Cromwell Earl of Essex, 267. Is divorced from
Anne of Cleve, Ibid. Marries Catharine Howard, Ibid. Burns Papists and
Protestants for Religion, 269. Beheads Catharine Howard for Adultery, 289.
Marries Catharine Parr, Ibid. Makes a successful War in Scotland, 324. He makes
an Expedition into France, 327. Takes Bologne, Ibid. Makes a Treaty of Peace
with France, 355. Forewarns the Protestants in Germany of their danger, 356.
Dies, 418. Henry of Zutphen suffers for Religion in Germany, 75. Henry Duke of
Saxony refuses to change his Religion to gain the Duchy, 249. But gains it by
George 's Death, 250. Henry Dauphin of France has a Daughter, 382. Henry the
II. of France succeeds to Francis the l. 424. Is Crowned, 435. The Ceremony of
it, Ibid. Persecutes the Lutherans severely in France, 456. Enters Paris in
State, 484. Crowns his Queen, Ibid. Persecutes the Lutherans, Ibid. Makes a
League with the Switzers, Ibid. Regains several Places from England, 485.
Publishes another Edict against the Lutherans, 492. Sends a Letter to the Pope
about his assisting Octavio Farnese, 514. He declares War against the Emperor
with his reasons, 517. Justifies himself from Leagues with the Turk, 518. Sends
the Abbot of Bellozane to Trent, with a Letter to the Council, Ibid. He
Publishes an Edict against the Pope, 521. And another against the Lutherans,
Ibid. Answers the Emperors Declaration, 522. Hinders the Switzers from sending
Ambassadors to the Council of Trent, 528. He sends Ambassadors to Duke Maurice,
529. Makes Peace with the Pope, 548. He declares War against the Emperor, 553.
Calls himself Protector of the Liberties of Germany, 554. He takes Toul,
Verdun, Metz, 555. Takes an Oath of Allegiance from the People of Metz, Ibid.
His Treaty with the Strasburghers, 557. His answer to the Princes Ambassadors,
558. The reasons of his leaving Germany, 559. His answer to the Switzers, Ibid.
He Wastes Luxembourg, 563. His Ambassadors Speech at the Treaty of Passaw, 564.
He Sollicites again by Letters from Aichstadt, 567. He brings his Men from
Luxembourg back into Artois, 571. Is offended with the Pacification at Passaw,
572. Writes to the Emperor, 576. Sends a Declaration to the States of the
Empire, 577. Carries on the War in the Low Countries, 603. But is beaten in
Tuscany in the Sienese War, 604. His Letter to the Diet at Francfort, Ibid.
Takes Casal, 613. Carries on the War into Montferrat, 617. Hereford, vide Fox.
Herman, vide Cologne. Hesse, vide Philip Landgrave. Hildesheym a City in the
Duchy of Brunswick, embraces the Protestant Religion, 300. they are accused by
their Bishop to the Emperor, 313. Hogostratus (James) a Dominican writes
against Luther, 4. Commissioned by Maximilian to Examine Jewish Books, 30.
Writes against Reuchlin, Ibid. Is cast by the Bishop of Spire, Ibid. Appeals to
Rome, Ibid. Leaves his Cause, Ibid. Examines two Augustine Friars at Brussels,
63. Holland, an Inundation there, 137. Hooper (John) Bishop of Gloucester burnt
for his Religion, 607. Huberine (Caspar) an Interimist, Preaches at Augsbourg,
535. Hugh (Capet) makes himself King of France, 150. Huglie (John) a Protestant
burnt for Religion by the Bishop of Constance, 105. Hungarians beg for
assistance at the Diet of Spire, 324. Their Horse join Duke Maurice, 409. Husse
(John) Preaches Wiclef's Doctrine, 46. Appeals from the Pope to Christ, Ibid.
Went to the Council of Constance with safe Conduct, 47. There burnt, Ibid.
Hutton (Ulricus) a Noble Man of Franconia, 65. Favors Luther and dies, Ibid.
I
JAmes the V. of Scotland Marries King Francis 's Daughter, 209. His Queen
dies, 230. Makes a War with England unsuccessfully, 304. Dies, Ibid. Jerome
Bishop of Brandenbourg, 2. Jerome of Prague burnt at the Council of Constance,
47. Jerome Bishop of Ascoli summons Luther by P. Leo's Order to appear at Rome,
5. Jews compared with Roman Clergy, 29. Illyricus (Matthias Flaccius) Writes
against the Adiaphorists, 498. Imperial Chamber (Vide Protestants) is set up
again in the Diet at Augsbourg, 466. The Judges fly from Spire for fear of the
Confederate Princes, 557. They answer Marquess Albert's Deputation about the
Franconian Bishops, 577. They decree in Favor of the Bishops, 578. Indulgences
Preached up in Germany, 1, 2. Confirmed by Pope Clement 's Decree in the
Extravagants, 9. Why granted, 273. Indult, vide P. Paul the III. P. Innocent
the III. Decreed to the Electoral Princes a right of choosing the Emperor, 21.
His decree de Majoritate and Obedientia, 107. Inquisition, its Original, 434.
Inquisitors about the Emperor's Edict of Religion in the Netherlands, how they
proceed, 498. Interim, drawn up at Augsbourg, 454. The heads of it, 458. Often
Revised and Corrected, 459. Sent to Rome, ibid. The Electors differ in their
Opinion about it, ibid. Those who draw it up are rewarded, 468. It is disliked
on both sides, Ibid. Confuted by the Saxon Divines, 481. Joachim, Elector of
Brandenbourg sends an Embassy to the Elector of Saxony, 242. Sends Agents to
Eysenach, 244. Made Geneali ssimo against the Turks, 292. He Strikes in with
the Papists in the War against the Smalcaldick League, 375. Interposes for a
Peace, 418. With the Landgrave, Ibid. Intercedes for Saxony, 427. And his Life
was spared at his Intercession, 428. Intercedes for the Landgrave, 429.
Remonstrates to the Emperor for him at Hall, 433. Calls Bucer to Augsbourg,
454. Angry with him for not subscribing the Interim, 457. Receives the Interim,
461. Acts with Duke Maurice in the Magdeburgick War, 505, 506. He sends
Ambassadors to the Conncil of Trent, 526. His Ambassadors with those of D.
Maurice, Solicit the Emperor about the Landgrave, 531. John XXII. P. vide
Aquinas. John King of Denmark overthrows the Swedes, 62. Dying, leaves his Son
Christian of six Years of Age, Ibid. John succeeds his Brother Frederick of
Saxony, 84. Goes to Franck-hausen against Muncer 's Gang, Ibid. Comes to the
Diet at Augsbourg, 127. Excuses the Landgrave's going from Augsbourg to the
Emperor, 131. Procures the removal of the Guards from the Gates of Augsbourg,
131. Is cited by the Emperor to Cologne, 141. Sends his Son and goes himself to
Smalcald, 142. Writes to the Confederate Princes to hinder an Election of a
King of the Romans, 143. Protests by his Son against Ferdinand 's Election to
be King of the Romans, 144. Pleads Age and demands safe conduct before his
going to the Diet at Spire, 153. Gives an Answer to the Elector of Mentz and
the Prince Palatine, 154. The conditions upon which he would acknowledge a King
of the Romans, 157. Dies, 161. John Frederick ( Son to John) D. of Saxony
answers the Emperors and Popes Ambassadors, 163. Yields to acknowledge
Ferdinand K. of the Romans, 173. Answers Vergerius 's Propositions for a
Council, 181. Negotiates with Ferdinand to stop the Prosecutions of the
Imperial Chamber, 185. Goes to Smalcald, 189. Negotiates with Henry VIII. of
England, 205. Quarrels with his Cousin George D. of Saxony, 206. He
communicates the Embassy of the Elector of Brandenbourg to the Landgrave, 243.
His Answer to the Brandenbourghers Embassy, Ibid. Goes to the Convention at
Eysenach, 244. Quarrels with the D. of Brunswick, 247. Writes to the French K.
in behalf of the D. of Wirtemberg, 249. He sends Ambassadors into England, 252.
He Answers the Emperors Letters, 263. Quarrels with Naumburg about a Bishop,
288. Puts in Amstorfius, Ibid. Makes War upon the D. of Brunswick with the
Landgrave, 298. The Declarations of the Reasons of their undertaking, Ibid.
Their answer to the Message of the States of the Empire, 299. Intercedes to no
purpose for the D. of Cleve, 313. Accommodates with King Ferdinand, 325. His
Son is affianced to K. Ferdinand 's Daughter, Ibid. Writes to the Emperor about
the D. of Brunswick, 354. He arms against the Emperor, 384. He and the
Landgrave declare War against the Emperor, 385. Sends his Son John William
Ambassador to D. Maurice, 406. Writes to Ulm to the Confederates for
Assistance, 409. Is in danger upon the Retreat of the Army, 412. Raises
contributions upon Papists, Ibid. Writes to the States of D. Maurice 's
Country, 414. Besieges Leipzick, 417. Takes most of Maurice 's Towns and his
own again, Ibid. Writes to the City of Strasbourg, 419. Takes Rochlitz by
Storm, and Marquess Albert of Brandenbourg Prisoner, 420. His Ambassadors to
the Bohemians, 424. He takes some Towns from D. Maurice, 425. Is overthrown at
the Forest of Lochawer, 427. Taken Prisoner, Ibid. Condemned to die, Ibid.
Bears it bravely, Ibid, Accepts the Emperors Proposals, 428. Absolves his
Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, 429. His Heroical Courage in refusing
the Interim, 462. He is used with great Harshness, 463. Declares he will not
persuade his Sons to receive the Interim. 469. Is carried Prisoner into the Low
Countries, 473. And kept with the Emperor, 474. Is brought back into Germany
with the Emperor, 496. Is dismissed by the Emperor, 573. Sollicites to be
restored upon Maurice 's Death, 587. Dies, 596. The differences between him and
the Elector Augustus, 597. John Prince Palatine steps between the Landgrave and
the D. of Brunswick at the Diet of Spire, 319. John Marquess of Brandenbourg
answers to the Saxon's and Landgrave's Letter. 387. Refuses the Interim, 460.
Islebius (Joannes Agricola) Preaches up Antinomianism, 244. Recants, 245.
Assists in Drawing up the Interim, 454. Jubilee Redueed to 50 Years by Pope
Clement, 9. P. Julius II. obliged to call a Council in 2 Years, 26. Refuses to
appear at that of Pisa, Ibid. Calls another at the Church of St. John de
Lateran in Rome, Ibid. Excommunicates the Pisan Cardinals, 27. Dies, Ibid. His
decree concerning Appeals, 35. P. Julius III. (de Monte) Inaugurated, 492.
gives his Hat to a Youth, Ibid. Secures Parma to Octavio Farnese, 492.
Publishes Bulls to call a Council at Trent, 503. They Offended many, 505. Cites
Octavio Farnese to Rome, 513. Writes lovingly to the Switzers, 514. Publishes
Indulgences at the Council of Trent, 542. Publishes a Declaration of
Thanksgiving for the Reduction of England, 611. Dies, 614.
K.
KIng of the Romans; terms of choosing one, 157. The manner of their Elections,
158. Knights, the ceremony of their Creation, 37. Knipperdoling a great
incendiary in Munster, 193. Made public Hangman of the Town, 194. Is taken at
the Storm of Munster, 201. and executed with John of Leyden, 202.
L.
LAndgrave, vide Philip Landgrave of Hesse. Landre (Francis de) a Preacher at
Paris, 297. Articles exhibited against him, ibid. His Answer, ibid. Recants,
309. Latimer (Hugh) burnt for his Religion at Oxford, 619. Langus (Matthew)
Bishop of Gurk, vide Maximilian. Made Cardinal, 27. Lateran, Fourth Council,
its Dignity, 26. Immortality of the Soul debated in it, 27. Lautrec leads an
Army into Italy, 110. Takes Alexandria and Pavia, ibid. Besieges Naples, 115.
Dies before it, ibid. Lenoncour (Robert Cardinal) made Bishop of Metz, 499.
Assists the French King in the taking of Metz, 555. Pope Leo X. Publishes Bulls
of Indulgences, 1. Sends Cajetan to the Diet at Augsbourg, 4. Summons Luther to
appear at Rome, 5. Writes to Cajetan to fetch Luther to Augsbourg, and to
command all persons to declare their abhorrence of his Opinions, ibid. Writes
to Frederick D. of Saxony to abandon Luther, 6. And to Venize to command him to
take care of Luther, ibid. Publishes a Bull, Nov. 8. 1518. For Indulgences, 12.
Favors the Election of Francis, I. 14. Meets him at Bononia after the defeat
of the Switzers at Marignano, 14. Concludes the fourth Lateran Council, 27.
Answers the Elector of Saxony 's Letter, 34. Publishes a Bull against Luther,
35. Condemns his Books and gives him 60 days to repent, Ibid. Else he
Excommunicates him, 36. Makes a League with the Switzers, 48. And with Charles
V. 50. Dies, Ibid. Leva (Antonio de) Charles V. 's General in Provence, 208.
Vnsnccessful there, Ibid. Lewis XII. Sends Ambassadors to the Council of Pisa.
26. His Kingdom put under an Interdict by P. Julius, 27. Lewis K. of Hungary
craves aid from the Diet at Nurenberg, 54. Overthrown by Solomon and kiiied,
105. Lewis Prince Palatine stands up for the preserving Luther 's safe conduct
at Worms, 44. Sends Ambassadors to Smalcald to the Protestants, 153. Dies.
321. Lewis D. of Bavaria, vide Bavaria. Leyden (John of) a Tailor, 192.
Preaches Anabaptism at Munster, Ibid. Incenses the Mad Multitude, 193. Marries
Matthew 's Widow, 194. Publishes Polygamy by Inspiration, 195. Is made King of
the Anabaptists, Ibid. Administers the Supper to his Subjects, 196. Beheads one
of his Queens, 199. Is obstinate to the last, 201. Is taken in the surprise of
the Town by Obersteyn, Ibid. Garried about for a sight, 202. Executed, Ibid.
His Body set in a Cage upon a Tower in Munster, Ibid. Lindaw, the City of
Lindaw receives the Interim, 472. Lintz, a Town of Austria upon the Danube, 12.
Lions, Nine Persons burnt there for Heresy, 587. De Lire is sent to the
Landgrave with Conditions, 442. Locusts in Germany, 298. Lorrain 's (Cardinals
of) Harangue to the Pope about a Council, 443. Lovain Divines rail at Luther,
21. Condemn his Writings, 27. Censure them publicly, 31. They Propose Articles
against the Reformation which the Emperor Ratified, 343. Lubeckers make War
against Christian K. of Denmark, Son to Frederick, 203. Lucern one of the
Swisse-Cantons, vide Switzers. They study to introduce the Reformation there
but in vain, 618. Luther (Martin) Preaches against Indulgences at Wittemberg in
1517. 2. Writes October. 31. to Albert Bishop of Mentz and Magdebourg against it,
Ibid. Publishes 95 Theses against Indulgences, Purgatory, etc. Ibid. Sends an
Explication of them to the Bishop of Brandenbourg and to Stupitz, Ibid.
Vindicates himself to Pope Leo, Ibid. Answers Eckius, 3. Answers Prierias 's
Dialogue, ibid. Rejoyns upon Silvester 's reply, 4. Answers Hogostratus, Ibid.
Desires that his Cause may be heard in Germany, 6. Is urged to retract his
Theses by Cajetan at Augsbourg, 7. Submits to the Pope, but refuses to recant,
Ibid. Referrs himself to the Judgment of the German Universities with that of
Paris, Ibid. Gives his Opinion in Writing to Cajetan, 8. Goes from Augsbourg
two days after, Ibid. And Writes to Cajetan when he went away to excuse
himself, Ibid. Appeals from the Pope not rightly informed, to his Determination
after full Information, 9. Luther Answers Frederick 's Letter excusing his
Retreat from Augsbourg, 11. He appeals from the Pope to a General Council, 12.
He Writes Submissively to Pope Leo, 13. Goes to Leipzick to Dispute, 21.
Opposes the Popes Supremacy against Eckius, 22. Writes Submissively to the Pope
at Miltitz 's desire, 23. His Character of the Court of Rome, 24. Makes
Proposals for Peace, Ibid. Writes a Book of Christian Liberty, 25. Another
called Tessaradicus, Ibid. And about confession and Vows, Ibid. And Communion
in both kinds, Ibid. He anwsers the Lovain and Cologne Divines, 27. He Writes
to Charles V. 31. And to the States of the Empire, Ibid. And Submissively to
the Bishop of Mentz, 32. And to the Bishop of Mersburgh, 33. Opposes the Popes
Bull, and appeals to a General Council, 36. Writes about the Babylonish
Captivity, Ibid. Condemns the Doctrine of the seven Sacraments, Ib. Writes
against the Popes Bull, Ibid. His Books burnt by the Popes Messengers to
Frederick, 39. He burns the Canon Law and the Popes Bull, Ibid. His reasons for
it, Ibid, 40. Answers Ambrosius Catharinus, 40. Promises to appear at Worms in
a Letter to Frederick, 41. Is put into the Bull de Coena Domini, 42. Turns it
into High Dutch and writes Animadversions, Ibid. Goes to Worms, ibid. Is
dissuaded from it, Ibid. To no Purpose, Ibid. Owns his Books, ibid. Takes time
to consider of his defense, ibid. has a day allowed, ibid. Pleads to his
Accusation before the Emperor and States, 43. Answers Eckius's Returns upon his
Plea, 44. Meets Commissioners who were to hear him privately, ibid. His Answer
to the Commissioners, 45. Parlies with them, 46. Submits to the next General
Council, ibid. Goes home from Worms, ibid. Writes to the Emperor for
Protection upon the Road, ibid. And to the States, ibid. Drolls in his Answer
to the Parisian Censure of his Books, 47. Writes Letters to strengthen his
Friends in his Retirement, 49. And Books against the Mass and Monastic Vows,
and one against Latomus, ibid. Answers Henry the VIII. sharply, 50. Returns to
Wittemberg, 51. Excuses it to Frederick, ibid. Disapproves the taking down of
Images, 52. He writes to the Boliemians to persuade them to Unity, 53. Writes
against false Bishops, ibid. Calls himself Preacher of the Gospel, ibid.
Refuses to stand to the Determination of any under God, 54. Translates Adrian
's Instructions to the Diet, with Remarks, 60. Interprets the Decree of the
Diet at Nuremberg, 64. And adds thereto a Discourse against Private Masses, 65.
Admonishes the Princes of Germany, 75. Writes de Servo Arbitrio against
Erasmus, ibid. Warns the Saxons of Muncer, 86. Writes a Book to prevent
Sedition, ibid. His Answer to the Demands of the Boors in Schwabia, 90. His
Momtory Epistle to the Princes and Nobility, 94. His General Epistle to
Nobility and Boors, 95. His Alarm against the Boors, 96. Censured as too sharp,
ibid. He defends it afterward, ibid. Writes against Caralostadius, about the
Eucharist, 97. Undertakes his Protection upon his Submission, ibid. Marries a
Nu^, ibid. Differs with Zuinglius about the Eutharist, ibid. Writes
submissively to Henry VIII. 100. And to George D. of Saxony, 101. Complains of
K. Henry 's Answer, 102. Has a Conference with Zuinglius at Marpurgh, 121.
Writes to the Bishops at the Diet of Augsbourg, 140. Comforts Melancthon, ibid.
He defends the League of Smalcald, 148. He persuades the Leipzickers to
continue Protestants, 168. He justifies himself from the Charge of Rebellion,
ibid. Quarrels with Erasmus, 170. Writes against the Anabaptists at Munster,
199. Wrote against the Draught of a Reformation, published by the Delegate
Cardinals, 238. Writes against the Antinomians, 244. Preaches at Leipzick,
250. He publishes a Book about the Authority of Councils, ibid. He writes
against the D. of Brunswick, 272. He Installs Amstorfius, 288. Writes against
Phlugius, ib. Writes a Camp Sermon for those who went against the Turks, 292.
His Opinion about Magistracy, 293. His second Camp Sermon, 294. His Prayer
against the rage of the Turks, 295. He writes about the Sacrament, 340. Answers
what the Lovain Doctors wrote against the Reformation, 343. Publishes a Book
against the Roman Hierarchy, 349. His Theses about Government, ib. His
Ludicrous Pictures about the Pope, ibid. Writes to dissuade the Protestants
from Releasing the D. of Brunswick, 354. He goes to Isleben to be an Arbitrator
between the Counts Mansfeild, 362. Falls sick, ibid. His Prayers, 363. Dies,
ibid. Is buried at Wittemberg, ibid. His Life, ibid. His Skill in the German
Language, ibid. His undaunted courage, ibid.
M.
MAgdebourg, refuses to submit to the Emperor, 434. Is Proscribed, 436. In
great distress upon that account, 485. They publish a Manifesto, 486. Another
Manifesto of theirs, 496. They are routed by the D. of Mecklenbourg, 500.
Conditions are proposed to them, 501. They publish a third Declaration, ibid.
They Sally out briskly upon Maurice, 502. They answer the Deputation of their
own States, 502. They overcome D. Maurice in a Sally, and take the D. of
Mecklenbourg Prisoner, 505. They are solicited to surrender, 506. The
Declaration of the States and Clergy against them, ibid. Their Answer to it,
508. A Mutiny in the Town, 515. They accept of a Peace, 528. Their Preachers
Vindicate themselves to D. Maurice, 529. They get credit by their constancy,
ibid. Malvenda opens the Conference at Ratisbon, 359. Treats of Justification,
ibid. Answers Bucer, ibid. Mantua, a Council called to meet there, by P. Paul
III. 207. The D. of Mantua demanded a Garrison before the Council should sit,
230. Marcellus II. chosen Pope, 615. Dies after a Reign of 22 days, ibid. Marot
(Clement) an account of him, 310. Mary Q. of Hungary made Governess of the
Netherlands, 149. Goes to Augsbourg to Mediate for the mitigation of the
Emperors Edict, 501. Holds a Convention of the States of the Netherlands at Aix
la Chapelle, 560. She stops the Landgrave at Mastricht, 573. Mary Q. of Scots,
Troubles in her Minority, 316. Affianced to Prince Edward of England, ibid. Is
carried into France, 477. Mary ( Daughter to Henry VIII.) Proclaims her self
Queen of England, upon K. Edward's death, 589. Enters London, ibid. Makes
Gardener Chancellor, ibid. Beheads the D. of Northumberland, ibid. She
Establishes the Popish Religion again in England, 591. Orders a public
Disputation at London, 593. Dissolves K. Edward 's Laws about Religion in
Parliament, 595. Marries Pr. Philip of Spain, ibid. Breaks Wiat 's Conspiracy,
596. Beheads Jane Gray, and the Duke of Suffolk, ibid. Banishes Foreign
Protestants out of England, 597. Publishes a Book of Articles about Religion,
ibid. Commits the Princess Ellizabeth to the Tower, 598. Her Marriage with K.
Philip is solemnized with great splendour, 604. Calls a Parliament, wherein
England is again subjected to Rome, 605, 606. Dissolves that Parliament, 607.
Burns several for Religion, ibid. She mediates a Peace between the Emperor and
King of France, 616. It was reported that she was with Child, ibid. She
increases the Persecution in England, ibid. Her Ambassadors return home from
Rome, 618. She calls a Parliament, where she proposes the Restitution of the
Church Lands, in vain, 627. Martyr (Peter) comes into England and professes
Divinity at Oxon, 443. Disputes there about the Lord's Supper, 483. Is in
trouble upon Edward 's Death, 590. Applies himself to Cranmer, ibid. Gets leave
to be gone, ibid. Goes to Zurich, 637. Matthews (John) a great Prophet among
the Anabaptists, commands a Community of Goods, 194. Runs Truteling through
with a Pike by Inspiration, ibid. Is run through himself by a Soldier, ibid.
Maurice ( D. of Saxony) Marries the Landgrave's Daughter, 272. Quarrels with
the Elector of Saxony, 292. Is wounded in Hungary, 304. Refuses to enter into
the Protestant League after his Father's death, ibid. Makes Laws for the
Government of the Country, 311. Endeavors an accommodation between the D. of
Brunswick and the Landgrave, 353. Persuades the D. of Brunswick to surrender,
354. Purges himself of Treachery, ibid. Holds a Secret Conference with the
Emperor at Ratisbon, 380. Has a Conference with K. Ferdinand, 391. Calls a
Convention of the States at Chemnitz, 405. Consults against the Protestants,
ibid. His Friends write to the Protestants, 406. He writes to the Landgrave,
ibid. Writes to the Elector, 409. And to his Son, ibid. Takes most of the
Electors Towns, ibid. Is ill spoken of, and Lampoon'd by the Protestants, 410.
Publishes a Manifesto to clear himself, ibid. Joins Ferdinand to go toward
Bohemia, 423. Intercedes for the Landgrave, 429. Writes to the Landgrave to
comply, 430. Receives Wittemberg with the rest of the Electorate from the
Emperor, 431. Exacts an Oath of Allegiance of John Frederick 's Subjects, ibid.
Promises the Landgrave to interceed with the Emperor at Hall, 433. And
Remonstrates about it, ibid. Receives the Wittemberg Divines Graciously, 435.
He is invested in the Electorate Solemnly at Augsbourg, 457. Calls a Convention
at Meissen, who draw up a Form of Religion for Saxony, 478. Intercedes with
Prince Philip for the Landgrave, ibid. Writes to the States to clear himself
from the imputation of Popery, 484. His Deputies at Augsbourg protest against
the Council of Trent, 499. He engages in the Expedition against the
Magdebourghers, 502. He is made Generalissimo of that War, 503. He attacks the
Magdebourghers, 504. Defeats Heideck and Mansfeldt, ibid. He promises the
Landgrave Aid secretly, 505. Routed in a Sally by the Magdebourghers, ibid.
Proposes Conditions of Peace to the Town, 515. Commands his Divines to draw up
a Consession of their Faith, ibid. Demands a safe Conduct for his Divines to go
to the Council of Trent, 516. Sends the Proposals to the Magdebourghers by
Heideck, 521. He holds a Convention about the business of Magdebourg, 525. He
takes an Oath of Fidelity from the men of ^atzenelbogen, 526. He concludes a
Peace with the City of Magdebourg, 528. Complains of the Preachers, ibid.
Hatches a War against the Emperor, 529. Sends Ambassadors to the Emperor about
the Landgrave, 531. He holds a Conference with Prince William, the Landgrave's
Son, 534. His Ambassadors come to Trent and declare their Instructions, 537.
They join with the Agents of Wirtemberg and Strasburg to solicit for the
hearing of the Protestants in the Council, ibid. The Saxon Divines are upon
their way to come to the Council, 541. The Ambassadors complain against
Pelargus, ibid. Maurice sends Letters to his Ambassadors, 542. They leave Trent
secretly, ibid. His care for the release of the Landgrave, 549. He declares War
against the Emperor, 550. Takes the Field and joins with Marq. Albert, 555. He
goes with the other Princes, and besieges Ulm, 556. Treats with Ferdinand of
Conditions of Peace, ibid. Writes to the French King, 558. His Army Skirmishes
with the Imperialists, 559. A Mutiny in his Camp for want of Pay, ibid. His
Soldiers make the Emperor fly from Inspruck, 560. Which is Plundered, ibid.
They Publish a Declaration, ibid. He restores the Outed Ministers, ibid. His
Grievances at the Treaty of Passaw, 563. His Proposals at the Treaty, 566. He
is impatient of delay, and hastens Ferdinand, 568. He returns to the
Confederates, 569. Besieges Franefort, ibid. At last he accepts a Peace, 571.
Sends his Forces into Hungary, 573. Sends Commissioners to treat with John
Frederick's Commissioners to no purpose, 577. Went to Heidelberg to mediate
between Albert and the Bishops, 578. Makes a League with the D. of Brunswick,
ibid. Declares War against Marq. Albert, 581. He overcomes Albert, and is
killed in the Fight, 586. His Death foretold by Prodigies, ibid. Maximilian
(Emperor) holds a Diet at Augsbourg, 4. Writes in August 1518. to Pope Leo to
correct Luther, and to put an end to his growing Heresies, 5. Dies, Jan. 12.
1519. 13. Sends Ambassadors to the Council of Pisa, 26. Goes off to Pope
Julius, 27. Sends Langus to the Lateran Council, ibid. Commissions Hogostrate
and Reuchlin to examine Jewish Books, 30. Wars with the Switzers, 469.
Maximilian ( Son to Ferdinand) comes into Germany out of Spain, 505. Is well
beloved, ibid. He returns home from Spain, 529. Is honorably received at
Trent, 535. Goes to Brussels, 637. Mecklenbourg, vide George D. of
Mecklenbourg. Mechlin almost consumed by Lightning, 392. Medices, the rise of
that Family to Greatness, 169. Meinier President of the Parliament of Aix
persecutes the Waldenses, 345. Uses the Inhabitants of Merindol and Cabriers
barbarously, 345, 346. Meissen, John Bishop of Meissen, Opposes Luther about
Communion in both kinds, 25. Melancthon (Philip) comes to Wittemberg, 21. Goes
to Leipzick, ib. Answers the Parisian Censure of Luther 's Books, 47. Comes to
the Diet at Augsbourg, 127. One of the Protestant Deputies there to mediate an
Accommodation, 132. Very much disconsolate, 140. Comforted by Luther, ibid.
Comes to Cologne, 310. Defends Bucer, 311. His Opinion about Indifferent
Things, 481. He draws up a Confession of Faith for the Saxon Divines, 515.
Congratulates John Frederick 's safe Return home, 574. Sends Letters of Comfort
to the Banished Bohemian Preachers, 613. Mendoza sent by the Emperor to the
Council of Trent, 360. Ambassador to Strasbourg, 419. His Speech to the Pope
about the Council from the Emperor, 443. Sends the Pope's Answer to the
Emperor, 445. Mentz, the Seat of the Elector, four German miles from Francfort,
13. Elector of Mentz, vide Albert. The Elector approves the Interim craftily in
the Diet, 460. Sends the Pope's Indult into the Landgraviate, 483. Denies to
Register Manrice 's Protestation against a Council, 499. He leaves Trent, 543.
He flies from Albert of Brandenbourg, 567. He dies, 614. Mersburgh, Bishops
Answer to Luther, 33. Milan, the Council removed thither from Pisa, 27. Miltitz
(Charles) Bedchamber man to Pope Leo, vide Wittemberg. Miltitz sent by Leo to
Frederick against Luther, 12. Treats with Luther, 23. And the Augustine Friars
concerning him, ibid. Minden proscribed by the Imperial Chamber, 245. Mirandula
(Joannes Picus) his Books Censured, 28. Monte ( Cardinal de) the Pope's Legate
at Bononia, His Answer to the Pope's Letter, 444. His Insolent Usage of Vargas
the Emperor's Ambassador at Bononia, 446, 447. Made Pope, and called Julius
III. 492. Montmorency (Anne) made Constable of France, 239. Is in disgrace,
277. Gains Favor with Henry II. King of France. Takes Metz for the French
King, 555. His Treaty with the Deputies of Strasbourg, 557. More ( Sir Thomas)
Chancellor of England, 180. Beheaded for not denying the Pope's Supremacy,
Ibid. Morin (John) under-Provost of Paris prosecutes the Protestants severely,
175. Morone (John) Legate to P. Paul III. at Spire, 291. Muleasses K. of Tunis
outed of his Country comes to Augsbourg, 457. Muncer (Thomas) begins to Preach
in Franconia, 52. An account of his Enthusiasm, 83. Settles at Mulhausen, 84.
Turns out by the Rabbles help all the Magistrates, ibid. Joins with the Boors
of Swabia and Franconia, Ibid. Is routed by Count Mansfield, Ibid. Retires with
his Gang to Franck-hausen, Ibid. His Speech to the Rabble, 85. His men
frighted, 86. Routed by the Princes Army, Ibid. 5000. of them taken, Ibid.
Muncer taken at Franck-hausen, Ibid. Racked to confess his accomplices, Ibid.
Beheaded, Ibid. Munster a City in Westphalia possessed by the Anabaptists, 174.
The Senate Establish the Reformed Religion there, 191. They make a treaty with
the Bishop, 192. Banish the Anabaptists, Ibid. They are Tumultuous there, 193.
It is besieged by its Bishop, Ibid. Who is assisted by the Neighboring
Princes, 194. A great Famine in the City, 198. The Princes threaten to send the
Force of the Empire upon them, 197. Murner (Thomas) a Franciscan Friar
complains to Campegio against the Senate of Strasbourg, 73. Musculus
(Wolfgangus.) flies from Augsbourg to Bern for not subscribing the Interim,
461.
N.
NAples a sedition there because of the Inquisition, 434. Nassaw (Count of)
desires the Elector of Saxony to come to the Diet at Spire, 152. Henry of
Nassaw Charles V's. General in Picardy, 208. Vnsuccessful there, Ibid. William,
Son to Count Nassaw succeeds the Prince of Orange, 327. Naves discourses with
Count Solmes about the War designed against the Protestants, 357. Speaks to the
Landgrave at Spire in the Emperors name, 368. Dies, 419. Naumbourg, the Chapter
choose Phlugius for their Bishop, 288. Netherlands, Reformation gets footing
there, 341. Northumberland (John D. of) Marries his Son Guilford Dudley to the
Lady Jane Gray, 580. Is siezed on at Cambridge, 589. And beheaded by Q. Mary,
Ibid. Nuremberg, a Diet convened thither, 51. Their Ministers accused to the
Popes Legate, 62. The Acts of the Diet Published, 63. The treaty of
Pacification removed hither from Schurnfurt, 160. A Peace is there concluded,
Ibid. A Holy League there drawn up amongst the Popish Princes, 245. Another
Diet there, 298. The decree of that Diet, 299. The Netherlands Ambassadors
accuse the D. of Cleve in the Diet, 306. The Decree of the Diet, 307. Their
quarrels with Albert of Brandenbourg, 561. Vide Albert, their Answer to Albert
's Remonstrance, 599.
O
O Bersteyn (Ulrick Count) made General of the Army against the Munster mad
Men, 197. His Soldiers are tumultuous for want of Pay, 200. He carries the Town
at last, 201. Ockham (William) Condemned by the University of Paris, 28. What
his Doctrine, 29. Oecolampadius (John) Preaches at Basil, 76. He embraces the
Doctrine of Zuinglius, 97. Disputes at Bern, 111. Meets Luther at Marpurg, 121.
Dies, 156. Orleans, vide Franciscan Friars. D. of Orleans dies, 352. Osiander
comes to Marpurg to the Conference betwixt Luther and Zuinglius, 121. Sets up a
new Sect about Justification in Prussia, 511. Rails against Melancthon and the
Saxon Divines, 512. Dies at Coningsberg, 575. His Sect in Prussia promise to
submit to the Augustane Confession, 632. Otho Prince Palatine Embraces the
Protestant Religion, 300. Recovers his Country, and Joins with the Confederate
Princes, 556. Oxford, a dispute there concerning the Lord's Supper, 483. Oxline
(John) a Minister carried by force from his House by the Governor of Turegie,
76. This Occasions the Canton of Zurich to remonstrate, 77.
P.
PAlatine (George) vide Spires. Palatine (Prince) vide Lewis, vide Otho.
Palaeologus (John) Emperor of Constantinople comes to the Council of Ferrara,
10. Pall, the excessive charge of it, 273. The Ceremony of its Consecration,
274. Passaw a Treaty there, 563. The Princes Mediators there answer Maurice 's
Grievances, 564. And they answer the French Ambassadors Speech, 565. They
exhort the Emperor to a Peace by Letters, 566. They answer the Emperors
Letters, 568. The heads of the Pacifitation, 572. Paris Doctors of that
University appealed against P. Leo for Abrogating the Pragmatick Sanction, 10.
Censure the Books of Reuchlin, 30. And condemn Luther 's Books, 47. An Account
of the Faculty of Divinity at Paris, 48. A Young Gentleman of Thoulouse burnt
there for Religion, 239. They are severe upon the Lutherans, 296. The manner of
Proceedings upon him, 297. Their Divines at Melun draw up Articles against the
Reformation, 342. The Parliament answers the K. of France 's Edict, 619. Paul
III. (Farnese) chosen Pope, 174. Instructs Vergerius how to stave off a
Council, 175. Issues out Bulls to call a Council, 206. And others to reform the
Vices of Rome, 209. Prorogues the Council called at Mantua, 230. Is Sollicitous
to reconcile the Emperor and the King of France, 232. Appoints a Committee of
Cardinals to Examine the Corruptions of the Church of Rome, 233. Nominates
Vicenza for the Session of the Council, 238. Returns to Rome, 241. Prorogues
the Council without Limitation, 250. Sends his Legate to the Emperor, 264.
Makes War upon Perugia, 266. The Speech of his Legate at the Diet of Spire,
291. Allows a Council to be held at Trent, 292. Sends Cardinals to mediate
between the French K. and the Emperor, 303. Commends the Chapter of Cologne in
a Letter to them, 313. Writes an Answer to the Letter of the Princes, 320.
Writes a sharp Letter to the Emperor to chide him for the Decree of Spires,
337. Creates several Cardinals, 340. Summons the Council once more to Trent,
Ibid. Endeavors to raise a War against the Lutherans, 348. Sends his Legates
to Trent, 360. Writes to the Swisse Bishops to come to the Council of Trent,
374. Excommunicates the Archbishop of Cologne, Ibid. Writes to the Switzers to
persuade them to join against the Protestants, 382. He publishes a Bull
declaring the causes of the War against the Protestants, 388. Makes the Count
Schawenbourg Archbishop of Cologne, 417. His answer to the Cardinal of Trent
and Mendoza, 444. His Letter to his Legate at Bononia, Ibid. His answer to the
Emperors Ambassador, 445. And Letter to the German Bishops, ibid. His answer to
the Emperors, Ambassadors, to justify the removal of the Council to Bononia,
450. His animadversions upon the Interim, 459. Sends Legates into Germany, 473.
Who bring an Indulgence or Indult of several things, 482. He dies, 487. Libels
come out against him with accounts of his horrid Lusts, 488. His Funeral, ibid.
He instituted the order of the Jesuits, 615. Paul IV. (Caraffa) chosen Pope,
615. Pelargus (Ambrose) Reflects insolently upon the Protestants in the Council
of Trent, 541. De Pensier a Lutheran Divine recants at Paris, 309. Pescara,
vide d' Avalos. Peter Pence, what, 170. Petro Aloisio, P. Paul III's Bastard,
D. of Parma and Piacenza, 438. Is Assassinated at Piacenza, 439. His flagitious
life, Ibid. Phefecorn (John) a Convert Jew, 29. His Petition to Maximilian,
Ibid. Writes against Reuchlin, 30. Phifer a Companion of Muncer 's, 84. Philip
Landgrave of Hesse, his Spaech to his Soldiers against Muncer, 85. His
discourse with Muncer, 86. Arms for fear of a Confeder my against the Reserned
Religion, 114. Departs privately from the Diet at Augsbourg, 131. Makes a
League for six years with the Reformed Switzers, 141. Answers the Arbitrators,
154. Endenvours to restore Ulric Duke of Wirtemberg, 169. And brings it about,
173. Writes to acquaint the Emperor with his Proceedings for Duke Ulric, 174.
Makes his submission to Ferdinand about Ulric 's business, 179. Commands his
Divines to answer the An^thaptists Books, 198. He sends an answer to their mad
Proposals, Ibid. Goes to the Convention at Eysenach, 244. Intercepts the D. of
Brunswick 's Letter, 246. He Writes in his own Vindication to the German
Princes, 247. Excauses the D. of Wirtemberg to K. Francis by Letter, 249. He
answers the Emperors Letter about a Pacification, 263. Joins with the Elector
of Saxony against the D. of Brunswick, 298. Opposes the Duke of Brunswick, 353.
Submits to an accommodation, Ibid. Receives the D. of Brunswick upon surrender,
354. Writes to the Emperor concerning him, Ibid. Writes again, 355. Answers the
Emperors Letter, Ibid. Writes to Granvel about the War intended against the
Protestants, 356. Writes to Naves about the same business, 358. Goes to Spire
to Meet the Emperor, 368. Treats with him, Ibid. And with Granvel and Naves,
370. And with the Emperor again, 373. Is courteously dismissed, Ibid. Sends
notice to Ratisbon of the Emperors Preparations, 376. He arms against the
Emperor, 384. His Forces, 388. He sends his Son William to Strasbourg, ibid.
Refuses to Confer with the Duke of Brunswick, ibid. His Men skirmish with the
Spaniards, 395. His bold advice to set upon the Emperor, 397. Comes near the
Impertalists with his Army, 404. A Skirmish between him and the Prince of
Sulmona, 407. His Letter to the Mauricians, ibid. And to Maurice, 408. Is in
danger upon the Retreat of the Army, 412. Writes to Maurice his Son-in-Law, ib.
He rejects the Emperor's Proposals, 423. He justifies himself from the
Reproaches about Surprising Francfort, 426. Is invited to come to Leipzick,
429. Articles of Peace are proposed to him, 430. Which he accepts, 431. Goes to
Hall to the Emperor, 433. Signs the Articles, and submits to the same in
Person, ibid. Is detained Prisoner, 433. Letters are spread abroad in his Name
as if he allowed of the Interim, 463. Is carried Prisoner into Flanders, 473.
And sent to Oudenard, 474. His Subjects refuse the Interim, 477. New
Intercessions for him in vain, 479. The Ministers in his Country refuse the
Pope's Indult, 483. He attempts an escape, 504. Not succeeding, is kept close
Prisoner, 505. He relieves the Oppressed Ministers Liberally, 517. He is set at
liberty, and stopped again, 373. He returns into his own Country, 574. He accepts
a Mediation in the Difference with the Count of Nassaw, about Catzenelbogen,
617. Which still keeps in Suspense, 620. Has a Meeting with Augustus Elector of
Saxony, 633. Philip Prince Palatine Governor of Vienna when Solomon besieged
it, 121. Forces him to raise his Siege, Ibid. Philip Son to Charles V. comes
through the Netherlands into Italy, 477. Is received at Genoa, Ibid. And at
Milan, 478. Goes into Germany, Ibid. Enters Brussels, 479. Homage is done to
him in the Low Countries, 485. He marries Queen Mary in England, 604. He has
Naples and the Kingdom of Jerusalem, Ibid. With the Duchy of Milan resigned to
him, 605. Goes into Flanders to meet his Father, 618. He enters upon the
Government of the Netherlands, Ibid. Sends Ambassadors into Germany to acquaint
them with his New Government, 628. Phlugius (Julius) vide Gropper. Chosen by
the Chapter of Naumbourg to be their Bishop, 288. Is admitted one of the
Presidents of the Conference at Ratisbon, 359. Assists in drawing up the
Interim, 454. Phlugius (Caspar) heads the Bohemian Confederates, 423. Is
condemned of High Treason, 434. Picards, a Sect of the Bohemians, 53. Picus,
vide Mirandula. Pisa, Council there, 26. Called by Cardinals, Ibid. Reasons of
so doing, Ibid. Suspends P. Julius, 27. Remove to Milan, Ibid. P. Pius 's
Decree concerning appeals, 35. He altered his Opinion from what it was at the
Council of Basil, 36. Excommunicates Sigismund, ibid. Poiet (William)
Chancellor of France disgraced, 299. Pool (Reginald Cardinal) sent Nuncio from
the Pope to the French King, 210. Writes a Book called a Defense of
Ecclesiastical Unity, ibid. Made Cardinal by P. Paul III. 211. Loses the
Popedom on suspicion of Lutheranism, 490. Is detained in Germany by the
Emperor, 594. Returns into England, 605. Reconciles the Nation to the Sea of
Rome, 606. Writes to the Emperor and King of France to mediate a Peace, 615.
Popes anciently subject to Emperors, 38. Pragmatick Sanction, vide Paris.
Priests, the Ceremony of their Degradation, 64. Prietias (Sylvester) writes
against Luther, 3. He asserts the Pope to be absolute head of the Church, ibid.
Replies to Luther, 4. Princes of the Empire disagree about the Emperor's Letter
against: Luther, 44. Complain of the Pope's Proceedings in the Affairs of
Germany, 60. Return an Answer to Adrian 's Letter to the Diet, ibid. Draw up an
account of the Grievances of Germany, which they gave to the Pope's Legate, 63.
Their answer to Campegio 's Speech at Nuremberg, 68. They write to Charles V.
to make haste into Germany, 108. They write again, 110. Write from Spire to the
Senate at Strasburg, 116. Princes of the Reformed Religion Protest against the
Decree of Spire, 119. Deliberate about a League amongst all Protestants in
Germany, 122. They answer the Emperors Proposals at Augsbourg, 133. Several of
the Princes declare upon what Terms they allow a King of the Romans, 157.
Protestant Princes refuse a league with Francis against the Emperor, 187. Those
assembled at Coblentz write severely to the Anabaptists at Munster, 197.
Catholic Princes Opinion at Ratisbon, 281. They answer the Legates Letter,
283. They Interceed for the D. of Cleve, Ibid. Some of them writes to the Pope,
320. The Popish Princes separate answer at the Diet at Worms, 344. They write
to the Bremers, 501. They meet at Noremberg, 512. Several Princes send
Ambassadors to the Emperor to interceed for the Landgrave's Liberty, 533.
Others desire the Erench King to desist from his inroads into Germany, 558. A
Convention of them meet at Francfort, 579. They write to the Emperor about the
Peace, 616. Protestant Princes, vide Princes, vide Protestant. Protestants, the
Original of the Name, 120. their Ambassadors had audience of Charles at
Piacenza, 123. They appeal to his Answer, 125. They consult of a League at
Smalcald, ibid. And quarrel about Religion, ibid. Break up without a final
Resolution, ibid. The Protestant Deputies meet at Noremberg, 126. Resolve that
Religion should be debated at Augsbourg, 129. Present a Confession of Faith to
the Emperor, ibid. Press to have it read, ibid. The Protestants defend the
Augustane Confession in writing, 131. Answer Truchses 's Speech, 134. They
debate with the Emperor about Religion, 135. They leave the Diet, 137. The
Deputies of the Associate Princes demand liberty of Conscience from the Diet at
Augsbourg, 139. The Protestant Princes write to the Kings of France and England
to wipe of those Calumnies which had been thrown upon them, 145. They summon
all the Protestant Confederates to Smalcald, 147. They solicit the Dane and
Northern Princes, and Free Cities to join with them, ib. Their Answer to the
Emperor's Summons, 149. the Protestant Princes refuse to acknowledge Ferdinand
K. of the Romans, 151. They answer the Ambassadors of the Elector of Mentz and
the Palatine at Smalcald, 153. Both parties of the Protestants have a good
understanding about the Lords Supper, 159, Their Conditions of Pacification,
ibid. They give in a full answer, 164. Their decrees in order to a Council,
167. They give in their Answer to Vergerius 's Proposals for a Council, 181.
They meet at Smalcald, ibid. Their answer to the French Ambassador at Smalcald,
185. Their answer to the English Ambassador, 188. They protest against the
Proceedings of the Imperial Chamber, which shall be contrary to Charles and
Ferdinand 's Decrees, 189. They draw up Articles of a League with Henry VIII.
204. They meet at Francfort, 206. And receive several Cities into the League,
ibid. They break off Correspondence with Henry VIII. Ibid. They send Complaints
to the Emperor against the Prosecutions of the Imperial Chamber, 208. They
answer the Emperors Letter, 209. They meet at Smalcald, 212. Their answer to
Eldo the Emperors Ambassador, 215. Their rejoinder upon Eldo 's reply, 221.
Their Decrees at Smalcald, 226. Their Reasons why they refuse to Meet at
Mantua, whither P. Paul III. had convened them, Ibid. They send Reasons of
their Actions to K. Francis, 230. The Protestant Princes meet at Brunswick,
239. Their Answer at Eysenach, 244. They call a Convention at Arnstadt, 251.
They send Ambassadors to the Emperor into Flanders, 253. They write to the
French King, 254. They meet at Smalcald, 255. They answer the Ambassadors sent
by Granvel to procure a Pacification, 257. They answer King Henry 's
Propositions, 262. Make a Decree to interceed with the French King for the
Protestants if he would not take it ill, Ibid. And resolve to oppose the
Proceedings of the Imperial Chamber, ibid. Their answer to King Ferdinand 's
Proposals at Haguenaw, 268. Their Answers to the Emperors Proposals, 276. They
interceed with the French King for the Protestants, 277. They address to the
Emperor in the Diet, 279. Their answer to Contarini 's Papers, 280. They
Petition the Emperor, 281. They answer Contarini 's Letter against a National
Council, 283. They absolutely decline the Jurisdiction of the Imperial Chamber,
304. They Petition Ferdinand at the Diet of Noremberg, 306. They oppose the
decree of the Diet, 307. They meet at Smalcald, 312. Send Ambassadors to the
Emperor at Spire, ibid. They meet at Francfort, 317. They protest against the
Duke of Brunswick 's voting at the Diet, 319. They accuse the Duke of Brunswick
publicly in the Diet, 322. They persist in their Accusation, 323. Their answer
to Ferdinand at Worms, 344. Their Petition to him, 345. The Protestants meet
at Francfort, 356. Reports are spread of a War against them, ibid. Another
meeting at Francfort, 357. They send Deputies to interceed for the Elector of
Cologne, ibid. They are accused of a Conspiracy, ibid. They still urge the
business of Cologne, 360. The Protestants Deputies meet at Worms, 373. They
complain at Ratisbon that Diazi 's Murder was unrevenged, 374. Their Opinion of
the Council of Trent, 375. They are apprehensive of War, ibid. They demand the
reason of the Preparations, 376. Their Deputies return home from Ratisbon, 380.
The first of their Commanders, ibid. Their Deputies meet at Ulm, 381. They send
to the Venetians and Grisons, ibid. They send Ambassadors to the Switzers, 383.
They Petition the Emperor, 384. They send Ambassadors to France and England,
385. They write to the Marquess of Brandenbourg to dissuade him from assisting
the Emperor, 387. They publish a Manifesto against him, Ibid. Their first
exploits in the War, 388. They write to the D. of Bavaria, 392. Their demands
of the Switzers, 393. They declare War against the Emperor, ibid. They dispute
what Title to give the Emperor, 394. They march to Ratisbon, ibid. The names of
the principal Confederates, 395. The Spaniards break into their Camp, ibid.
Their oversight in not taking the Landgrave's advice, 397. Their address to the
Bohemians, 399. Their Declaration concerning Incendiaries sent out by the Pope,
ibid. Their answer to the Instrument of Proscription, ibid. They raise their
Camp from Ingolstadt, 403. They write to the reformed Switzers, 404. They lose
an opportunity of taking the Emperor at Grienghen, 407. Their Council of War
writes to Maurice, 408. They write to several Imperial Cities and Princes to
join with them, ibid. The Confederates Deputies meet at Ulm, 409. Answer the
Elector of Saxony 's demands, ibid. They send an Embassy into France and
England, 411. They are in danger and withdraw their Camp, ibid. In the retreat
they run a risque, 412. They differ from the Catholics at Augsbourg about the
Council of Trent, 440. They are Solicited to submit to the Council, ibid.
Their Ambassors at Trent insist upon such a safe conduct for their Divines as
was granted at the Council of Basil, 539. The demands of their Divines in the
Council, 546. The Protestant Princes make a League at Nuremberg, 614. They
acquaint the Emperor with it, ibid. Their answer in the Diet of Augsbourg to
the Papists Allegations, 623. Their reply to Ferdinand 's Answer to their
Papers, 626. Prussia vide Albert of Brandenbourg, vide Sigismund of Poland,
vide Wolfgang grand Master.
R.
RAtisbon, Catholic Lords there with Campegio, confirm the Decree at Worms
against Luther, 74. Make Regulations for the Reformation of the Clergy, 75. The
Princes do not meet at Ratisbon at the Diet, 110. The Diet removes thither from
Spire, 155. The Articles of the Treaty of Nurenberg are there confirmed, 160. A
Diet there, 272. The Acts of the Diet at Ratisbon, 275. The Presidents and
Witnesses at the Conference, 276. The Acts of the Diet, 278. The Decree of the
Diet, 283. They promise Aid against the Turks, ib. A Conference is appointed
there, 351. The Names of the Conferrers, ibid. It is refused by the Papists,
352. The Conference opened, 358. The Names of the Presidents, ibid. The Points
disputed upon, ibid. It breaks up, 359. A Diet there, 374. Reformation in
Germany, its Original, 273. Religion, those of the Reformed Religion begin to
form a League, 105. Renate Prince of Orange is killed, 327. Reuchlin (John
Capnio) Commissioned to examine Jewish Books, 30. His Answer to Maximilian,
ibid. Answers Phefercorne 's Book, ibid. Is Cited to Mentz, ibid. Excepts to
Hogostratus as a Judge, ibid. Appeals to the Pope, ibid. Is acquitted at Rome,
ibid. Dies, 55. Rhodes taken by Solomon, 57. Richard Elector of Triers, vide
Triers. Ridley (Nicholas) Bishop of London burnt at Oxford for Religion, 619.
Rochell, an Insurrection there, 304. Quieted, 305. Rome, Court of Rome, it is
Description, 24. A great Inundation there, 137. Roman Clergy, vide Jews.
Romans, vide King of the Romans. Rotman (Bernard) Preaches up the Reformation
at Munster, 190. Declares himself an Anabaptist, 192.
S.
SAmson (Friar) Preaches Indulgences at Zurick, 22. Savoy, D. of Savoy quarrels
with Geneva, 203. Loses most part of his Country to the French, ibid. Accuses
the French King, 323. Dies, 602. Saxons embrace Luther 's Doctrine of the
Eucharist, 97. Saxony, Prince of Saxony 's Answer to the Arbitrators, 159.
Quarrels in the Churches there about Indifferent things, 481. Scherteline
(Sebastian) marches toward Inspruck with his Army for the Protestants, 388.
Leaves the Camp, 406. Retires from Strasbourg to Constance, 418. A Fine is set
upon his Head by the Emperor, 554. He raises men in Germany for the French
King, ibid. Is reconciled to the Emperor and King Ferdinand, 594. Schwabian
Confederates beat Ulric D. of Wirtemberg, 80. They refuse a Truce with the
Boors, ibid. They rout the Boors at Saltzbourg, 81. An Account of the Schwabian
League, 82. The Schwabian Cities mediate betwixt Albert and the City of
Noremberg, 562. Schwinfurt, a Town upon the Main, there the Princes mediate an
Accommodation, 156. The Treaty is removed to Norenberg, 160. Sepsy, vide
Sepusio. Sepusio claims the Crown of Hungary after K. Lewis 's death, 105. vide
Vaivod of Transylvania. Dies, 269. His Son put under Solyman' Protection, 270.
Servetus (Michael) Burnt at Genoa, 593. Seymour (Edw.) D. of Somerset,
Protector of K. Edward VI. and the Kingdom in his Minority, 418. Is Imprisoned,
485. Released, and Marries the D. of Northumberland 's Daughter, 492. Is again
made a Prisoner, 528. And Beheaded, 538. Sforza (Francis) obtains the Duchy of
Milan of Charles V. 122. Marries Christina the K. of Denmark's Daughter, 174.
Dies, 180. Sibylla of Cleve, Wife to John Frederick Elector of Saxony,
sollicites the Emperor for her Husband, 429. Is received Graciously by the
Emperor, ibid. She dies, 596. Sickius (Francis) at War with the Bishop of
Triers, 56. Sickness, Sweating Sickness in Germany, 121. Sidonius (Michael) a
Champion for the Mass at Augsbourg, 437. Assists in Compiling the Interim, 454.
Siena revolts from the Emperor, 573. Is Besieged by the D. of Florence, 598.
Retaken by the Emperor's Forces, 615. Sigismund takes Cusanus Prisoner, 36.
Appeals from the Pope to a Couucil, ibid. Calls the Council of Constance, 47.
Begs the assistance of the Empire against Zisca, ibid. Sigismund K. of Poland
Wars against Albert, Great Master of the Teutonick Order, 99. Makes him D. of
Prussia, ibid. His Answer to the Emperor's Ambassadors, 348. His Plea given in
by his Ambassador Alaskia about the Duchy of Prussia, 445. He dies, 450.
Sixtus IV 's Decree concerning the Virgin Mary, 377. Sleidan (John) sent by the
Protestants Ambassador into England, 352. Sent Deputy from Strasbourg to the
Council of Trent, 529. He applies himself to the Emperor's Ambassadors, 531.
Complains of Gropper to the Council of Trent, 535. Joins with the Wirtemberg
and Saxon Ambassadors in their Solicitations with the Emperor's Ambassadors,
537. Takes leave of the Emperor's Ambassador, who stops him, 545. Leaves Trent,
546. Deputy from Strasbourg to the French King, 557. Treats with him, and the
Constable, ibid. Dies, 638. Smalcald, a Town in Franconia, belonging to the
Landgrave of Hesse, vide Protestant. League at Smalcald, 142. The Confederates
of the League expostubate upon the motion to choose a King of the Romans, 143.
The League renewed, 189. A Convention of the Protestants there, 212. Solomon
makes War in Hungary, 50. Takes Belgrade, 51. And Rhodes, 57. Invades Hungary,
103. Besieges Vienna, 121. Breaks up the Siege, ibid. Makes a new Irruption
into Austria, 161. His Troops are defeated, ibid. Imprisons Alaski, Ferdinand'
s Ambassador, 271. Strangles his Son Mustapha, 594. Solmes (Count) vide Naves.
Spira (Francis) his dismal Story, 475. Spires, Bishop of Spires appointed to
hear Reuchlin 's Cause, 30. Decrees in favor of him against Hogostratus, ibid.
A Diet held there, 103. The States there differ about Religion, 104. But their
Breaches are made up, ibid. And they make a Decree about Religion, ibid. The
Princes Assembled here write to the Senate of Strasbourg about the Mass, 116.
The Diet there assembled, 118. They refuse the Deputies of Strasbourg to sit in
the Diet, ibid. They make a Decree about Religion, ibid. The Princes of the
Reformed Religion protest against the Decree, 119. As also the Free Cities,
120. A Diet called thither, 152. Removed to Ratisbon, 155. Another Diet called
there, 288. A mighty full Diet, 317. A Decree there which angers the Papists,
325. States of the Empire. Some at Ratisbon desire to referr every thing to the
Pope's Legate, 279. They treat with tho D. of Cleve to restore Guelderland,
285. They send a Message from Nurenberg to the Saxon and Landgrave about the D.
of Brunswick, 299. Write to the Switzers not to aid the French King, 321. They
acquaint Maurice the Elector of Brandenbourg with the Emperor's Resolution
about the Landgrave, 442. Strasbourg, Priests marry there, 66. The Bishop cites
them, ib. They justify themselves, ibid. The Bishop writes to Campegio,
complaining of the Senate, 73. The Senate justify themselves to Campegio,
ibid. And Parley with him upon his Answer, 74. The Popish Clergy complain
against the Senate to the Council of the Empire, 76. The Senates Answer, 79:
Their Ministers draw up an Apology, ibid. Quarrels there about the Mass, 115.
They suence the Popish Ministers, ibid. The Bishop complains to the Diet at
Spire, 116. Mass abolished there, ibid. Their Deputies protest, upon their
being denied to sit in the Diet, 118. Their Divines answer Erasmus, 122. Makes
a League with the Evangelick Cantons of Switzerland, 126. Which is resented by
the Council of the Empire, ibid. They with some other Confederate Cities
exhibit a Confession at Augsbourg to the Emperor, 130. They debate the matter
further against the Emperor, 138. They are oppugned by Popish Divines, ibid.
They set up a School, 241. Their Letter to the Emperor to dissuade him from the
War, 378. They make their Peace, and are sined, 423. They refuse the Interim,
464. And stand to it to Granvell, 465. They send their Judgment of the Interim
to the Emperor in a Letter, 471. In a Consultation they resolve to accept of
the Interim, 472. They send Deputies with another Letter to the Emperor, 473.
Their Bishop writes to them about yielding, ib. They are commanded to agree
with their Bishop, 474. They write to the Emperor of the Bishops unreasonable
demands, 478. The Bishop says Mass again, 479. Quarrels between him and the
Senate about the public Professors, 480. The Senate and the Bishop agree, 485.
Mass first said in the Cathedral, 491. Derided by the People, ibid. Whence the
Priests fly, ibid. The Bishop complains to the Emperor, 496. But the Breach is
made up, ibid. The Bishop complains against the Preachers, 513. The Senate
sends Sleidan their Deputy to the Council of Trent, 529. vid. Sleidan. They
answer the Demands of Marq. Albert, 571. Stroza (Peter) a Florentine gulls the
Protestants with Promises of Money, 404. Stupitz (John) General of the
Augustine Friars, 2. Stura (Steno) vide Christiern. Sturmius (James) dies, 594.
Sweden, vide Gustavus. Switzers oppose the Election of Francis I. to the
Empire, 14. An account of their Commonwealth, 48. Had a Custom that Priests
should publicly keep Concubines, 51. They complain against Zuinglius in a
Convention of Estates, 66. They assemble at Lucern, and make Edicts against the
New Religion, 67. They Remonstrate against those of Zurick, 69. They join with
Zuinglius in the Doctrine of the Eucharist, 97. They meet 12 Cantons to Dispute
at Baden, 105. The Popish Cantons make a League with Ferdinand, 118. Seeds of
Civil Wars arise amongst themselves, 120. Which are taken up, ibid. They make a
League for six years, with the Landgrave of Hesse, 141. Do not refuse to join
in the League of Smalcald, if Comprehension be allowed them, 148. Not admitted
into the League, 151. The Popish Cantons League against the Zurichers, 155.
They overcome the Zurichers, 156. They overcome them again, ibid. They conclude
a Peace, ibid. The Protestant Cantons interceed with the French King to remit
his Severities toward the Protestants, 210. They answer the Letter which was
sent to them by the States of the Empire, 323. Interceed to the French King for
the Waldenses, 347. They give an answer to the Protestants. Embassy, 392. They
answer the Emperors Letter, 398. The Protestant Cantons differ in their Answer
about the War from the Popish ones, 399. Their Answer to the Protestants
demands, 404. Two Protestant Cantons refuse a League with Henry II. King of
France, 484. Sylvius (Aeneas) vide P. Pius.
T.
TEcelius (John Tetzel) a Dominican writes against Luther 's ninety five
Theses, 2. Teutonick order its institution, 99. They subdue Prussia, ibid.
Thomas of Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, 241. Killed by some of King Henry
II 's Court, ibid. His rich Shrine, ibid. Canonized, 242. Toledo (Don Francisco
de) Ambassador from the Emperor at the Council of Trent, 374. Treats vigorously
with the Protestant Ambassadors there, 539. Transylvania Vaivod claims the
Kingdom of Hungary against Ferdinand, 112. Writes about it to the Princes of
the Empire, ibid. Invites Solomon into Germany, 121. Is made King of Hungary by
Solomon, ibid. Dies, 269. His Son is delivered up to Solomon, 285. Made Vaivod
of Transylvania, ibid. Transylvania revolts from Ferdinand, 633. Tregerus
(Conradus) disputes with the Preachers of the Reformed Religion at Bern, 111.
Trent nominated by the Pope to hold a Council, 292. Allowed by the Catholic
Princes of Germany, ibid. Protested against by the Protestants, ibid. The
Council called, 296. It is opened, 361. The first Session, ibid. The decrees of
it, 362. The second Session, ibid. The third Session, 373. The fourth Session
with its decrees, 377. The French Ambassadors Speech in the Council, ibid. It
is put off, 391. What number of Bishops were there, ibid. Decrees made there
about Justification, 416. The seventh Session, 422. The Council is divided and
some go to Bononia, 425. The Emperors Deputies commanded not to stir thence,
ibid. The Councilis divided, 439. Cardinal of Trent speaks to the Pope about
removing the Council, 443. The Council meets once more at Trent, 513. Sits
formally, 518. Receives the French King's Letter, ibid. The Ceremony of their
Sessions, 520. The may of making Articles and Canons, 521. They decree the
business of the Lords Supper, 525. They leave some things to be disputed when
the Protestants should come to the Council, 526. The form of their safe
conduct, ibid. They answer the French Kings Letter, 527. They make decrees
about Penance and Extreme Unction, 530. Long debates about a Safe Conduct at
Trent, 539. They are wonderfully divided, 546. Fly from Trent in haste, 547.
And they prorogue the Council for two Years, 548. Treves, vide Triers. Triers
(Elector) makes a Speech for Francis I. 16. Persuades Luther to yield, 46. Very
courteously, ibid. Richard the Elector makes War with Francis Sicking, 56. Not
for Religion, ibid. Kills several Boors at Worms, 81. After they had thrown
down their Arms, ibid. Dies, 149. The Elector of Triers leaves the Council of
Trent, 542. Truchses (George) Head of the Schwabian League, 80. Routs the Boors
in Schwaben, ibid. And at Winsberg, 81. Burns the Town, ibid. Routs others in
Franconia, ibid. Makes a Speech to the Protestant Princes in the Emperors Name,
134. Turegie, vide Oxline. Turks ( vide Solomon) their Original, 295. They
invade Hungary, 314. They take Tripoly, 518. Their Fleet takes Corsica, 591.
Their Fleet scours the Coasts of Italy, 617.
V.
VAiod, vide Transylvania. Valla (Laurentius) his book censured, 28. Vargas
(Francisco de) and Martino Velasco, the Emperors Ambassadors, protest against
the Council at Bononia, 446. Venetians make a League with the Emperor against
Francis, 204. They conclude a Peace with the Turk, 252. They publish a
Proclamation about Religion against the reformed, 468. Venize (Gabriel)
Provincial of the Augustans in Germany, vide Leo. Vergerius (Peter Paul) the
Popes Legate at Augsbourg, 127. Had orders to manage the business of a Council
cautiously, 166. Is recalled into Italy by P. Paul III. 174. And sent back with
the old Instructions, 175. Consults with the Duke of Saxony at Prague, 180.
Sent to Naples to the Emperor, 204. Appointed of the Committee to draw up a
Bull for the calling of a Council, ibid. His Speech at Worms, 272. Talks with
Spira at Padua, 475. Turns Protestant, 476. Persuades his Diocese of Justinople
to join with him, ibid. Being Persecuted, settles in the Valteline, 477. And
thence removes to Tubing, ibid. Writes a Book to dissuade the Switzers from
sending to the Council of Trent, 528. Vey, a Lawyer of Baden speaks to Luther
from the Commissioners at Worms, 45. Exhorts him to submit his Books to the
Emperor and Princes, 46. Vienna vide Solomon. Visconti Dukes of Milan their
Pedigree, 203. Ulm receives the Protestant Religion, and a Church is
constituted there, 149. Is reconciled to the Emperor and fined, 413. A Diet
called thither, 428. What was done at it, 431. Adjourned to Augsbourg, 432. The
Government changed by the Emperor, 472. Their Divines refuse with great Courage
to acknowledge the Doctrine of the Interim, ibid. Their Ministers are released,
479. Their answer to Albert 's Proposals, 563. Ulric Duke of Wirtemberg claims
his Country, 79. Is repulsed by the Schwabian Confederates, 80. Is restored
into it by the Landgrave of Hesse, 173. Engages to be Feudatary to Ferdinand,
ibid. And recovers his Country entirely, 174. He acknowledges himself Feudatary
to Ferdinand, 180. Is admitted into the Protestant League, 206. Excuses himself
by Letter to King Francis, 249. He with Upper Germany first takes Arms, 380.
Writes Supplicatory Letters to the Emperor, 413. Is received upon hard
Conditions, 415. He makes his Submission to the Emperor in Person at Ulm, 421.
Receives the Interim, 462. Dies, 502. Vogelsberg (Sebastian) raises Men in
Germany for Henry King of France, 434. Is beheaded at Augsbourg for it, 456.
W.
WAradin (George Martinhausen Bishop of) made a Cardinal, 528. Is killed for
Commotions in Transylvania, 535. Waldenses Persecuted, 345. Barbarously
Massacred at Merindol, 346. Their Opinions, 347. Wenceslaus (Emperor)
intercedes for Husse, 46. Wiat ( Sir Thomas) rises in Kent upon Queen Mary 's
Marrying King Philip, 594. Is suppressed, 596. Executed, 598. Wiclef (John)
Preached against the Pope in England, 46. His Bones ordered to be Burnt by the
Council of Constance, 47. William, vide Bavaria. Winchester (Stephen Gardener
Bishop of) he writes a Reproachful Book against Bucer, 340. Is Imprisoned for
Obstinacy, 511. Made Lord Chancellor by Queen Mary, 589. An account of his
Proceedings in the Divorce of Henry VIII. ibid. He dies of a Dropsy, 627.
Wirtemberg, vide Ulric, and Christopher. Wittemberg, a City of Saxony upon the
Elbe, and an University, 2. Connives at Luther, ibid. They write to Pope Leo in
his behalf, 6. And to Miltitz that he might be tried in Germany, ibid. And to
Frederick in excuse of Luther 's Proceedings against Cajetan, 12. The
University abett the Augustines in not saying Mass, 49. Their Reply to
Frederick about that Matter, 50. Wolfgang made Grand Master of Prussia, 324.
His Plea at the Diet of Augsbourg about the Teutonic Order, 447. Is driven out
of his Country, 571. Wolfgang D. of Deux-Ponts absolutely refuses the Interim,
480. Yet promises to obey the Emperor as far as he could, 481. Wolsey dies for
Discontent, 170. Worms, a Diet called thither, 38. It is opened, 41. Luther
Proscribed by an Edict there, 48. A Diet called to punish the Anabaptists, 200.
Another Diet called there, 201. A Convention cited thither, 268. The Heads of
the Conference at Worms, 271. A Diet there, 343.
Z.
ZIsca (John) raises a War in Bohemia against Signismund in revenge of Husse 's
death, 47. Zuinglius (Ulricus) comes to Zurick, 22. Opposes Friar Samson about
Indulgences, ibid. Disswades the Switzers from serving abroad in the Wars, 48.
Defends himself against the Bishop of Constance, 51. Writes to the Switzers to
allow Marriage among their Priests, ibid. Disputes with John Faber in the
Assembly at Zurick, 57. Acquits himself of the Accusation of the States, 66.
Preaches up the abrogation of Images, ibid. Differs with Luther about the
Sacrament, 97. Would not go to the Conference at Baden, 105. Disputes at Bern,
111. Disputes with Luther at Marpurg, 121. Is killed, 156. Zurick, vide
Zuinglius. They refuse to serve abroad at Zuinglius 's desire, 48. They
establish the Reformation, 57. They Answer the Remonstrance of the other
Cantons, 70. And the Bishop of Constance 's Book abort Images, 72. They remove
Images, 76. They Expostulate with the other Cantons about the seizing of their
Ministers, 77. The Mass abolished there, 82. They stop Provisions from the
other Cantons, 155. They are routed in Battle, 156. And so a second time, ibid.
And at Last conclude a Peace, ibid. The Ministers of Zurick answer Gardener 's
Book, 340.
A TABLE TO THE CONTINUATION.
A.
ALbert Marquess of Brandenburg dies, 13. Alva 's War on the Pope, 9. He goes
to Rome, 11. The Emperor's Ambassadors to the Electoral Princes to carry his
Resignation, 6. Dr. Woton, English Ambassador in France, 14. Between France and
King Philip at Peronne, 19. At Cambray, 22. In France, 27. To the Diet of
Germany, 28. The Popes Ambassadors to the Christian Princes and to the Council,
49, 62. Admitted by the Princes of Germany of the Augustane confession, 63.
Refused by Queen Elizabeth, 64. His Legates to Trent, French Ambassadors to the
Council of Trent, 87. The Ambassador of Spain received, 91. Lansac Ambassador
for France at Rome, 94. The French Ambassadors protest against the Council, 95.
And go to Venice, 96. Andelot Marshal of France loses the favor of his
Prince, 19. Suspected to be in the conspiracy of Bloys, 43. Sent for Succors
into Germany, 78. Is in the battle of Dreux, 80. Defends Orleans, 82. The
Archbishop of Toledo suspected of Heresy, 48. An Assembly of the great Men of
France at Fountainbleau, 44. Of the three Estates decreed, 46. Opened at
Orleans, 51. Prorogued, 52. Reassembled at Pont Oyse, 58. An Assembly of the
Delegates of France, 68.
B
BAbotz a Town in Hungary besieged, 5. The battle of St. Quintin, 15. Of
Graveling, 20. Of Dreux, 80. The Bavarians demand the Cup and the Marriage of
their Clergy in a Tumult, 97. Bellay (Jean) Cardinal Dies, 50. The Bible
sufficient alone to determine the controversies of Religion, 60. Books
prohibited and why, 86. Bona Sfortia Queen of Poland dies. Du Bourg (Anna) a
member of the Parliament of Paris offends the King, 31. Is Prosecuted, 32.
Condemned and Executed, 34.
C
CAlais its Form and Strength, 17. Siege and taking from the English, 18.
Proffered to the Queen, 41. Catharine de Medicis Queen Dowager of France made
Regent, 33. She preserves Conde and Navar, 47. She shows great favor to the
Protestants, but yet underhand opposed them, 56. Suspecteth the Nobility, 57.
Excuses the conference of Poissy, 60. Dissembles the Rudeness of Laines, 61.
Solicited to begin a Persecution by the Spaniards, 65. She prohibits the
worship of Images, 69. She puts her self and her Son under the Protection of
the Prince of Conde, 72. Yet out of fear joins with the Catholic Lords, 72.
And betrays Conde, 73. She pretends she is at Liberty, ibid. She thanks Conde
for his good Service, 75. She treats with him, 75, 79. She fears the Duke of
Guise after the battle of Dreux, yet makes him General, 81. After he was slain
she more earnestly desired a Peace than before, 83. She excuses the Peace when
made, 91. She complains of the proceedings in the Council of Trent, 94.
Catzenello bogen resigned, 13. Cavii, 11. Charles V. Emperor resigns Spain and
the Empire, 5. Goes into Spain, 7. His Letter to his Son, 15. His Death and
Character, 23. Charles the IX. King of France succeeds his Brother, 47. Carried
by force to Paris, 72. Is declared out of his Minority at fourteen years of
Age, 99. Charles Cardinal Carassa strangled, 64. Christian King of Denmark
dies, 26. The Church ever pure and spotless, 51. Civitella a small City in
Italy baffles the French, 10. Coligni Admiral of France taken in St. Quintin,
15. Suspected to be in the conspirary of Bloys, 43. Recommends a toleration as
necessary, 44. Delivers a Petition for the Procestants, 45. Made General
after the Battle of Dreux, 81. Disownes the having any hand in the Murder of
the Duke of Guise, 83. Distikes the Peace of Orleans, 84. Colonna ( mark
Antony) 8. Coode (Lewis) the con^^aled head of the conspiracy of Amboys, 42.
Detained for it, 43. Leaves the Court, 44. Imprisoned (...) Orleans, 47. Freed
upon the Death of the King, 48. Acquitted in the Parliament of Paris, 56.
Reconciled to the Duke of Guife, 58. The Queen desires his Protection, 71. He
declares a War against the Catholic Lords, 73. Taken at the battle of Dreux,
80. Makes a Peace at Orelans, 84. The Conference of Poissy resolved on, 58.
Began, 59. One at Worms, 13. Conquet in Britain taken by the English, 21. The
Conspiracy of Bloys, 42. Discovered first by a Protestant, 43. Constantio
Confessor to Charles V. burnt, after he was dead for Heresy, 35. The Copthites
precend submission to the Pope, 57. Cosmus Duke of Florence obtains the
possession of Siena, 10. Procures a Peace for the Duke of Ferrara, 11. And the
Assembling of the Council of Trent, 49. Ru^^es the Power of the Caraffa 's, 26.
Councils are not to change the Doctrines or Customs of the Church, 45. A
National Council decreed in France, 46. That of Trent procured to avoid it, 49.
Recalled, 62. Writ against by Vergerius, ibid. Protested against by the
Protestant Princes of Germany, 63. Opened, 86. Complained of by the Queen of
France, 94. Accused for invading the Rights of Princes, 95. Protested against
by the French, ibid. 96. Ended and Censured, 96. The reason why it had no
better Success, 97.
D
DAvid (George) a famous Anabaptist, his Life, Doctrine and Death, 28, 29.
Diepe taken by the Protestants, 74. Surrendered, 78. Diana Duchess of
Valentinois, 30. Dietmarsh conquered, 26. Diets at Ratisbonne, 12. At
Augsbourg, 27. At Naumburg, 63. At Francfort, 89, 13. At Brisgow, 89. A
Disputation rejected when enforced by an Army, 41. Doway attempted by the
French, 9. Dreux the battle of, 80. Dunbar dismantled, 42. Dunkirk taken by the
French, 20.
E
EGmont (Count) General at Graveling, 21. Elizabeth Queen succeeds, 22. Is
severely treated by the Pope, 23. She at first refuses, but at length leagues
with the Protestant Scots, 40. She is kind to Mary of Scotland, 67. And after
this Leagueth with the Prince of Conde, 77. She rejects the Council of Trent,
64. And the Council designed to depose her, 90. The Question Whether Episcopacy
is of Divine Institution? Debated in the Council and rejected, 87. Erick King
of Sweden succeeds Gustavus his Father, 49. Is Crowned, 64.
F
FAith not to be kept with Heretics, 37. Broken by R. Catholics 53.54.
Designed to be broken when time serves, 91. A Turkish Fleet sent to the
Assistance of the French, 19. The English Fleet make an unfortunate Expedition
into France, 21. One of LI. Ships attend Charles V. into Spain, 7. A Fleet of
90. carries his Son Philip thither, 35. The English fleet procures the victory
at Graveling, 22. Ferdinand Brother of Charles V. His War in Transylvania and
Hungary, 4, 5. The Resignation of the Empire to him, 6. He is elected Emperor,
22. He confirms the Peace of Passaw, 12.28. He gives a brisk answer to the
French Ambassador, ibid. He Solicites the Protestant Princes to submit to the
Council of Trent, 62. Paul IV. refuses to acknowledge him to be Emperor, 22.
He expresses his dislike of the proceedings of the Council of Trent in a Letter
to the Pope, 90. Hinders them from proceeding against Queen Elizabeth, 96.
Ferrara, the Cardinal of, 85. The Duke of Ferrara makes his Peace, 11. His
Death, 36. Francis Otho Duke of Lunenberg dies, 36. Francis II. Succeeds Henry
II. his Father in France, 33. Having before Married Mary Queen of the Scots,
19. He is reported to have the L^prosie, 34. Claims England in the Right of his
Wife, 38. Dies, 47. Francford quarrels fatal, 11. Frederick I. King of Denmark
dies and is Succeeded by Frederick, II. His Son, 25. He conquereth Dietmarsh,
26. His answer to the Popes Legate, 63. Frederick III. Duke of Bauaria, 36.
G
GUise (the Duke of) sent into Italy, 10. Recalled, 11. Made General in France,
16. Takes Calais, 17. But is the cause of the defeat near Graveling, 20. He is
ma^^ Lieutenant General of France, 43. He procures the persecution in France,
30. Reconciled to Conde, 58. Recal'd to Court by the K. of Navar, 70, 71. He
frights the Queen unto a Compliance with the R. Catholic Lords, 72. Becomes
General in the end of the Battle of Dreux, 81. And is slain by one Poltrot
before Orleans, 82. Gran, a City in Hungary surprised, 5. Gustavus King of
Sweden dies, 49. Guines taken, 18.
H.
HAly General of the Turkish Forces in Hungary, his Actions, Character and
Death, 4. Hamilton (John) Archbishop of St. Andr^^s committed for hearing Mass,
99. Havre de Grace surrendered to the English, 77. Retaken by the French, 98.
Helinoa Queen of France dies, 36. Henry II. King of France breaks his Oath by
the Procurement of the Pope, 9. He recovereth Calais out of the hands of the
English, 17. Zealous for the Roman Catholic Religion, 20. He discovers a
secret design between him and K. Philip, to the Prince of Orange, 27. Is
persuaded to persecute the Protestants of France, 30. He is incensed against
the Parliament of Paris, 31. The Protestant Princes of Germany write to him,
32. His Death and Character, 33. His designs against England, 38. K. Philip
desires a Peace, that he may be at leisure to extirpate Heresy, 27. All
Heretics to be persecuted with Fire and Sword, 30, 31. Faith not to be kept
with such. 53, 54, 91. Princes to be deposed for Heresy, 92, 93. Philip much
commended for his Severity to Heretics, in the Council of Trent, 91. No Peace
to be made with such, ibid. Dangerous to Government, 51. Hospital made
Chancellor of France, 44. His Speech to the Assembly of Princes, ibid. He
assures the Clergy there should be a National Council if the Pope would not
call a General, 48, 49. His Speech in the States at Orleans, 50. At the opening
of the Conference of Poissy, 60. At the opening of the Assembly of the
Delegates, 68. He opposes the Declaring a War against the Prince of Conde, 72.
He procures Charles IX. to be declared of Age, 99. And ascribes the driving the
English out of France to the Liberty of Conscience granted to the Protestants,
ibid.
I.
I Gnatius Loyola the Founder of the Order of Jesuits, his Death and Story, 13.
Images set up in the Streets of Paris to be morshipped, 35. Ordered not to be
worshipped any where, 69. The Reasons why the Protestants destroyed them, 84.
The Images of the twelve Apostles of massy Silver lost, 76. The Worship of
Images and Relics commanded by the Council of Trent, 90. The Inquisition
promoted by Pope Paul IV. 27, 36. Desired by the Clergy of France 44. Allowed
to proceed summarily against the greatest persons, 92. Cites the Queen of
Na^ar, and several of the French Prelates, but is opposed by the King of
France, 92, 93, 94.
K.
KErsimont Governor of Britain, 2. Kirkwall taken and burnt, 23. Knox (John)
stirs the Scots to reform, 37. His Maxims occasion great devastations of
Church-buildings, 66. He is accused as the Author of a Tumult, 99.
L.
LAines, the second, General, of the Jesuits, very rude in the Gonference of
Poissy, 61. The Protestant League, 77. Leith made a French Colony, 40. Summoned
by the Scotch Nobility, 41. Besieged by the English, ibid. Surrendered and
dismantled, 42. Livonia falls off from the Sea of Rome, 57. Lorrain, (the
Cardinal of) opens the first Proposals for a Peace with K. Philip, 19.
Reprehends Henry II. of France, 33. He is suspected the Author of a Slander,
34. He reflecteth severely on Coligni, 45. Designs to make a Speech for the
three Estates, 51. He opposes the Progress of the Reformation, 57. Procures
the Conference of Poissy, 58. Disputes in it, 60. Opposes a National Council,
64. Leaves the Court, 65. Advises Mary Queen of Scots to leave her Jewels in
France, 66. Treats with the Protestant Princes of Germany, 69. He goes to the
Council of Trent, 88. Visits the Emperor at Inspruck, 90. He is ordered to
defend the Peace of Orleans, 91. He is gained over to the Pope's side, 94. He
goes to Rome, ibid. Returns to Trent, 96.
M.
Man's taken by the Protestants, 74. Deserted, 76. Mary Queen of England raises
some Religious Houses, 11. She joins with King Philip against France, 14. Is
advertised by him of the Designs of the French upon Calais, 18. Makes an
unfortunate attempt by her Fleet on France, 21. She dies when there was a
Parliament sitting, 22. Mary Queen Regent of Scotland summoneth a Parliament,
36. Breaks her Faith, 37. She leaves Edinburg, and goes to Dunbar, 38.
Reproaches the Lords of the Congregation for holding correspondence with the
English, 40. She is deposed, 41. Her Death and Character, 42. Mary Queen of
Scotland Married to the Dauphine of France, 19. Resolves to return into
Scotland, 65. Arrives there, 66. Endeavors to restore Popery, 67. Refuses a
Petition against it, 99. Mary Queen of Hungary dies, 36. Marriage of the Clergy
why forbidden, and continued so, 97. Massacre at Vassy, 70. Of Sens, 74. Mills
(Walter) the last Martyr in Scotland, 24. Melancthon (Philip) dies, 50. Minart
(Anthony) a bloody Persecutor, 30, 31. He is shot dead in the Streets, 34.
Popish Misrepresentations of the Protestants in France, 16, 33, 34. Montmorancy
Constable of France, averse to the Spanish War, 14. Taken Prisoner in the
Battle of St. Quintin, 15. Discharged, and labors for a Peace, 22. Designed
for ruin by the Guises, 46. Procures the laying aside the use of the Arms of
England, 39. Enters Orleans, 48. He is set against the Reformation, and the
King of Navar by the Queen, 56. Taken in the Battle of Dreux, 80. He refuses
to consent to the Liberty of Conscience, 84. He takes Havre de Grace, 99.
Montmorancy (Francis) Son of the former, gives his Father wise advice, 56.
N.
NAples (the Kingdom of) annexed to the Sea of Rome, 9. Navar (Henry King of)
suspected to be in the Conspiracy of Bloys, 43. And in that of Lions, 46. He is
solicited to come to the Assembly of the States by his Brother the Cardinal,
ib. Comes and is consigned, 47. Discharged and advanced, ibid. Becomes terrible
to the Pope, 49. Favors the Reformation, 56. Very earnest for a National
Council, 65. He joins with the Popish party, 69. Excuses the Massacre of
Vassy, 71. Is shot at Roan, and dies, 77. His Character, ibid. The Queen Cited
before the Inquisition after his Death, 92. A National Council desired in
France, 45, 64.
O.
O Liver Chancellor of France employed against the Members of Parliament, who
were suspected of Heresy, 33. Desious of a Reformation, and an hater of Bloody
Persecutions, 43. Obtains a Pardon for the Conspirators of Boyse, ibid. He dies
weeping for what he had done, 44. Orleans, an Assembly of the three Estates of
France opened there, 47, 50. Surprised by the Protestants, 73. Besieged, 82.
Ostia besieged and taken, 9. Retaken, ibid. Otho Henry Duke of Bavaria, dies
36. Orange, (William of Nassaw Prince of) Ambassador for Charles V. 6. Being
Ambassador in France he learns a Secret, 27.
P.
PAliano Fortified, 9. Restored to King Philip, 11. A Parliament in England,
22. In Scotland, 36. Another that setles a Confession of Faith, 42. Another
which confirms and settles it, 66. One held at Edinburg, in which Mary Queen of
the Scots passed several Acts in favor of the Reformation, 99. The Parliament
of Paris awed by Henry II. 31. Claims the Right of declaring the King out of
his Minority, 99. Paul IV. Pope, his Temper, 7. His War against King Philip, 8.
He ruins his Relations, 26. He refuses to acknowledge Ferdinand Emperor of
Germany, 22. And Queen Elizabeth, Queen of England, 23. Erects many
Bishoprics, 27. His death, and the rage of the People against him, 36. Peace
made between King Philip and the Pope, 11. Proposed between France and Spain,
19. That of Passaw confirmed, 28. That of Cambray fatal, 30. That of Orleans
disproved by Coligni, 84. And by the Fathers of Trent, 91. Perrenot Bishop of
Arras, 19. A Persecution in France, 16. One designed in the Netherlands, 27.
One in France, 30. In Spain, 35. In Piedmont, 52. In the Netherlands, 55.
Philbert Duke of Savoy his Marriage, 33. Pius IV. Elected, 36. Delays the
calling of a Council, 48. Is at last persuaded to renew that at Trent, 62.
Despises France, 86. Afraid of the French Bishops coming to that Council, 88.
Is promised a victory over the Council, 89. Reproached by the King of France,
96. Pretends to be free from the Obligation of all Laws, ibid. Philip II. King
of Spain, engaged in a War against Paul IV. 8. And France, 9. Leaves the
Netherlands, 35. He is much commended by Pope Paul IV. 31. Endeavors to
raise the power of the Bishops, and depress; the Pope's in the Council of
Trent, 90. His Severity much commended there, 91. He is solicited to endeavor
the Preservation of the Romish Religion in France, 61. Poltrot who Assassinated
the Duke of Guise, an account of him, 82. Princes, the Pope has power to
depose them, and to dispose of their Dominions, 62, 92. Denied by the King of
France, 94. Prioli (Lawrence) Duke of Venice dies, and is succeeded by Jerome
his Brother, 36.
Q.
QUintin (Jean) makes a long Apology for the Clergy in the Assembly of the
three Estates at Orleance, 51. He dies of Grief for the Reflections made on it,
ibid. St. Quintin besieged, 14. Taken, 15.
R.
REligion ought not to be the occasion of Rebellions, 50. A Remonstrance of the
Protestant Princes of Germany, 12. Riga Reformed, 57. Rouen, or Roan taken by
the Protestants, 74. Twice besieged, and at last taken by the Roman Catholics,
77. Rome prepared for a Siege, 8. And might have been taken.
S.
SArdinia, (the Isle of) proffered to the King of Navar, 65. Savoy inclined to
a Reformation, 97. St. Quintin. See Quintin. Sanfloriano, a Cardinal, 10.
Sectaries never to be suffered, 51. But to be severely treated, 91. Segni, a
strong City in the Papacy taken, 10. Seldius, ( Vice Chancellor) Ambassador, 6.
Siena consigned to the Duke of Florence, 10. Sigeth, a City in Hungary twice
besieged, 4. Sleidan (John) his Death and Character, 7. Succession in the
Clergy, 61. A Synod held by the Protestants of France in the time of a violent
persecution, 31.
T.
THermes a Marshal of France defeated, 20. Thionville taken, 10. A Toleration
granted to the Protestants of France, 68. Transylvania revolts, 4. The Treaty
of Cambray, 22, 30.
V.
VAlence (the Bishop of) favors the Reformation, 45. Valenza taken, 9.
Vallidolid, 35. Vassey, a Town in Champaigne, 70. Vergerius (Paul) a Cardinal
writes against the Council of Trent, 62. Vienne (the Archbishop of) for a
National Council, 45. The Vocation or Call of the Ministry, 61. Vinoxberg
taken, 20.
W.
WAr in Italy, 8. Between France and Spain, 14. In Piedmont, 53. The Reasons of
the Scotch War, 40. The beginning of the Civil War of France, 72. Wentworth
(Lord) Governor of Calais, 17. William Prince of Henebery dies, 36. Dr. Wotton
Ambassador in France, 14. At Cambray, 39.
Z.
ZEaland (the Province of) oppose the Continuance of the Spanish Forces in the
Netherlands, 48.
ERRATA In the History.
PAge 27. line 20. for Church, read Lurch. l. 23. r. Lewis XII. p. 31. l. 7. r.
Tortosa. p. 32. l. 41. r. Ambitious as Lucifer himself; That he. p. 36. l. 38.
concerning. r. called. p. 39. l. 47. r. Brindisi. p. 43. l. 29. Ensure. r.
Ensnare. p. 45. Work r. Rock. p. 46.. 2. l. 1. resumed r. repeated, p. 80.
Sturney r. Sturmius, as often as it occurs, p. 94. l. 38. our r. your, p. 115. l.
36. Cantreck r. Lautrec, p. 119. l. 5. Anbald r. Anhalt, p. 134. l. 52. r. Vey.
p. 143. l. 10. convenient r. inconvenient, p. 157. l. 14. r. Nordlinghen. p.
170. l. 37. 740. r. 728. p. 184. l. 58. r. Mecklenbourgh. p. 189. l. 1. r. out
of his, etc. p. 200. l. 63. danger r. hunger. p. 206. l. 21. Campodune r.
Kempten p. 209. l. 61. first r. fifth. p. 215. l. 21. impression upon r. inroad
into. p. 230. l. 34. r. Pomerania. p. 232. l. 36. r. Aleander. p. 242. l. 10.
r. John the Vaivod. p. 264. l. 52. r. did not only, etc. p. 269. l. 45. r.
Budaeus, p. 270. l. 24. r. than that that long, etc. p. 284. l. 26. Indico r.
Ynigo. l. 45. r. Rene. p. 287. l. 16. Mark r. Work. p. 288. l. 48. Religion r.
Provinces. p. 289. Compert r. Rampart. p. 292. l. 28. r. Vendosme. l 29. Nivern
r. Nevers. p. 293. Concord r. Counsel. p. 294. l. 6. r. first place to be, etc.
p. 317. l. 14. edge r. Egg. p. 338. l. 38. Ozias r. Uzziah. p. 356. l. 40. r.
Mentz. p. 361. l. 53. Esdras r. Ezrah. p. 363. l. 13. slept r. stepped. p. 443.
l. 8. r. Ebbleben. p. 435. r. Nevers. p. 439. l. 30. implorable r. implacable.
p. 441. l. 50. severity r. security. p. 447. l. 20. r. Vicenza. l. 24. r.
Morone. l. 27. r. Santacruce. p. 468. l. 35. Pecord r. Record. r. Rifeberg. l
48. r. Rochlitz. p. 471. would r. should. p. 473. l. 11. r. Fano. p. 475. l.
28. r. Casa. p. 477. l. 19. Gelou r. Gelenius. p. 478. l. 50. Fez r. Tunis. p.
481. l. 19. r. Matthias Flaccius Hlyricus, and as often as it occurs. p. 518. l.
23. r. Vienna. p. 519. l. 34. r. Lewis Hutin. p. 531. l. 41. with r. of. p.
545. l. 60. would r. should. p. 554. l. 38. r. Bayonne. p. 580. In the
Contents, l. 4. Albert r. Maurice. p. 594. l. 33. r. Blasseburg. p. 618. l. 58.
r. Barbara.

In the Continuation.
Page 8. l. 55. Security r. Severity, p. 10. l. 18. r. brought together an
Army. p. 28. l. 15. drought r. draught. p. 25. l. 2. 1233. r. 1523. p. 28. r.
600000 Growns. p. 56. l. 62. perished r. persisted. l. 59. r. from Zurich. p.
60. l. 41. thing r. nothing. p. 90. l. 11. Annals r. Annates.


