AN EXHORTATION TO CHARITY (And a Word of Comfort) To the Irish Protestants.

BEING A SERMON Preached at Steeple in Dorsetshire, Upon occasion of the
Collection for Relief of the Poor Protestants in this Kingdom, lately fled from
Ireland.

By SAMUEL BOLD, Rector there.

LONDON, Printed for Awnsham Churchill at the Black Swan at Amen-Corner,
MDCLXXXIX.

An Exhortation to Charity.
ROMANS viii. 18. For I reckon, that the Sufferings of this present Time, are not
worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be revealed in us.
OUR Blessed Savior has discovered very much Plainness, Ingenuity, and
Candor, in propounding his Religion to the World, and offering it to Peoples
acceptance. And he has manifested singular Love and Faithfulness toward his
Disciples and Followers; more particularly with reference to the Sufferings and
Inconveniences to which they may be exposed on his Account, and for the sake of
their Religion, whilst they are in this World.

He does expressly warn those, who have a mind to espouse his Faith and
Religion, of the Discouragements which may be in their way; assuring all those
who will follow him, and give up themselves to his Government, that they must
look for Troubles and Disturbances. He tells them plainly, they must not dream
of Ease, and worldly Prosperity, and of going to Heaven on a Carpet-way; that
so they may duly weigh Matters; and engage in his Cause, with a disposition of
Mind suited to a suffering-Estate, since they must pass through many
Tribulations into the Kingdom of God.

And as he has plainly told us, what we must expect and prepare for if we will
be his Disciples; so his Love to, and Concern for his People, does wonderfully
appear, in that he has made such plentiful provision for their Support and
Encouragement against all the Hardships and Difficulties they may be called to
grapple with. He assures them of sufficient Assistance and Comfort, during all
their Conflicts and Trials, and of such recompenses afterward as are enough to
blunt the edg of all Instruments, and abate the force of all Strokes which
shall be employed against them, as they are engaged in his Cause. He will
protect and animate, and bear them out in all that can befall them on his
account. He will give them his Holy Spirit to support, comfort, and refresh
them in the most furious and outrageous Attaques of their Adversaries. He will
resent all that is done to them, as done to himself in Person. He will most
certainly be avenged of all those who shall any way wrong and injure them. Yea,
he will honor, reward, and crown their Patience and Sufferings in the End,
with an Inheritance and Glory which does unconceivably overbailance the weight
of all those Pressures, under which they may at present groan and be uneasy.

And he gives such full and large Assurances of those Rewards with which he
will recompense the Sufferings of his People, that whosoever does but duly
consider them, and then compare this Glory with the greatest Sufferings which
can possibly befall sincere Christians during this present Time, he may easily
and certainly attain to a sound, strong, and satisfactory persuasion, that
these present Sufferings are unconceivably less than that Blessedness is
whereunto they shall be advanced.

This is what the words I have now read unto you, do expressly instruct us in.

Where you may take notice of these two things:

First, How much that Glory, suffering Believers shall be crowned and
recompensed with, does transcend all the Sufferings they can be called to
endure whilst they be in this World.

Secondly, The firm and solid persuasion our Apostle had touching this Matter.
I reckon upon a due and through comparing of Matters on each side, after a just
computation, and casting up of all Accounts; having weighed and considered
things impartially and faithfully on both Hands, I am fully satisfied, I am
firmly assured, I do rest settled in this conclusion, That the Sufferings of
this present Time are not worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be
revealed in us.

Here are two Points then to be briefly discoursed.

First, That the greatest Sufferings sincere Christians can be exposed unto for
their Religion whilst they are in this World, do not bear a proportion with the
greatness and excellency of that Blessedness and Glory with which they shall be
recompensed in the next World.

Secondly, That this is so certain and evident, we may be satisfied and assured
concerning it at present.

First, The greatest Sufferings sincere Christians can be exposed unto for
their Religion, whilst they are in this World, do not bear a proportion with
the Greatness and Excellency of that Blessedness and Glory with which they
shall be recompensed in the next World.

True Christianity is so opposite unto, so destructive of, all the Designs and
Interests of Satan, and so contrary to the Lusts and Practices of ungodly Men,
the Prince of Darkness, and his Adherents will undoubtedly do their utmost, to
make the profession and practice of it, as uneasy and frightful unto People as
possibly they can; so that as long as Satan remains unchained, or has any
liberty permitted him; and Idolatry, Superstition, Wickedness and Debauchery do
prevail on Earth, those who will approve themselves firm to the Religion of
their dear Savior, must expect many violent Assaults, and that they shall be
much molested and disturbed in their Passage to another World, under the open
profession and practice of the Gospel-Faith, and Laws.

But we have this Encouragement, to persist and hold fast our Integrity, to
contend for, and continue in our Christian Faith and Course, that let what will
befall us at present, we shall be no losers, but extraordinary gainers, by our
approving our selves faithful to our God, and to our Religion, in the midst of
the greatest Sufferings; For the Glory which shall be revealed in us, will
abundantly compensate for all the incommodious Occurrences, and most
penetrating Instances which can at present happen unto us.

Let us now a little consider the Sufferings which are incident unto us here
for our Religion, and then enquire a little after the Glory with which we shall
be recompensed hereafter, if we deport our selves aright under our present
Sufferings; and then I will prove to you, that the greatest Sufferings here do
not bear a proportion to that Glory.

First, We are in the first place to consider those Sufferings which are
incident unto us at present on the account of our Religion. And in general they
are very great, considered simply in themselves, and they may be of long
continuance, if compared only with the Abode we are to make in this World: We
may expect to suffer what can be devised and inflicted as the Result of that
Malignity, Hatred, and Enmity, Satan and wicked Man have to our most holy
Faith. And therefore we had need be well provided with Grace in our Hearts, and
to be expert in using the whole Christian Armor, that our Spirits may not
sink, nor our Strength fail us in the evil day.

But tho these Sufferings may be great considered simply in themselves, yet
very much of their Horror and Dreadfulness do depart as soon as we compare them
with the Glory which shall be revealed in us.

The Sufferings we are more especially here to take notice of, are those
Safferings we are exposed unto in this present Life, on the account of the true
Religion, by reason of the Perverseness and Fury of wicked Men, as irritated
and employed by Satan in order to the withdrawing of People from the Profession
of the true Faith, and serious Practice of real Holiness, and the deterring of
others from engaging themselves in this cause. These Sufferings are all
comprised in the word Persecution. And here they should be considered in their
most formidable Dress, in their most frightful Appearances. They may be reduced
under these Heads.

1. Outward Losses. We may on the account of our Religion, be brought into such
straits, that we must part with all our dearest and tenderest Relations: We may
be separated from the Wife of our Bosom, and the Children of our Affection, or
see them inhumanly treated, and most barbarously used before our Eyes. We may
be deprived of all our Estates, Riches, Houses, and useful Accommodations;
heavy Fines, pressing Mulcts may be imposed on us. We may be reduced from
plentiful Estates, to the extremest Penury, Nakedness and Want: We may lose
our Liberty, and be forced into soul and loathsome Consinement; we may exchange
convenient and delightful Habitations, comfortable and pious Conversation with
Religious Friends and Acquaintances, for deep and dark Dungeous, and the
horrible Society of the vilest and most impious Miscreants.

2. Corporal Pains. We may be called to sustain the keenest and most
penetrating Pains that envious and malicious Ingenuity can devise: Our Flesh
may be torn from us by piecemeal, our Joints may be wracked one from another,
our Bones may be broke in pieces, and all those Tortures may be experimented on
us, which can be occasioned by the uncivilized use of Water, Iron, Fire, and
the perverted mixture of all the Elements.

3. Reproach and Infamy. We may be exposed to the Scorn and Contempt of all who
are void of Grace, yea who are laden with ill Nature, impregnated by Popish
Principles. We may be accused and have the most detestable Crimes imputed and
laid to our Charge: We may be publicly represented as the most execrable
Villains, and be made as the Dung and Offscouring of all thing; we may be lest
open to the Insolence and Taunts of all who are destitute of Civility and
common Breeding; yea, who have learned to express Hatred and Malice in the most
enormous Instances of Spitefulness and Disgrace.

4. Death it self; yea we may be brought to die a great many Deaths in one: We
may be put to the most infamous, the most lingering, the most torturing, the
most intricate sorts of Death that can be devised: We may be brought to undergo
whatsoever can be found out, whereby Suffering and Misery may be represented
execrable, and set off with Ostentation.

In short, our Sufferings may be very various; innumerable Instances of Cruelty
may be experimented on us, if possible, to the glutting and surfeiting of the
truculent and insatiable Adversaries of our Faith. These may be often repeated,
that so we may feel their whole Force and Keeness. Our Sufferings may be of
long continuance, considered only with respect to the time we shall spend on
Earth.

But yet let me note unto you (by the way) that tho all this may be possible,
yet God does very seldom (if ever) permit his single Servants to be exercised
with very numerous sorts of Cruelty, and to be long continued under their
Trials. But whatever the Designs of their Enemies may be, he orders some way or
other, that their Sufferings shall be moderated either for Kind, Number, or
Duration.

But let us magnify and raise the Idea of horrible Sufferings to the utmost,
wherein they can possibly be inflicted on sincere Christians here, yet their
Terror and Frightfulness will in a great measure disappear, when duly compared
with the future Glory. Which leads me,

Secondly, To enquire a little after that Glory, suffering Christrians shall be
recompensed with hereafter. Now concerning this Glory, you may observe,

1. That it does import the blessed and happy Estate those who suffer for the
Faith of Christ, and Cause of true Holiness, shall certainly be advanced unto
in the other World. There is a most happy Inheritance and Estate provided for
true Believers, into which they are ordinarily to enter through Sufferings and
Tribulations. It is purchased for them by the Blood of the Son of God, it is
secured unto them by the Promise of the faithful and true God, who cannot lie.
Actual Possession is taken of it on their behalf by Christ their Head: And he
is continually interesting himself on their account, and interceding for their
Admission into it.

This is an Estate of Joy and Pleasure, so sublime, so great, so excellent,
that all the Inheritances and Delights of this World are but Dung and Filth
when compared to it. Here true Christians will be advanced to that height, the
greatest Honors and Privileges of this World are less and more empty than
Shadows when compared with it. Their macerated and abused Bodies, will here be
made conformable to the glorious Body, of their dear Savior. All the Powers of
their Souls will be mightily purisied and enlarged. Here they will have all
sorts of Objects most exactly suited to their refined Capacities, which can
administer any Delight and Pleasure unto them. They will be free from every
thing that can any way sully, intermit, or obstruct their perfect and most
absolute Satisfaction. They will enjoy God and Christ, all the Happiness of
Heaven, every thing that can refresh, entertain, and please them, even all that
is comprehended in those great and comprehensive Expressions, in which the
Promises of the Gospel are folded up.

2. It is an Happiness which far exceeds all that we can conceive and apprehend
at present: We may with reason enough use those words concerning it, in which
the Apostle describes the glorious Mysteries of the Gospel. Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man, the things which God
has prepared for them that love him. 1 Cor. 29.
When our Thoughts and Imaginations are raised to the greatest heights to which
they can possibly be wound up at present, we fall unconceivably short of
reaching to the great and excellent things those who suffer for the Gospel
shall fully enjoy. We may easily form Notions of more excellent things than
this World can afford, but our ripest and most elevated Apprehensions of things
great and good are as short of what Believers will inherit, as the faint
glimmering of the Glowworm is of the most shining Brightness of the Sun. Our
Life Col. 3. 3.
and our Happiness is yet hid with Christ in God: Now we are the Sons of God,
and it does not yet appear what we shall be. 1 John 3. 2:


3. But it will be fully made known and revealed. Sincere Christians shall
actually inherit what is at present too great and comprehensive for them to
understand and conceive. This Glory shall be revealed in them; they shall
actually partake of it: it shall be discovered openly to their Comfort, and in
the view af all their Adversaries to their greater Astonishment and Confusion,
Luke 13. 28.

It is called the Glory which shall be revealed in us: Glory in opposition to
the Shame and Disgrace which may be cast upon us here. The Glory which shall be
revealed in us; we shall partake of, and inherit the shining ravishing Luster
and Brightness of all the Excellencies and Perfections of that happy Estate,
which is now reserved for us, and shall hereafter be fully discovered in the
Kingdom of our God.

Thirdly, And now I am to prove to you, that the greatest Sufferings which can
befall us in this present time on the account of our Religion, have not any
thing in them which may render them worthy to be taken notice of, as a
Discouragement to us in our Christian Course, when we consider the glorious
Estate, unto which we shall hereafter be advanced. The greatest Sufferings here
do not bear a Proportion with what we may warrantably expect. But that Glory
which shall be revealed will abundantly exceed all that is offensive and
troublesome in the Sufferings of this present time. For,

1. The greatest of these Sufferings, yea, put them altogether, they do but
touch our outward Part, and affect our outward Interests: they do not come
near, they cannot of themselves prejudice our highest and chiefest Concerns,
our noblest and most excellent Part. Notwithstanding all that Men may inflict
and do, our Souls will still retain their own Liberty and Freedom, our
Innocence and Integrity, our inward Peace and Comfort will remain unimpared,
firm and inviolable. Hence our Savior does so aflectionately warn us not to
fear them, who when they have done their worst, cannot hurt our best Part, but
must leave our Souls as safe, and our Uprightness as firm and entire as ever. I
say unto you my Friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after
that have no more that they can do; Luke 12. 4. But the Glory which shall be
revealed relates unto, and w^ll powerfully affect both our Bodies and Souls in
all their Parts and Capacities. It will enrich and beautify both in all
respects to unimaginable degrees. All the Sufferings of this present time are
not so much when compared to the Miseries wicked Men must endure hereafter, as
the small scratch of a Pin, is to the Trouble and Torment of a ranckling
Gangreen, and a wounded Spirit together. The Sufferings of this Life, when
compared with the future Glory, do not bear the same Proportion therewith, that
the biting of a Flea, or stinging of a Gnat does, with a whole Age of Pleasure
and Delight.

2. All the Sufferings of this Life put together, are not so great, but our
Thoughts may easily comprehend them, and add to them something worse than Men
can possibly inflict. Indeed the most tremendous Sufferings here are ordinarily
less than our own Apprehensions and Fears do make them; our own Minds and
Suspicions do commonly create the most troublesome part of those Sufferings we
do endure. But this is certain, that our Sufferings are never so great from
Instruments, but we can readily form Notions of much greater. Whereas the Glory
to be revealed is such, that when we have mounted as high in Imagination as we
can, we are much more defective in forming Notions pleasing and delightful,
answerably to what this Glory does contain, than we do hyperbolize in
magnifying Troubles and Calamities, when our Thoughts and Fancies do most
exceed Realities.

3. The Sufferings of this present time tho they may appear long, when
considered only with respect to our continuance in this World, yet they are
very short and momentary, if compared with the Duration of that Glory which
shall be revealed. The Sufferings we may sustain on the account of our Religion
can at longest endure but the time of that short stay we make here. They are
but the Sufferings of this present time; they are at most of an uncertain and
short continuance: Weeping may endure for a Night, but Joy comes in the
Morning; Psalm. 30. 5.

But on the other side, our Glory will be endless and eternal; so that on this
account there is not so much proportion betwixt our Sufferings and our Glory,
as there is between one minutes disturbance and an entire Age, nay some
thousands of Years uninterrupted Pleasure and Satisfaction.

The Believer has this advantage, that his annoying and troublesome
Occurrences will be of a very short continuance, but what is grateful and
ravishing to him will be uninterrupted without decay, and without Period. His
Sufferings on this account are not so worthy to be compared with his Glory, as
one minute is to be compared with the longest Succession of Ages. If need be
that he be in heaviness 1 Pet. 1. 6.
(he must suffer no more than is expedient, and shall be useful unto him) his
Heaviness must be but for a season. 1 Pet. 5. 10.
If he must suffer, his Sufferings must continue but for a while, a very little
short time; but his Glory will be everlasting; his Inheritance is
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for
him; 1 Pet. 1. 4.
as soon as his Earthly House of this Tabernacle is dissolved, he is to enter
into and take Possession of an House not made with Hands, eternal in the
Heavens. 2 Cor. 5. 1.


4. The Glory sincere Christians shall inherit hereafter is so great and
excellent, and does so much exceed all their Sufferings at present, that when
it is duly apprehended by Faith, it does exceedingly abate and mitigate, and
almost annihilate the Force and Malignity of all that can be inflicted on them
at present. This Glory apprehended by Faith does so fill them with Comfort and
Joy now in the midst of their greatest Sufferings, they can behave themselves,
as if they did not perceive any hurt or inconvenience by all that is inflicted
on them. They can and do rejoice in the hope of the Glory of God, Romans 5. 2, 3.
yea, they do actually glory in Tribulations also. They can rejoice and triumph
that they are counted worthy to suffer shame for the Name of Christ; Act 5. 41.
Heb. 11. 35.
yea, scorn to accept deliverance when they are tortured, that they may obtain
a better Resurrection. And if our perceiving and laying hold of this Glory at
present by Faith, makes it so much to overweigh all our Sufferings, when
actually involved in them, how much must the Glory it self in its full
exhibition, transcend and exceed the Sufferings of this present Time.

5. The Sufferings of this present Time do contribute much toward our
investiture in the future Glory. So that considering our present Sufferings
under their best Acceptance, they bear no more proportion to the Glory that
shall be revealed, than the Means does with the End. And the End must certainly
be more excellent and worthy, than that which is but a Means and Instrument to
bring about that End. 2 Cor. 4. 17.
Our light Affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Our Sufferings (you see) when compared
with Glory, are but very short and light, the Glory is far more exceeding, an
eternal weight of Glory; it is not imaginary, as the biggest part of our
Sufferings are, but real and substantial. And these Sufferings do contribute to
the fitting of us for, and the conducting and bringing of us to this Glory.

Now here I must acquaint you, before I proceed to the other part of the Text,
that they are not all kind of Sufferings in this Life, which will contribute to
the conducting of People to that Glory which shall be revealed.

People may, by their Vices, Wickednesses, and Immoralities, contract very much
hurt, and grievous Sufferings upon themselves. And these are so far from
administering any Relief, upon the consideration of a future Glory, that they
will rather fill with greater horror and confusion. And without particular
Repentance for the Facts which have made way for such just and righteous
Punishments, they will but open a passage for the Sufferers, into Torments and
Punishments unconceivably greater, more insupportable and lasting than those be
which they at present endure.

Therefore if we would have Comfort and Support in the Sufferings which may be
inflicted on us in this present Life, from the consideration of the future
Glory, we must take particular care, that if we suffer, it may be really for
Religion, the Protestant Religion, the Cause of the Lord Jesus Christ. And that
we bear our Sufferings with a truly Christian Disposition, and frame of Spirit.
1 Pet. 4. 12.
Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery Trial, which is to try you,
as though some strange thing happened unto you. Verse. 13.
But rejoice, in as much as ye are Partakers of Christ's Sufferings, that when
his Glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. Verse. 14.
If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of
Glory, and of God, rests upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but on
your part he is glorisied. Verse. 15.
But let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an Evil doer, or
as a busy-body in other Men's Matters. Verse. 16.
Yet if any Man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him
glorify God on this behalf, etc. Matthew. 5. 10.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for Righteousness-sake; for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven Verse. 12.
-- Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your Reward in Heaven.

More particularly our Sufferings will contribute much to our future Happiness,
if they be inflicted on us.

First, For the True Faith.

Secondly, For the Purity of God's Worship.

Thirdly, Because of our strict and faithful ordering of our Lives and
Conversations, by the Laws and Precepts of the Gospel of Christ.

First, For our firm adhering unto, and regular contending for that true Faith
which was once delivered unto the Saints. Satan has made it a great part of
his Business to put Men of corrupt Minds on the Adulterating of the Christian
Faith. He has sometimes prompted them to endeavor to depreciate, and almost
annihilate some of the main fundamental Articles of our Religion: Sometimes he
has furnished them with new Notions, and then put them upon the assuming to
themselves an Authority to impose what he and they together have coined as
Articles of the Christian Faith.

Now those Sufferings which are inflicted on us, by the Evil and Potent
Adversaries of the Truth, because we will not renounce and part with the plain
and obvious Doctrines of the Gospel, nor own an Authority in the Church
directly opposite to Christ's, nor espouse and entertain the Traditions of Men,
for the Doctrines of God, have a plain tendency to dispose us for, and to give
us a just claim, by virtue of the Promise of our Blessed Savior, to that Glory
which shall be revealed.

Secondly, For our just and zealous Concern for the Purity of God's Worship,
Satan and his Instruments have endeavored, with all their Cunning and Might,
to corrupt the Worship of God, by rejecting (at least) some parts of his
Institutions, strangely altering and defacing some essential Parts of his
Service, and annexing Idolatrous and Superstitious Observations unto that
Worship God has appointed, whereby they have done as much as they could, to
render his Worship and Service altogether ineffectual to those Blessed Ends and
Purposes for which they were intended; and have changed the Truth and Substance
of Devotion, for mere Formality, and a number of Ostentations and Pompous,
though very ludicrous and pernicious, Rites.

Now again, if we suffer because we have a just Zeal against Idolatry and
Superstition, because we will accurately observe all God's Institutions in
every one of their Parts; and because we will, as near as possibly we can,
perform every part of his Worship, in the way and manner he prescribes, then
our present Sufferings will conduce much to our future Glory and Happiness.

Thirdly, As every Article of the Christian Faith, and every part of the
Gospel Worship, is admirably adapted to engage us unto, and promote us in the
leading of a very strict, holy, and exemplary Conversation; so all the
Corruptions of Faith and Worship, which have been vigorously advanced in the
Christian World, have had a direct tendency to open a way, at long-run, to the
abounding of Debauchery and Immorality. This is very apparent as to all those
Instances in the Church of Some whereby she has corrupted in her Communion the
Gospel-Faith and Worship.

It is real Holiness in our Lives, and a strict conforming of our several
Practices to the Rules of the Gospel, which does most oppose and weaken Satan's
Interest in the World. And it is against this that he principally levels all
his Designs.

Though many of his Artisices seem at the first view, to aim more immediately
at something else, and therefore are ordinarily propounded in very winning
Terms, and are glossed over with very hypocritical and deceiving Colors; yet
whenever he succeeds, it is demonstrably evident, that to supplant the Power of
Godliness, was his chief Intent, as the fatal and ultimate result of all his
Wiles.

It is the malignity and hatred wicked Men have to the Power of Religion, which
makes them to exert so much Violence and Cruelty against those who dare not
allow themselves in the Liberties they take, but do conscienciously endeavor
to approve themselves unto their God, by a constant and diligent attendance to
those Laws and Commandments he has given them. Joh. 15. 19
If ye were of the World, the World would love his own; but because ye are not
of the World, but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World
hates you. 1 Pet. 4. 4.
They think it strange that you run not with them to the same excess of Riot,
speaking evil of you.

Let us therefore take care so to govern our selves, that our Conversation may
become the Gospel of Christ, and that we may walk worthy of that high Vocation
whereunto we are called, and that in every thing we may adorn the Doctrine of
our God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. Let us see to it, that our Lives may
in all their Parts bear some proportion with the purity and tendency of our
Faith, the Doctrines we own and profess, the Promises which are laid before us
for our encouragement, the Example our Blessed Savior himself has given us,
and the great Things we tell the World, we expect, and hope for; that so if we
suffer here, it may be evident we suffer, because we will not Romans 1^^
be conformed to this World, but are transformed by the renewing of our Minds,
and do approve what is the good, and acceptable, and perfect Will of God. And
then we may expect, that 2 Cor. 1. 5.
as the Sufferings of Christ do abound in us, so our Consolation also shall
abound by Christ. We may then rest assured that our present Sufferings shall be
recompensed with a Glory which shall unconceivably exceed all that is
troublesome and afflicting in what we sustain at present.

If we suffer because we will not make shipwreck of Faith and a good
Conscience, because we offer unto God more excellent Sacrifices than others;
and because it is our Care and Business to walk worthy of our God, unto all
well-pleasing, to be fruitful in every good Work, and increase in the Knowledge
of God, we may certainly attain to be of such a Temper as the Apostle here
discovers in the Text. We may arrive to make the same determination with our
selves he did, and reckon, that the Sufferings of this present Time, are not
worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be revealed in us.

Which leads me to the Second Point I took notice of from the words, viz.

That sincere Christians may at present be thoroughly assured, that the
Sufferings of this present Life, do not bear any proportion with the Glory they
shall be recompensed with hereafter. They may, upon a due weighing of the
Sufferings of this present Time, and a future Glory together, attain such a
full conviction of the huge Advantage the Glory they shall be rewarded with,
has, above all the Sufferings they can at present endure, as will mightily
dispose them to bear with great Equanimity, and encounter with wonderful
Fortitude, all the uneasy and frightful Occurrences unto which they can be
exposed in this World for the sake of Christ, and on the account of their
Religion.

We have in the Text the sedate and deliberate Judgment and Determination of
one, who was as thoroughly accomplished to speak to this Point, as any mere Man
could be. He had experienced the Sufferings of this present Time, in as
abundant Measures, and to as high Degrees as any Man; He felt all the smart and
pain that Sufferings could produce. He had taken a view of Cruelty in its most
various and terrifying Forms and Shapes; and had looked further into the future
Glory, than any pious Soul can ordinarily see, whilst it carries along with it
this mortal Clog. So that here we have the conclusion of one, who
experimentally understood both the Nature and Extent of a Believer's Sufferings
and Glory, better than any other Person upon Earth. You may read an account of
his Sufferings in 2 Cor. 11. 23, etc. And you may guess how sit he was to make
a Judgment concerning the future Glory, from what he himself had experience of,
as he reports it himself in 2 Cor. 12. 4.

But if we had not so express a Testimony concerning this Business, from this
Apostle; yet if we will but compare the greatest Sufferings which have been
inflicted on sincere Christians in any Age of the World, or the greatest
Sufferings we can imagine possible to be inflicted by Men, with those excellent
Accounts the Scriptures do give of the future Glory; and withal remember how
short all intelligible words do fall of expressing and describing this Glory to
the full; that common Principle of Reason which directs and enables us to judge
of, and determine the difference there is between inferior Matters, when
presented to our Consideration, must necessarily prompt us to conclude, that
present Sufferings do not bear a proportion with the promised Glory.

If we compare these Matters with Sedateness, and approve our selves impartial,
Reason it self, as assisted by the Holy Scriptures, will as certainly direct us
to conclude for the future Glory, as it will influence and authorize us to
determine, that a massy Mountain is more ponderous than a Light and almost
imperceptible Feather.

We hugely wrong our selves, and injure the Interest of Piety, in that we wave
the due comparing of Matters, and do not so diligently, and with such
consideration as becomes us, set the Encouragements we have to Virtue and
Holiness, in a just opposition to whatsoever may be pretended a Discouragement
thereunto. Did we compare aright, eternal Inheritances with temporal
Occurrences, and the uncertain, unsatisfying, short-lived Honors, Pleasures,
etc. of this World, with the certain, constant, uninterrupted, endless Torments
and Miseries of the next World, we should have more fixed and sound Judgments
and Resolutions touching these things, than we ordinarily have.

And if the common Principle of Reason will teach us to make such a
Determination on a due comparing of these matters together, how much more will
our Minds be assured that the future Glory will abundantly transcend our
present Sufferings, when we shall be enabled to pry further into these matters,
and see them more distinctly, by having them set in a clearer Light through
that special Illumination of the holy Spirit, God is pleased to bestow on
sincere Christians?

As we have the Promise of God to assure us of a happy and blessed Eternity, if
notwithstanding all the Sufferings and Difficulties, Inconveniences and
Discouragements we may meet with in adhering to the P^^^e^^ion and Practice of
the true Religion, we Romans 2. ^.
patiently continue in well doing; so we find Believers have been so thoroughly
assured in their own Minds of the great advantage future Glory has above all
present Sufferings, they have both made open Profession of their Satisfaction
concerning this matter, and have actually rejoiced and triumphed at the
Consideration thereof, when they have been treated very discourteously by the
Adversaries of their Religion. 2 Timothy 1. 12.
F^^ the which cause (says the Apostle) I also suffer these (...) evertheless,
I am not ashamed; for I know whom I (...), and I am persuaded that he is able
to keep in (...) have committed unto him against that day. The Ap(...) way
rejoicing (Acts 5. 41.) that they were count(...) suffer Shame for the Name of
Christ.

Yea, Believers have had such Pl(...)ssurance of what the Text does instruct us
in, th(...) been powerfully influenced thereby to renounce an(...) with all the
Flatteries, Pleasures, and Pomps of (...) World, and expose themselves
voluntarily to the m(...)el and barbarous Usages of the implacable Enemies
(...)ne true Faith and Religion. Yea, they have actually (...)ed and refused to
accept of the Offers of Deliverance ^^om the most painful Tortures. By Faith
Moses when he was come to Years, refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh 's
Daughter, choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to
enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a season: Esteemirg the Reproach of Christ
greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the
Recompense of the Reward: Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. And we read of others who were
tortured, not accepting Deliverance, that they might obtain a better
Resurrection; Heb. 11. 35.

Having thus briefly discoursed of the two Points taken notice of from the
Text, I shall raise a few Inferences from what has been discoursed.

First, This should greatly endear the Protestant Religion unto us, and
mightily confirm and settle us in the Profession and Practice of it. The
Protestant Religion is the only true Christian and Scripture-Religion: It takes
in and comprehends all that the Word of God does teach and authorize, and it
rejects and renounces every thing from being a part of Religion which the
Scriptures do not warrant. All this is very evident and plain to those who do
impartially compare our Religion with the holy Scriptures. The Protestant
Religion is the Religion that is from above, and is first pure, then peacable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits, without
Partiality and without Hypocrisy; James 3. 17.

This is the Faith and Religion we are commanded by God himself to stand fast
in, and to contend earnestly for; and as it were to enter into an Association
to defend and maintain it against all the Attempts of its Adversaries; for we
are required to stand fast in one Spirit, with one Mind, striving together for
the Faith of the Gospel; Phil. 1. 27.

The Protestant Religion is that which was the common Religion among the
Apostles, and all good Christians of old. It is the Religion of all the
Reformed Churches at present: This is the Religion we all make a Profession of,
and it is such a Religion, that if we be but sincere in, and true to it, we may
suffer (if occasion be) for it with Comfort, and the more we suffer for it, the
greater measures of Glory we shall be recompensed with at last. People may call
what ever they fancy, and whatever their Interest does incline them unto, by
the Name of Religion: but it is the Protestant Religion which is the only true
Christian Religion, and the only Religion which is worth suffering for.

And if our Religion be such as will bear us out in Sufferings, yea, cause the
greatest Sufferings we can be exposed unto for its sake, to turn us to the most
desirable and advantageous account, how does it deserve to be esteemed by us?
What a Zeal should we have for it? How concerned should we be on its behalf?
With what firmness should we adhere unto it? With what Courage and Resolution
should we encounter all Difficulties we may meet with, whilst engaged in and
for it? With what assurance should we own to the World that we are of this
Religion? With what Care and Circumspection should we walk, that our
Conversations may not thwart with, nor blemish, but every way accord and
comport well with this Religion? What Valor and Excellency of Spirit should we
all manifest in opposing and endeavoring to pull down (according to the
Stations and Capacities we are in) all the Insolent and Arbitrary Attempters to
supplant and overthrow our Religion?

This is the Religion God has revealed, which he owns and will recompense,
this is the Religion which leads to Glory. It is indeed a Religion the Men of
this World do hate: And therefore its Professors must expect but little
courteous Entertainment from them: They must look for Tribulations and
Sufferings as they pass on their Pilgrimage through this Wilderness. But then
it is a Religion which secures this advantage to all its faithful Professors,
That their Sufferings shall be their Gain, and the more they suffer on its
account, the greater and more glorious their Reward shall be.

How dear should that Religion be unto us, which assures us of such a Glory,
that all the Sufferings of this Life are as nothing when compared with it?

Secondly, This should hugely encourage and support those who do suffer for the
Protestant Religion. The Protestant Interest has been at a very low Ebb a
great many Years; very subtle, formidable, and general Designs have been on
foot to destroy the Reformed Church. And as the Enemies of our Religion did
considently please themselves in all Nations with an Opinion that their
Projects should take effect, and that they should certainly root out that only
true Religion, which they call Heresy; so no doubt they would have succeeded in
their Attempts, had not God been on our side, who always has been, is, and
ever will be true and faithful to his Word and Promise.

He has built his Church on so firm and unmovable a Rock, and has so engaged
his Faithfulness and Power on its behalf, that no Counsel or Strength shall
ever be able to prevail against it.

But tho God will not utterly forsake his People, tho he will not cast them off
for ever, yet he may permit the Plowers to plow long and deep Furrows on their
Backs: He may suffer the Antichristian State to rage violently, and many of the
Kings and Rulers of the Earth to take Counsel together, and set themselves
against the Protestant Churches.

These may treat the best Christians with much Insolence and Barbarity, but he
all the time sits upon the Throne of his Majesty, and really laughs them to
scorn, and derides the bloody Enemies of his Truth and Gospel.

God seems to wink at the Enemies of his Truth, and permits them to carry on
their Designs so far as he thinks fit to overruled their Methods and Courses to
Ends they never think of.

But when his Peoples Dross is purged away, and their Adversaries have filled
up the measure of their Iniquities, and are fully ripe for Vengeance, then will
be open a way for the solemn and illustrious conducting of his Church to that
pure and prosperous Estate which he has promised to place her even in this
World, in the open view and sight of the Nations.

Great Multitudes of eminent Protestants have for many Years now past been very
inhumanly treated: Great numbers are at this time very cruelly used, their
Sighs and Groans do sound loud, their Sufferings are very apparent and visible.

But poor Sufferers! be not you discouraged, your Groans do reach Heaven, they
penetrate unto the Mercy-Seat, they come unto the Ears of your God, the Lord of
Hosts, who only is mighty to save. He is jealous for his Honor, he is jealous
for his People, he will arise, he will help, he will be avenged of your
Adversaries, yea he will do it speedily.

God has miraculously appeared to save and deliver his People in this Land: He
has settled us by his own Righthand, under the Protection and Government of a
King and Queen, who have signally approved their Fidelity to, and Zeal for the
Protestant Religion, and their Concern that the main Supporters of the
Antichristian and persecuting Party may be brought down, and rendered incapable
any farther to play Reaks in God's Vineyard.

And we have ground to hope that God is about to arise, and cloth himself with
Vengeance; and that he will set such Princes and Rulers, in a little time, over
the Nations, Rev. 1^. 16.
as will take the Whore, and make her desolate and naked; and will cat her
Flesh, and burn her with Fire.

You who suffer for the Protestant Religion, either in Ireland, France, or any
where else, take Heart, be not discouraged, be not dismayed, but labor to
possess your Souls with Patience. Phil. 1. ^3.
Be you in nothing terrified by your Adversaries, which will be to them an
evident Token of Perdition, but to you of Salvation, and that of God. Know you,
and be assured, that Romans 13. 11.
now your Salvation is nearer than when you believed.

You suffer for the Cause of God, the Interest of Christ, the Truth of the
Gospel; which must, which will stand and prevail, mauger all the Policy and
Power both of Hell and Earth. Your Sufferings are taken notice of, and recorded
Above; and there is no unkind usage you experience here, but your Head, the
Lord Jesus Christ, is tenderly affected with it, and resents it as done to
himself in Person; you do but tread in your Savior's Steps. The more you
suffer for him, the more you are conformed to him. You are walking to Glory, in
the same path through which your Master and Head entered in thither. Romans 8. 17.
If you suffer with him, you shall be glorified together nith him.

Now who would not suffer for Christ, and with Christ, when assured on doing
so, he shall reign with him? Will not Heaven, and the highest Honor, and the
greatest Glory to be enjoyed there, fully compensate for all you can suffer
here?

He that will not suffer the Person, who gives but a Cup of cold Water to a
Disciple, in the Name of a Disciple, to go without a Reward, will by no means
be unmindful of, or suffer one who has followed him through Tribulations and
Sufferings, to miss of the Glory and Inheritance which he has promised to
every Person who does so.

Take Courage all you suffering Protestants, and hold out cheerfully. If you
never deny Christ, he will never deny you. Support your selves with the
precious Promises he has given you. Encourage your selves from the
consideration of that great and wonderful Glory which shall be revealed in you;
comfort your selves, and one another, with these words, so shall we ever be
with the Lord.

It is as righteous a thing with the Lord, to recompense you with Glory, Rest,
and Happiness, who suffer for him, as it is 2 These. 1. 6. ^.
to recompense Tribulation to them that trouble you.

If you hold out and endure to the End, acting Faith and Patience, living upon
the Promises, and drawing Comfort from the Glory which is treasured up for you;
with what Joy and Triumph may you part with this World, tho you should be
called to end your Days and Sufferings together?

Becareful that you never cease groaning and crying to your God. Let your
fervent Prayers continually accompany to the Throne of Grace, the ardent
Supplications of all those who sympathize with you in your Sufferings. Let none
of us ever desist from an earnest vehement importunity with our God, till he
has actually made his Church the Joy of the whole Earth, or at least have
safely conducted us to that Glory which shall at last be revealed in all his
Saints.

Thirdly, Persecution is a most horrible and inexcusable Villainy. The Name is
so apparently odious, that no Party, whilst under the Guilt, and in the
practice of the thing, will own it. Those who have rendered themselves excerable
to the highest degree, by the open perpetrating of the most villainous
Cruelties, on the faithful Professors of the only true Religion, have had the
impudence to deny (even whilst their Hands and their Clothes have been died
with the reaking Blood of those Innocent and Holy Persons they have murdered)
that they are Persecutors. Others who have been guilty of the Sin to avoid the
infamy of the Character, have chosen to call the unjustifiable Courses they
have applied themselves unto, by another Name. But if God's People must suffer
in their Names, in their Estates, in their Liberties, and as to their Lives,
and all this for Religion, the thing is really the same as Persecution,
notwithstanding the injurious Persons may provide a less infamous Name for what
they do.

Persecution is a Villainy and Wickedness which is best and most exactly
represented and expressed by its own proper Name. It thwarts and contradicts all
the Dictates of Humane Nature; It breaks all the Ties and Bonds of common
Civility. It is most opposite and contrary to, and most destructive of all the
Purposes and Designs of every Part and Branch of the Christian Religion.

That which is most essential and peculiar to it, is, that it abuses those for
whom God has the greatest love: It vilifies and casts Infamy upon them whom
God will for ever glorify.

And if God will reward his suffering persecuted Servants with the greatest
Measures of Glory, what shall become of the Persecutors and Troublers of his
People? Their Estate indeed is very dreadful. If they impenitently persist in
their persecuting Course, it were better for them they had never been born; or
being born, that a Millstone were hanged about their Necks, and they thrown
into the depth of the Sea.

If Persecutors do not repent, and this in good carnest, and in due time, God
will certainly curse, and burn, and damn them to all Eternity. He will
recompense the Troublers of his People, with the greatest Measures of Anguish
and Tribulation. Their Portion must be, that fiery Indignation which shall
devour the Adversaries. For them is reserved the blackness of Darkness for ever.

Fourthly, We may from what has been discoursed, be put in mind of the Duty we
owe (whilst we are free from Sufferings) to those Protestants who are in an
afflicted and suffering Estate. Great numbers of Protestants have been
suffering very severe things a long time for their Religion: They have long
groaned under the Tyranny and Cruelty of their Oppressors.

Blessed be God, we do enjoy the Gospel with much freedom, ease, quiet, and
plenty: But we must take care that we do not forget the Troubles of God's
People in other places, especially in our Neighboring Countries, where our
fellow-Protestants have suffered, and do suffer such shameful and horrible
Cruelties, that none of the ancient Persecutions have had any thing in them
which may make them run parallel with the present.

It is certain, we ought to lay to heart the afflicted Condition of those who
are of the same Religion with us, our Bowels should yearn over them; we should
labor to have our Souls possessed with Resentments suitable to what they
undergo and endure.

And it greatly concerns us to present their Case (in our deepest Humiliations)
unto our God. With what awful and earnest importunity should we wrestle in our
Prayers with the Lord on their behalf? With what reiterated vehemence should we
entreat God to arise and scatter the Enemies of his Church, and make his Arm
bare, and save his People which are appointed to destruction!

O Lord awake, and stir up thy Power, and come and help. Hear thy People which
prays unto thee; and wherein-soever the Enemies of thy Church do behave
themselves proudly, show thy self to be above them; plead thine own Cause with
all thy haughty, cruel, and contemptuous Adversaries, and maintain thou the
Right of thy People, who look unto thee, and have long waited for thy
Salvation. Psalm. 74. 18, etc.
Remember this, that the Enemy has reproached, O Lord, and that the foolish
People have blasphemed thy Name. O deliver not the Soul of thy Turtle-dove unto
the multitude of the Wicked, forget not the Congregation of thy Poor for ever.
Have respect unto the Covenant; for the dark places of the Earth are full of
the Habitations of Cruelty. O let not the Oppressed return ashamed; let the
Poor and Needy praise thy Name. Arise, O God, plead thine own Cause; remember
how the foolish Man reproacheth thee daily. Forget not the Voice of thine
Enemies; the Tumult of those that rise up against thee, increases continually.
Keep not thou silence, O God; hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God.
Psalm. 83. 1. etc.
For lo, thine Enemies make a Tumult; and they that hate thee, have lift up the
Head. They have taken crafty Counsel against thy People, and consulted against
thy hidden Ones. They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a
Nation; that the Name of Israel (that the Name of Protestant) may be no more in
remembrance. For they have consulted together with one consent; they are
confederate against thee. verse. 9. etc
-- Do unto them as unto the Midianites; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the
Brook of Kison, which perished at En-dor; they became as Dung for the Earth.
Make their Nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb; yea, all their Princes as Zebah,
and Zalmunna. verse. 15.
-- Persecutethem with thy Tempest, and make them afraid with thy Storm. Fill,
O Lord verse. 18.
-- That Men may know, that thou whose Name alone is JEHOVAH, art the most High
over all theEarth.

But there is one thing more I would more particularly recommend to you, as a
piece of Service we more especially owe to our Suffering Brethren at this Time:

And that is,

To contribute what we can for their Support and Relief, under their present
Sufferings, and for the hastening of their Deliverance from the Tyranny and
Cruelty of their Adversaries. If, God will recompense his suffering Servants,
with a Glory which will infinitely exceed all that can be inflicted on them at
present, we may be sure he sets a a very high value on them, and has a very
affectionate and tender regard unto them. And is it not very apparent from
hence, that we ought to have a very great esteem of them, and to concern our
selves as much as possibly we can at present, for their support and deliverance?

We should now be very free and liberal in imparting what we have, to supply
the Wants and Necessities of our distressed Brethren, that comfortable
Accommodations may be provided for them. It is our Duty to do good to all, but
especially to those who are of the Household of Faith. And amongst these, to
have a more particular regard to those who suffer for the Faith. We should now
extend our Charity to the utmost, that some competent Provision may be made for
them.

And here (though I have not those Letters Pattents to read amongst you, which
I understand are to be read this Day in the Neighboring Churches, to excite
the Charity of all honest and-piously disposed Christians) I cannot forbear
briefly to mind you, how loudly the distressed Estate of the Irish Protestants
does call upon us all to commiserate them in their Affliction, and to stretch
our Charity, every one of us, as far as we are able, and to contribute as
plentifully for their Supply, as our own Necessities will permit.

How grateful a Sacrifice would you offer unto God, if you would every one
voluntarily consign, and dedicate the greatest Portions of your worldly Goods,
which your Personal and Family unavoidable Occasions can spare, for the supply
and help of these afflicted Christians, even now, whilst you are destitute of
that more solemn invitation to Charity your Neighbors round about you have at
this time! O, what a great, generous, and excellent Spirit prevailed in the
Christians of old! What a powerful and truly Divine Love flamed in their
Breasts toward their fellow Christians! How little did they value this World!
How tender were they of the Ease and Welfare of those who loved and served the
same God and Christ they did! when they gave not only all the Money they had in
present possession, that the Members of Christ might be provided for, and
furnished with Conveniences, but Act. 4. 34, 35.
those who were Possessors of Lands, or Houses, sold them, and brought the
Prices of the Things that were sold, -- that distribution might be made unto
every Man according as he had need.

What Luke 16. 9,
Friends may you now make to your selves, of the Mammon of Unrighteousness?
What everlasting Habitations may you now secure, to receive you, when this
World shall not be able to serve or retain you any longer?

Indeed, I know your Stations, Capacities and Circumstances are such, you
cannot make such splendid Oblations, as may be offered in most, if not all
other Protestant Assemblies in this Land: But if you are not straightened in your
own Bowels, you may contribute so much as will be of some use to these needy
Persons, and most real and affecting Objects of Charity.

You who are poorest, if with the poor Widow in the Gospel, you give but your
two Mites, what you give will be graciously accepted of the Lord: 2 Cor. 3. 12.
For if there be first a willing Mind, it is accepted according to that a Man
has, and not according to that he has not.

Whatsoever we give on this Occasion, provided we do it with simplicity and
cheerfulness, we do but lend the same unto the Lord, who will not suffer us to
be losers by what we trust him with, or lay out upon his Credit. He will in due
time, and in his own way, recompe^se our showing Mercy, our Kindness, our
Liberality, our Charity to his suffering Servants, Children, and Members, with
an hundred-sold, yea, with many thousand-sold Gain and Advantage.

If we own, and relieve, and help the persecuted Followers of Christ, to the
utmost of our Power, Christ will own and approve, and glorify us at the great
Day. The Lord Jesus at his glorious appearing, will say, Come ye Blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World,
to those who seed, and cloth, and entertain, and visit, and refresh his
hungry, thirsty, afflicted, naked, and imprisoned Servants. But to those who
shall refuse to administer suitable Relief to his needy, suffering, afflicted
People; He will say, Depart from me, ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels. Mat. 25. 34, etc.

As for those Protestants who are come out of Ireland hither, because they
would not renounce the Protestant Religion, nor concur with the open Enemies of
our Faith and Peace, to enslave and ruin us, but have been forced to forsake
their own Country, by reason of the Insolence and Cruelty of their wild
Neighbors, and the Violence of a worse and more barbarous Foreign Force, they
ought most certainly to be very much respected by us. It is our bounden and
indispensible Duty, to contribute all we can to their Ease and Refreshment. And
especially should we be bountiful unto, and encourage to our utmost, such
amongst them, who are come hither on purpose, that they may be put into a
Capacity to help forward the deliverance of those distressed and besieged
People they have left behind them, and who are willing to resist the most
outrageous Assaults of the common Enemies of their Religion and Country, with
their last Blood, and to prevent the Romish and French Party from making this
Land as very a Field of Blood, as they have made, or would make that Country.

Many, if not all of these Persons, had Houses and Lands, and as great store of
comfortable Accommodations, a few Months since, as (it may be) we have at
present: And if the Stroke we lately feared, had not been miraculously
prevented, from falling presently upon us with its most formidable Force,
peradventure their Miseries would not so soon have prevailed in this manner
over them.

And if Considerations of this Nature will not now prompt us to express our
Charity toward them, with the greatest cheerfulness, in some eminent and most
suitable Instances, what may we expect, but that for our Ingratitude and
Obduracy, we our selves shall in a little Time be brought under the like
Circumstances with them? If we will not serve our God by a cheerful
distributing that abundance of all things, he continues us yet in the
possession of, for the Supply and Relief of these his Indigent Servants, he may
very righteously make us Deuteronomy. 28. 48.
serve their Enemies in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of
all things; and may suffer the same Enemies to put a Yoke of Iron upon our
Necks, until they have destroyed us.

God forbid that any of these poor Sufferers should perish, should be starved
or famished to Death, by reason of the uncharitableness of any who call
themselves Protestants in this Land, now they are arrived into a Land of Plenty
and Fullness.

Shall we gorge our selves, and feed upon Delicacies, whilst People of our own
Religion are amongst us, who have not wherewithal to provide necessary Food for
their own sustenance? Shall we hoard up Money for the Rust, and Clothes for the
Moth, whilst poor Protestants want Money to furnish themselves with the
Necessaries of Life, and have scarce Raiment to cover their Nakedness, at most
not to secure them from the Inconveniences of approaching Weather?

What plentiful Provision might be made for these and other afflicted
Protestants, without impairing our present Estates, Riches, and Wealth, in the
least Measure, would the Inhabitants of this Land but retrieve, and bring back
again into use and fashion, that plainness and modesty of Attire, that
simplicity and wholesomeness of Diet, that temperance and sobriety in
Conversation, which prevailed formerly here, when this Nation was both a sure
Refuge and Sanctuary to the Oppressed, and a Terror to all the Countries round
about us, when ever they adventured to behave themselves with Insolence and
Rudeness toward Protestants? Would the generality in this Land, but set apart
for charitable Uses, what is unnecessarily, yea, extravagantly expended for
strange Dresses, superfluous Dishes, and in other unjustifiable, yet too common
Excesses, we should soon have an almost inexhaustible Treasure, out of which
those who suffer for Religion, might on every occasion be plentifully provided
with Conveniences, and all this might be without any real prejudice to our
Persons, or our Fortunes.

God now calls us to Humiliation, and the denial of our selves, and shall we
refuse to deny our Lusts? If now when the Church of God is in trouble and great
distress, we will not deny our selves, but prefer our Luxury, Pride, and
Vanities, before the afflicted Members of our Savior: If we shall now refuse
to spare the very Excrescencies of our ordinary and usual Expenses, for the
succor of our suffering Brethren; what may we justly conclude the Issue and
Event of these things will be? Shall we not be justly deemed more uncharitable
to these poor Protestants, than Dives was to Lazarus? Will not our Land be
involved in such Guilt, that we may too truly fear the accomplishment upon our
selves, of what the Prophet Isaiah relates, in the 3d Chapter of his Prophecy,
Verse. 24, etc. It shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell, there shall
be stink; and instead of a Girdle, a Rent; and instead of well-set Hair,
Baldness; and instead of a Stomacher, a girding of Sack cloth; and Burning
instead of Beauty. Thy Men shall fall by the Sword, and thy Mighty in the War;
and her Gates shall lament and mourn, and she being desolate, shall sit upon
the Ground.

By being charitable now, every one to our Power, we may both greatly refresh
and comfort these poor Protestants, these suffering Christians, and effectually
secure our selves and our Country from the Indignation and just Judgment of
God, unto which Uncharitableness, as well as Oppression, does expose People.

And as we should enlarge our Charity as far as we can, in communicating what
we have to supply the Exigencies of those who are stripped and spoiled of all
their worldly Enjoyments, on the account of the True Religion; so we are
obliged to do all that is in our power, to weaken and overthrow the Potent and
implacable Enemies of our Religion, the present Persecutors and Oppressors of
the Saints of God.

There is One on the other side of the Water, who has so long gorged himself
with Cruelty, and with unheard of Perfidy, made havoc of the Liberties,
Rights, Interests, Estates, and Lives of sincere Protestants; and so many ways
involved himself in Designs to supplant and overthrow our Religion, and all the
Interests and Privileges of this Nation, as well as of all the other
Protestant States, that he seems to have forgot that he should be A Man; yea,
to think that all the World is turned into Brutes, and he the Beast of Prey to
devour all the rest: But it is to be hoped, God will soon bring him to a
Reckoning.

God has now put it into the Heart of our Sovereigns, and of other Protestant
Princes, to declare War against that Mirror of Inhumanity, in order to the
securing of this Land, and all other Protestant States, from the cursed Designs
the Popish Party have been long projecting; and to rescue the suffering
Servants of the most High God, out of that intolerable Servitude and Bondage
with which they have been long oppressed.

Let not any of us murmur, or complain; let us not be discontented, nor
manifest the least unwillingness to pay any Sums, which are or shall be legally
appointed, to promote so good a Work. It would greatly become us to evidence
such a promptness and alacrity in this Affair, that there might be ground to
believe, that the only Ambition of every one, is to exceed one another in a
ready and joyful compliance with every Motion, that has any tendency to
promote so glorious an Enterprise.

What have our Foreign Adversaries been aiming at all this while, but to
possess the Enemies of our Faith in those Mannours, Farms, Lands, and Estates,
which were in former Times blindly surrendered up to the voracious Appetites of
some ravenous Priests? And to make People of the same Persuasion, Masters of
all those other Lands and Estates, which by a wiser management have hitherto
been preserved from Superstitious Clutches?

Let us take care that we be not at this Time Stingy, Nigardly, and Penurious,
lest by our overmuch concern for a small Particle, we sacrifice all, and
betray our selves into their Hands, who will profane the whole, pretending
that every part is Sacred.

Our Adversaries Designs are evidently to deprive us of our Religion, and of
all that we can properly call our own, and to reduce us under that v^^e, that
ignominious, that insupportable Oppression, under which the Protestants in
France have long groaned.

How would English Men ennoble themselves, and raise their Reputation and
Character through all the World, would they generally and unanimously resolve to
empty all their Treasures, and Morgage and spend all their Lands and Estates
(though abundantly less will serve the turn) rather than such a laudable
Undertaking shall not be crowned with success, rather than Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Power shall not be extirpated, rather than those who are oppressed
and persecuted for the Faith of the Gospel, shall not be rescued and delivered.

The Israelites did part with their Ornaments, their Jewels, their golden
Earrings, to make them an Idol; though they might expect that thereby the
Wrath of God would be provoked against them to a prodigious Degree. And what do
the Worshippers of Idols in our Days freely and willingly part with, that they
may Inherit the loss of their Liberty, and of their Souls, at the dearest Rate?
Will not all these rise up in Judgment against us, if we think any thing too
dear to be parted with to secure our Religion, the Public Interests, our
Private Rights and Liberties, yea, and to purchase the Fase, Liberty, and
Freedom of the Church of God in other Parts of the World?

We of the Clergy do know that Manors and Estates have been excused from
paying Tithes, to encourage the Owners, to engage in a pretendedly Holy War.
Let us of the Clergy now manifest our selves so free from Worldly Minds, and
Covetousness, that we will cheerfully part with all our Tithes, rather than
Money (which is usually esteemed the S^^^^s of War) shall in the least be
wanting to support this Enterprise, which is as truly Just and Pious, as it is
apparently Great and Honorable.

Yea, let not English Men only adventure their Fortunes, but vigorously
resolve, they will, One and All, expose their Persons in this Affair, if
Occasion be. And then (if we have thoroughly humbled our selves before God, and
duly implored his Blessing and Aid (as we have lately pretended to do) and do
conscientiously endeavor to walk in all holy Uprightness before our God for
the future) we need not doubt but that this great and glorious Enterprise will
be effectual to these Blessed Ends for which it is intended.

If we be thus disposed, rather than we shall want Success, our God, who is the
Lord of Hosts, will employ all his Attributes, and muster together all his
Armies to sight for us. He will frown our Enemies into Confusion, and turn
their Swords one against another; He will send an Angel to cut them all off in
less Time than a Night: He will knock out their Brains with Hailstones, and
make the Sta^s in their Courses to sight against France; or he will find out
some new, and hitherto unexperimented Instances, whereby he will make our
Enemies the infamous Monuments of his Vengeance.

Let not any of us, who are sincere in the Protestant Religion, and heartily
concerned for the deliverance of those who suffer for our Religion, be
discouraged. Let none of us fear, or be dismayed, how potent, or how numerous
soever our Enemies are; But let us be strong, and of good Courage, for the Lord
our God is with us whithersoever we go.

Fifthly, I would desire you to reflect once more on the Text, and observe how
much it does concern every one of us in particular, to get our Minds well
assured, that the future Glory will abundantly exceed all the Sufferings of
this present time. The better we are assured our selves of this, the better use
we shall make of this Text in all the parts of our Lives. Let us labor to have
our Minds possessed with as accurate Notions of both these things as we can;
let us often think of each, and frequently compare both together. Let us never
rest satisfied till we have such a Persuasion and Sense of the future Glory as
will make all things appear very little and inconsiderable, whenever they offer
to stand in competition with it. Let us be earnest in our Prayers, that we may
be endued with such a Faith as may overcome the World, and may be indeed to us
the Substance of things hoped for, the Evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1.

With what Life and Vigor shall we then perform all our Duties? With what
Patience and Cheerfulness shall we entertain and endure every afflicting
Occurrence? With what Courage, Constancy and Triumph shall we go through, and
accomplish our Christian Warfare? How freely shall we contribute what we have
to those who suffer? How willingly shall we sacrifice all for our Religion and
the Publick-Weal? With what satisfaction may we look for the coming of Christ?
And how confidently may we depend on our appearing with him in Glory?

When your Circumstances shall be most menacing according to the Judgment of
this World, you may every one of you in particular say, as the Apostle did, I
am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have
fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at the last day, and not to me only, but unto all
them that love his appearing. 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8.

The God of all Grace, whe^^^^th called us unto his eternal Glory by Christ
Jesus, after (...) have suffered awhile, make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, (...) you. To him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen. 1
Pet. 5. 10. 11.

FINIS.

