THE DOCTRINE OF Non-Resistance or Passive Obedience No way concerned in the
CONTROVERSIES Now depending between the Williamites and the Iacobites.

By a LAY GENTLEMAN, of the Communion of the Church of England, by Law
established.

Cruces nec colimus, nec optamus.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXIX.

The Doctrine of NON-RESISTANCE, or PASSIVE OBEDIENCE, No way concerned in the
CONTROVERSIES now depending, etc.
I Have with some impatience and wonder beheld the bandying of the
Non-resisting Doctrine to and fro in this disturbed Kingdom, for so many
Months, and to so little purpose; because I am not able to comprehend what any
of the contending Parties would be at, nor why that Doctrine, rather than any
other, should be made now the Subject of our Disquisitions and Enquiries.

For what if God has forbidden us upon pain of Damnation, to resist our Lawful
Princes when they do amiss; and has reserved to himself the Censure and
Punishment of his own Ministers, as I'believe all Lawful Princes are such; and
that God has for great and wise Reasons tied up our hands; Does it therefore
follow from hence, that James is still the Lawful King of England? Or that when
he was so, we that believe the Non-resisting Doctrine, were bound to sight for
him, whatever he did?

And on the other side, what can the Friends of their present Majesty's pretend
to palliate their Contempt and Scorn of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience? It
was indeed dangerous to them when he first entered England, because all that
believed themselves bound by it, were obliged not to take up Arms for him
against King James; and so consequently it deprived him of their Assistance:
But when he had once subdued the Forces, and obtained the Throne of that
Infatuated Monarch; of what use can it be to him to have his Subjects so
frequently told, That it is lawful for them to take Arms and Defend themselves,
their Rights and Religions against him? I doubt not but His Majesty intends to
Govern us with the utmost Clemency and Mercy according to our Laws: But when
neither Moses nor David could always please their Subjects; It is to be feared
the best of Princes may at one time or other need the Influence of the Doctrine
of Passive Obedience to restrain the madness of the People: and therefore they
can be no Friends to Government in general; nor to him, or his, in particular,
who are so zealous to have the Doctrine of Non-resistance extirpated out of the
World. The consequence of which, is, That it is Lawful for every Man to Rebel
against his Lawful Prince, whenever he think^ it necessary.

My design therefore in this Discourse being to put an end, as far as I can, to
this unseasonable Dispute. I shall endeavor to prove these Particulars, as to
the Friends of the late King.

1. That th^se that believed it, were not thereby bound to assert the Mis
government of James the Second.

2. That seeing he has deserted his Throne, and withdrawn his Person and Seals,
they are not thereby obliged to endeavor the restoring of him.

The Doctrine of Passive Obedience does not oblige a Subject to assert the
Mis-government of his Prince: For it supposes the Prince may command what he
ought not, and then it obliges me to suffer rather than to resist my Prince,
or to break the Commandments of God, or the Laws of my Country, or do any other
ill Action in Obedience to his Commands. Now what is this to the purpose? King
James had notoriously subverted all our Constitutions and Laws, both in Church
and State, and would suffer no redress; the Church of England, on the other
hand, Petitioned him from time to time by her Bishops and Nobility, to suffer a
Parliament to meet and redress our Grievances; but this he would not yield, and
what should they do in this case?

Why, said the Jesuit, in the Answer to the Petition of the 17 th of November,
1688. (when they had set forth, That in their Opinion the Only visible way to
preserve his Majesty and this his Kingdom, History of the Desertion, p. 48.
would be the calling of a Parliament Regular and Free in all its
circumstances.) I hope to make it out, that the summoning a Parliament now, is
so far from being the Only way to effect these things, that it will be one of
the Principal Causes of much Misery to the Kingdom. And, I am sure, both our
Duty to God and our holy Religion, as well as to His Majesty and our Country,
does plainly enjoin us to use one other effectual means, etc. which is the
keeping inviolably to our Allegiance to our Sovereign; and effectually joining
with him to resist all his Enemies Whether Foreign Aggressors, or Native
Rebels. That is, let the King do what he please to you, you are bound to fight
for him and expel the Prince of Orange, and subdue all his Adherents.

I can very well remember what small effect this Oratory had then upon the
minds of all Men. There did not seem to be one Protestant in the Nation, who
could not distinguish between the Doctrine of Nonresistance and that of
actually aiding a Prince to destroy and enslave his People. His late Majesty
however persisted in his Opinion, that no Parliament could be holden till the
Prince of Orange was driven out; and the Clergy and Nobility in theirs, that
this was the Only visible way to preserve the late King and Kingdom: which
implied, that all fighting was dangerous to both, till this was done. And
accordingly, as we had no disloyal Exhortations from Press or Pulpit to
persuade Men to fight against their Prince; so neither had we any to persuade
us to fight for him: but the thing was committed to God to determine as he
thought fit.

In this our Bishops, Clergy, Nobility and Gentry; and in general all the
Children of the Church of England behaved themselves like good Christians and
good Subjects too; this difficult Case could then be no otherwise well and
justifiably managed; and if some few forgot their Duty, and declared too soon
for the Prince of Orange, his now Majesty; this they only are responsible for;
those that adhered to the late King till he actually left the Nation and the
Government, fell for want of the first Mover, are not responsible for their
Miscarriage if it was one.

In the Primitive times, when this Doctrine was best both understood and
practiced, their Loyalty was one of their lesser Virtues, upon which they never
valued themselves. It would have been then a mean piece of Virtue for a Man to
have alleged he had been ever Loyal to his Prince, when a Rebel or a Traitor
Christian was a thing they looked upon with horror and affrightment; they
expected Martyrdom every moment, and were preparing for it at all times; they
were told then, at their first admission into the Church, that they must expect
Persecution, and every one who took up that Profession, did it with that
Expectation: And the Religion being contrary to the Established Laws, whoever
came in to it, knew beforehand that at one time or other he might be called to
lay down his Life for it, and when it happened, it was no new or unexpected
accident, but foreseen and provided for.

But then they were not so silly as to be fond of their Persecutors, or to wish
or fight for it: Ad Scapulam c. 2.
We are (said Tertullian) defamed as Enemies to the Emperor's Majesty; tamen
nuaquam Alainiani, nec Nigriani vel Cassiani inveniri potuerunt Christiani; Yet
never was any Christian found like Albinus, Apolog. C. XXXV.
Pescennius, Niger or Avidius Cassius Usurping the Throne, and Invading the
Government. They prayed for the Emperor, and performed all the Duties of good
Subjects till he persecuted them, F^seb. H. E.
and endeavored to destroy the Church of God; lib. 7. c. 1.
but then they changed their Notes, Quales erg^ leges is it, lib. 10. c. X.
quas adversus nos soli exequuntur impii, injusti, turpes, truces, vani, de
Vita.
dementes? What Laws are these which none ever put in Execution against us,
Constable. lib. 2.
but impious, unjust, base, barbarous, vain and mad Princes? c. 2. Tertul.
Who ever pleases may see enough of this laid together in Jovian, Apol. cap. 6.
page 161. and 162. There is not one of those Princes who persecuted the
Church, but he is represented to the World by the Fathers and Church Historians
in the blackest Characters. That little Book that was written by Lactantius to
show the dismal Ends, and sad Catastrophies of the Persecuting Princes, shows
how far they were from being fond of Persecution or Persecutors; and by what
hand soever the enraged Fool fell, the deliverance was ascribed to God, who
makes use of such instruments as he thinks fit to punish bloody and tyrannical
Men. And let any Man show me that the Primitive Christians were discontented
when they were delivered, if he can.

So far were some of the Ancient Fathers from fighting for the persecuting
Princes, when they happened to be dethroned or invaded, that they would not
suffer a baptized Person to list himself in the service of a Pagan Prince, Anno
Christi 295.
Tertullian, de corona, cap. 11. To which purpose he alleges that passage of
our Savior. He that takes the Sword, Cum Ecclesia pace gauderet: and proinde
in Maximilianum animadvertitur ob spretam Militiam, non ob fidem Christia^am.
shall perish by the Sword: But then, says he, Plane si quos militia
praeventos fides posterior invenit, alia conditio est. Those who were admitted
to Baptism after they were listed in the Service of the Emperor, were not under
the same obligation. And we have the Passion of one Maximilian, an African, who
suffered Martyrdom for no other Cause, but for that he would not serve the
Emperor as a Soldier. And the Council of A^les, which first admitted baptized
Persons to take up Arms, limited the Grant to times of Peace; which was all one
with the saying, They would not allow it under Pagan Princes. From all which I
may reasonably infer, They did not think themselves bound to bestir themselves
for Pagan or persecuting Princes, as if the Church must have perished, if they
had not had the Honor to preserve every Prince God had set over them till he
had ended his Reign and his Life together.

Yet in all these times the Doctrine of Passive Obedience was at the Highest
never called in question, never doubted of. It is as true also, The Roman
Emperors, under whom they lived, were absolute Independent Princes, whose Will
was the Law; and the constitution of the Empire differed vastly from that of
England. So that we are not under the same Obligations they were, because our
Princes have not the same Legal Powers the Roman Emperors had: but then, I
doubt not, but we are as much bound to submit to the Legal Commands of a King
of England, as the Primitive Christians were to the Legal Commands of their
Princes. But this was no part of the Controversy under the Reign of James II.
who had as little Law as Reason for what he did.

I could never meet with one single Protestant, how discontented soever he was,
that James II. is not still King of England, who would pretend to justify or
excuse any of his Actions; no, they all grant his Design was certainly to
extirpate the Protestant Religion, to enslave, and consequently to extirpate
the English Nation: but then say they, What of all that, no evil is to be done;
we ought not to rebel to save a Church or a Nation.

Why, what then? supposing all this were true, What is this to them? Have any
of them rebelled? Yes, say they, all that have sworn Allegiance to their
present Majesty's, have made defection from James II. who though he were never so
bad a Man, is still our lawful Prince, and we are bound to swear Allegiance to
no other, as long as he is alive.

To this I reply, If the things laid to the Charge of James II. in the Prince
of Orange's Declaration, are true, and I think no body questions that, for all
the same things, in a manner, are complained of in the Bishops Proposals, but
one or two, which were too high for any Subject to take notice of; why then, I
say, That Prince had a just Cause to make War upon James II. and if he was
conquered by him, he has as good Right to our Allegiance, on that score, as
ever any conquering Prince had.

But this is not all, It is well known, His now Majesty offered to submit all
his Controversies to the Decision of an English Parliament, which is more,
perhaps, than was ever done by any invading Prince before; but James II. was
resolved, That neither he nor we should have any Right or Redress; but rather
than submit to that, he would go make a Voyage to his most Christian Majesty
for his Assistance to make a second Conquest of us.

There has been much bandying, Whether James II. went voluntarily away, or were
forced; and this is a Question not worth one Farthing, at the bottom. For if he
went voluntarily, he was forced; and if he was forced, he went voluntarily.

I suppose no Man ever said or thought he freely resigned the Crown, but that
his Mis-government had raised such Jealousies and Discontents in the Minds of
his Subject, that they neither could nor would fight for him till he had in
Parliament done Right, first to his People, and then to the Prince. This he was
resolved not to grant, be the Event what it would; and when he saw himself
deserted by all the World, still he persisted in his Resolution; and after he
had promised a Parliament, broke his Word with the Prince and the Nation, and
withdrew his Person and Seals, and left us in Anarchy and Confusion. Now, I
say, he was not forced to do this: he might, and as the case stood, he was
bound to have granted a Parliament, and then he might have staid with good
safety to his Person and Sovereignty.

Now, if there be nothing asked of a Prince by his Neighbour-Prince upon an
Invasion, but what he ought to grant and may grant; he is forced by no body but
himself, if he will run away from his People, rather than do them and his
Neighbor Right.

But then, when we say, His retreat was voluntary, we do not pretend there was
no force made use of, but that it was not made use of to that end. All that was
asked by the Prince or his own Subjects, was a free and legal Parliament; and
all the force that was used was to that End: And this he might and ought to
have granted; but if he would not, the Prince is not to be supposed to have
brought 14000 Men, only to make a vain Show with all, but either to force him
to do him Right, or force him out of his Kingdom.

This Prince was no Subject to King James, nor to any other Prince, and
consequently was no Rebel: He had as well good Right as a good Cause to invade
this injurious Prince who had injured both him and his good Subjects, and
without a War would do no right either to the Prince or us. For the Prince had
tried all fair ways before he tried Force, as is notoriously known to all the
World.

But our Jacobites prate of the Force that was used against him by another
Sovereign Prince, as injurious, only because it was Force. Why, the Prince was
no Subject, and if James II. would do him no right without Force (though we that
were then his Subjects had no Right to compel him) HE might lawfully compel him
by Force to do what he ought to have done without it, but would not.

What Stupidity is it to deny a Sovereign Prince may make use of Force against
a neighboring Prince that has done him Wrong?

Well, but say they, His Subjects ought to have fought for King James: To which
I say, Why did they not, who hindered them from fighting? No, they would not
fight, or, which is all one, they durst not; and now he is gone, they think to
make him amends, by a fullen disclaiming of the present King's Sovereignty.

But though they will not swear, they will promise to live peaceably under this
King: That is, they will not own him for the lawful King of England, but they
will submit to him as they did to Oliver Cromwell, till they have an Opportunity
to dethrone him, and deliver him into the Hand of King James; and for this they
would be allowed the same Condition with those Subjects that have sworn
Allegiance to him. Is this reasonable? will they admit a Servant or a Rival on
the same Terms into their own Families?

Well but some of his Subjects forsook, and others of them fought against him,
and almost all the rest stood still, and would not fight for him. 1. What is
this to them, if they have done as much for him as they could or ought, they
shall answer for no body but themselves. 2. What was the Reason, and who gave
the Cause of this general Desertion? 3. It is denied that King James his
Subjects were bound to stand by him and fight for him. He had notoriously
invaded and destroyed all our Civil and Religious Rights and Liberties, and
designed the Ruin and Destruction both of them and us, and would give us no
Assurance, we could rely on, to do otherwise for the future; and therefore if
it were unlawful to resist him, it was also as unlawful to assist and enable
him to destroy the true Religion, the English Liberties and Immunities; nay the
very Nation.

Now Jovian tells us, page 272. Whosoever acts contrary to Law, in this Realm,
to the Prejudice of any other Person, must be subject to make Reparation by
Law; against which the King himself can protect no Man, as long as the Courts
of Law are kept open; (this has been sufficiently confuted) so that there can
be no Tyranny, nor any Persecution, but a most exorbitant and illegal
Persecution, which must presuppose, That Justice is obstructed, the Laws and
Lawyers silenced, the Courts of Judicature that up, and that the King governs
altogether by Arbitrary Power and the Sword. (The Courts were indeed open, but
we know for all that, no Man could have any redress; but the Consequences were
the same as if they had been shut up.) But to suppose this (says the Doctor)
is plainly to suppose the utmost possibility, which is next to an
impossibility, a possibility indeed in Theory, but scarce to the reduced into
Practice, For in such a violent Undertaking all good Men would withdraw from
the Service and Assistance of the King; (mark that) and the Bad durst not serve
him, because if he died, or repented of his Undertaking, they must be
answerable for all the Wrongs and Illegalities they were guilty of in his
Service. And a little lower he tells us, To shut up the Laws or obstruct and
pervert Justice, would prove an exceeding difficult and almost impracticable
Undertaking, because all his good Subjects, and all the bad too, that tendered
their own Safety, would desert him; nay Foreigners, upon this account, would
make a Difficulty to serve him, because he could not protect them against his
own Laws.

Now all this was done and averred in the Face of the Sun, this Possibility was
brought into act, and things driven on to the utmost Extremity; and the only
Question then was, Whether we should intail this arbitrary tyrannical
exorbitant Persecution on our Posterity, without any Hopes or Possibility of
Redress, or whether we should withdraw from his Service, and secure our Rights
and Religion by it? And this was done by all but the Irish and Papists, both
Good and Bad, in a manner, as the Doctor foretold it would; and to me it seems
altogether justifiable. I know the Doctor means only a Civil Recess; but if it
was highly punishable and Infamous to have persisted in a cooperation and
Assistance of these things, it was worse and more punishable to have fought for
them.

And from hence I conclude, All that did withdraw from the Service of the late
King, when they saw he was resolved on these illegal exorbitant Courses, are
not to be blamed; and that the best of the Primitive Christians would have done
the same thing, if it had been their lot to have fallen under such a Prince.

Tertullian, de corona, c. 12. expounds that Place of Scripture, Give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's.
Give the Man to God, and the Penny to Caesar. The Man bore God's Image, as the
Penny did Caesar's; and when God and Caesar were in opposition, the whole Man
was God's Right. So far were they from thinking, their Loyalty to their Prince
obliged them to be disloyal to their Religion, even then when they never
thought of Resisting, their hands were tied up neither to assist nor resist a
against persecuting Prince, they would do neither of these though they (perished.
And are not we still under the same Obligations as to the latter as well as to
the former? For Shame, let no Man boast of that Loyalty to his Prince, which
makes him Disloyal to God and his Church, to whom his Duty is first owing; for
in this Case it is our undoubted Duty, to obey God rather than Man. Art thou
then (says Tertullian) a Servant and Soldier to two, to God and Caesar too;
certainly thou will not be for Caesar when thou owe thy Service to God: even
in common things, I yield to the better: or I believe thou will be for the
better. So far were they then from valuing themselves upon the score of their
Loyalty to their Prince.

The Disloyalty of two other Parties have made the Church of England take into
the contrary Extreme; and as a Jesuit wished it might do her much good, in
Scorn: So she had like to have paid too dear for the Pretense; and they that
would now again sacrifice her to their Interest and Reputation, are, to speak
softly, none of her best Friends.

They pretend we have not suffered enough for our Religion, to justify our
Resistance? Why, according to their Principles we are never to resist, whatever
we suffer, but to suffer on till there is not one Man left to resist. Now did
ever any Man, before they, complain, That for the Elect's sake God had shortened
those. Days* If they think we have not suffered enough for our Religion, they
may be pleased to go for France or Ireland and there make up what is wanting:
But if they love Company, and would needs have us suffer with them too, I do
not understand the Favor. If they are Prodigal of their own Lives and Fortunes
in this World, they ought to be tender of other Men's; Cruces nec colimus, nec
optamus; We neither worship nor wish for Crosses, said Octavius, a Primitive
Christian: And it is madness to desire to be, and to bring others into
affliction and Trouble, when God does not willingly afflict or grieve the
Children of Men, and has sent us a Deliverance, before we expected it, and
sooner than some Men are well-pleased.

They have another Objection, which is full as extravagant as this; If, say
they, King William has conquered King James, why does he not claim the Crown by
Conquest? Why, he that has several Rights to the same thing, may use his best,
and wave the rest. Nemo juro suo quod cum damni periculo conjunctum est,
Grotius.
uti cogitur; No Man is bound to produce an invidious Title: Should King
William have treated us as a conquered People, they would have been the first
that would have complaimed; who now complain, only, because they have not that
Case. The truth is, they would have him claim as a Conqueror, that they might
thence take occasion to ruin him; but he has the Right of a Conqueror, and the
Right of a Lawful Successor too; and though his own personal Right of Succession
is more remote, that of his Lady is immediate; and by it be claims, to our
great Good, and his immortal Honor: And they, in the mean time, might, if they
pleased, be as satisfied in the Right he has by conquest, as the Saxons were,
when King William I. won the Crown in a Battle, and wore it, under the Pretense
of an Election, because he could lay no Claim to it by Succession: And Henry.
VII. twisted his Right by Conquest with his Descent from Lancaster, and his
Right by Marriage. But these Men seem not to care which way our Ruin come, if
we may but be miserable; we have not suffered enough under King James, but he,
too, would fain come in by Conquest; and if ever he get the Crown again that
way, these Gentlemen will have no reason to complain of the Want of Sufferings.

Tertullian, who wrote his Apology for the Christians, in or about the Year of
Christ CC. as Pamelius stateth the Time, in his Annals of the Life of that
Father, says in his first Apology, c. 37. If we Christians would become your
public and declared Enemies, or secret Revengers of our own Wrongs, should we
want Force and number to support it? We exceed the Moors, the Marcomans, and
the Parthians, or any other one single Nation in the whole World; we are but of
Yesterday, and yet we have filled all your Places, your Cities, your Islands,
Castles, Corporations, Councils, Tribes, Companies, Palace, Senate and Forum or
Marketplace; and we have left you nothing to enjoy alone but your Temples; now
we who so willingly lay down our Lives, are we not thereby fitted and prepared,
do you think, to manage any War, though we were very much inferior in Number; if
our Religion did not oblige us, rather to suffer Death than to inflict it? we
might without Arms or Resistance, barely by disagreeing with you, and the Envy
of a Separation, very much endager and disquiet you; for if so great a part of
the Empire, as we now make, should break it self off from the rest, and retire
into any remote Corner of the World, it would certainly confound your
Dominions, to lose so many Subjects, be their Quality what it will; yea, our
very departure from you would be a severe Punishment; the Desolation and
Silence we should leave behind us, would strike you with an Horror and
Amazement, as if the World were expiring; you would be forced to seek for new
Subjects to supply our Places; and perhaps we should leave you more Enemies
than Subjects or Defenders. This Place has been often cited to prove the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience; and in truth it is a noble Testimony of the
Faith and Patience of those Saints: But then the Church continued after this
under Pagan and Persecuting Princes one hundred and ten years, and something
more, in which short time there is reckoned about twenty nine Emperors; their
times being short, and their ends Bloody; they almost all of them pershing by
the Sword. Did any of the Primitive Christians in those days make any scruple
to submit to the prevailing Power? The same Author, in this very Apology, puts
the Question to the Pagans, Vnde Cassii, Nigri, and Albini, etc. De Romany
(nisi fallor) id est, de non Christanis. From whence are all your Usurpers,
Traitors, and Rebels? They were ( if I am not deceived) all Romans, that is, no
Christians. Those very Loyal Pagans, that Persecuted the poor Christians,
because they would not sacrifice for the safety of the Empire and Emperor,
Those Loyal Pagans, who would swear falsely by all their Gods, rather than by
the single Genius of the Emperor, they were the Men that so frequently deposed,
murdered, and destroyed their Princes; that in one hundred and ten years there
was about thirty of them, and scarce three in all that time that died a natural
Death.

But where the Numerous body of Loyal Christians in the mean time, Cap. 2.
who, as he tells Scapula, were so great a Multitude that they were almost the
greatest part of every City; Tanta hominum multitudo, pars pene major Civitatis
cujusque.
and as he tells us in the other Apology, they were fit to have undertaken any
the most dangerous War, though they had been inferior in numbers, who so
stoutly and fearlessly suffered deaths, that were extraordinarily dreadful for
their Religion? Why did they not appear in the defense of some of these poor
miserable Emperors, who were thus slaughtered one upon the neck of another? How
could they satisfy their consciences to pay their Allegiance to thirty
Emperors in one hundred and ten years, and suffer above twenty of these to be
deposed and murdered without ever in the least concerning themselves what
became of them, or who was in the Imperial Throne. Certainly here was some
reason for this, it was not Cowardice; never in any Age were there greater
numbers of Heroical Martyrs than in this Century; four of the ten Persecutions
fell in this short period of time; and they bore them with all the bravery that
any of their Ancestors had shown. The Deposing Doctrine was not then dreamt of;
At the end of this dreadful Century they were as Innocent as at the beginning
of it, there was never a Traitor or Usurper to be yet charged upon the
Christian Church. Well, but what then, why did they suffer the Pagans to
murder their Princes at this rate? How could they in conscience pray for
thirty Emperors in one hundred and ten years, most of which were stained with
the Royal Bloods of their Predecessors; and who had no other. Title than that
of a Prosperous Usurpation and a successful Rebellion? Let the Iacobites of our
Age come forth now, and try if they can justify these Primitive Christians in
all this; let them produce their Arguments and form Apologies for them, which
shall not at the same time be unanswerable Objections against their own
Practice.

All that I can say for these Holy Menl, is this, They followed the Example of
our Savior; and, as he said in another case, who made me a Judge and a divider
of Civil Inheritances, or of the Titles and Claims of Princes? So they said
here, who has given us Power or Command to interest our selves in these things?
If we do our Duty and submit to and pray for those Powers that we find set over
us, by Men as the Instruments, by God as the great disposer of Crowns and
Scepters, we are safe; for it is he that Rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and
sets over them The basest of Men, Dan. 4. 17.
such as Oliver Cromwell was, Kings given to sinful Nations in his Wrath, and
sometimes as suddenly again taken away in his Anger; and at others continued
longer for the Trial of his People or the chastisement of wicked Men. St.
Austin says, De civitate Dei, lib. V.
Let us ascribe the gift of Kingdoms and Imperial Powers to none but the True
God; cap. 21.
he that gives eternal felicity in the Kingdom of Heaven to none but the Pious:
but the Earthly Kingdom, both to the good and to the bad, as he pleases, who
is not pleased with injustice: For though we should in this case say all we
know, yet it would at last be impossible for us, to search the hearts of Men,
and by a clear discovery to judge of the justice of (God in relation to)
Kingdoms. That one True God therefore, who needs neither the Approbation
(Judgment) nor assistance of Men, when he pleased, and as far as he pleased,
gave the Empire of the World to the Romans, who gave it before that to the
Assyrians and Persians. And a little lower, He that gave the Kingdom or Empire
to Marius, gave it to Julius Caesar; he that gave it to Augustus, gave it also
to Nero; He that gave it to Vespasian and Titus, two merciful sweet Princes,
gave it also to Domitian, a most cruel Prince: And that I may not be forced
(says he) to run through all the Particulars, he that gave it to Constantine,
a Christian, gave it to Julian an Apostate, whose great parts and Sacrilegious
and detestable curiosity was deceived by the love of Empire; who trusting
afterward in those vain Oracles to which he was too much addicted, and being
too secure of the Victory they had promised him, burnt his Navy on the Tigris,
which should have supplied his Army with Provisions, and rashly pursuing
irrational Designs, was deservedly cut off in the Enemies Country.

Now I would fain have our Jacobites tell me, whether the same True God has
abandoned the Government of the World, and when he did so? Did he give the
Empire of the World to Nero, to Domitian, to Julian the Apostate, all Usurpers,
and some of them Murderers of their Predecessors? nay, to Marius, who was the
very Image of Oliver Cromwell? and has he not since that done any thing of that
Nature? Did not he that gave the Kingdom of England to King James, give it also
to King William? Did not the Primitive Fathers submit to, and pray for Nero,
Domitian and Julian, though Murderers and Usurpers, as well as to Claudius,
Titus, and Constantius. It was well known, Claudius left a Son, whose birth was
never questioned, and that Nero was set up by the Intriegues of Agrippina his
Mother; Yet St. Paul owned his power to be God, Romans 13. For in that Princes
Reign, this Epistle was written, as Bishop Pearson proves in his Annals of St.
Paul, page 15. But the Christians were few in number then. Well, but they were
numerous enough in the second and third Century, but they were all of St.
Augustin's mind then too, and left God to dispose of the Kingdoms of the World
as he thought fit. Now how did they know that he had given the Empire in their
times to this of that Man, but by the event? and was that sufficient to
justify them in their acquiescing in, and submitting to, the Will of God thus
discovered and will not the same be sufficient to us too? Is not the same
Providence as powerful and as vigilant in our times as in theirs?

For my part I was none of them that did, or durst have resisted or Rebelled
against King James: but when he chose rather to leave his Kingdom, than to do
his Subjects Right; it was just with God and Men to confirm the Election he had
made; and seeing he would not continue in the Station, God had placed him in
(that of a Regular and Limited Monarchy) but aspired to an Absolute and
unlimited Arbitrary Empire, and persecuted those who had set him up and
preserved him in his Throne; It was just, I say, that God should say unto him
as he did to Saul, Because thou have rejected the word of the Lord; he has
rejected thee from being King. Seeing you have provoked and deserted your
People, and have fled into a strange Country, when you might by observing your
Oath and your Laws, have lived happily in your own; you shall the fruit of your
own folly, and I will give it to a neighbor of thine that is better than you.

Now I would fain know of my Country men, who are still dissatisfied, what I or
any of the other Members of the Church of England, who never resisted King
James till he left us, have done more than the Primitive Christians did in the
like Circumstances; and I would have them produce but one Example in all those
times of a Christian that did scruple to submit to, or pray for, the Prince
that was set over him, be his Title what it would. Lactantius de mortibus
persecutorum.
And when his hand is in, let him show me the Christian that desired the
Restitution of Dioclesian or Liciniu; two persecuting Princes, Eusebius. H. E.
lib. VIII. c. 13.
who were as manifestly laid aside as King James was or could be; supposing he
was purely forced, and that there was nothing of his will in it, which yet were
a very extravagant Supposition.

2. I come now to the Second thing, I proposed to examine, whether those who
stand for the Non-resisting Doctrine are by it bound to endeavor the
Restitution of James the Second, now he had deserted the Throne, and withdrawn
his Person and Seals?

I have in part anticipated this Enquiry in the former part, as it was
impossible to do otherwise, by showing the Primitive Christians who owned and
practiced this Doctrine to the highest, did yet never concern themselves for
the Titles or Successions of their Princes, but submitted to those they found
in the Throne, good, or bad, by what Right, Title or Pretense soever they came
in.

The only reason that be given for this, is what I have assigned out of St.
Augustine, viz. That the Kingdoms of the World were so particularly under the
Government of God, that no person could usurp them without his particular Gift
and Providence. They did not in this case make any difference between his
Approbation and Permission: They knew and acknowledged this thing was managed
in such manner, that it was impossible for Man sometimes after the utmost
search to find out the reason of it; but yet they said also with St. Augustine,
God could approve nothing but what was just, and in this be sure nothing could
happen but what he approved: no force, no fraud ever prevailed against any
Prince that was in Possession, but by the Will, and Approbation of God Almighty.

The only Objection that can be made against this, is, That this will seem to
make God the Author or Approver of the ill things that have been done to good
Princes in the several Ages of the World. To which I reply, That God has very
great Reason and Justice in all his Actions, though it is not always known to
Men. The best of Men have been guilty of great offenses, some of which have not
been known to Men in general, and others that were known have not been
committed to writing, and are lost; but when all things shall in the last Day
be discovered, then it will appear, That God was just in all his ways, and
righteous in all his works.

And though God has pleased to settle the Kingdom of the World in certain
Families and Persons as he thought fit, yet he has not thereby bound up his own
hands so, that let them do what they please, every person that is by his
Providence exalted to a Throne must necessarily Reign till his Death, and shall
then be succeeded by none but his next right Heir. God never made a personal
promise to any Family, but that of David; and after that to Jehu: but in the
Family of David (as the Promise was in part conditional) there were many false
steps, and aberrations from the true Rules of an Hereditary Succession; and for
the sins of Solomen, God rent ten of the Tribes out of the hand of Rehoboam his
Son, which never after returned under the House of David; and though this is
styled a Rebellion, yet God owns that this thing was from him, 1 King. 12. 24.
And the Family of Jehu ended in the fourth desent, as it was foretold.

Now put these two together, That there is a particular Providence, that
particularly concerns it self in the disposing of Crowns, against which neither
Fraud nor Force can prevail: And, That God has an absolute Right, as well as
full Power to dispose of the Kingdoms of the World as he please; and
accordingly has in every Age of the World, de facto, disposed of them; and the
Conclusion will be, That whosoever ascends a Throne, and reigns in any Kingdom,
does it by the Will and Appointment of God: And in this no Wrong is done by
God, for he may dispose of what is his own, when and how he please: All Princes
are Gods Ministers and Deputies, and, when he please, he may lay them aside,
and set up others in their stead.

And this in general is true of all Princes, Good and Bad; but as to the
latter, to what purpose are Prayers and Tears styled, The Arms of the Church
against persecuting Princes, if they were of no Force? to what purpose should
Men cry unto the Lord, because of the King, if he were resolved never to hear
them; or which is all one, never to help them? And the Difficulty is the same
yet; if I may not accept of a Deliverance, when it comes. Why, if God is
pleased to put an end to the Life of an ill Prince, and to set up the next
immediate Successor, then I may say I am delivered? But when did God oblige
himself to this? That he would exercise this most Sovereign Jurisdiction, over
Princes, only one way; and that every Prince should be succeeded by none but
his next immediate Heir: Where has he obliged us to accept of no other
Deliverance, and to reject all other Successors but those that we took to be
right, with the loss of our Lives and Fortunes? Did the Primitive Fathers of
the Church act or write thus, or how come we to be under other Laws than they
were?

If James II. governed us as he ought, according to his Laws and his Oath, we
are bound, in Gratitude, to desire the continuance of his Government, and to be
much concerned that we are not still under his Scepter; for he was once the
undoubted rightful King of England: But if it was otherwise, if he persecuted
that Church, he promised and was bound to protect, and did not treat us like
Englishmen, but like Slaves, what reason have we to desire, now we are
delivered, to be again brought into the same Circumstances we so lately groaned
under? Nero, Domitian and Decius, the three first Persecutors of the Christian
Church, all of them perished by the Sword; but Valerian, the fourth, as he is
reckoned by Lactantius, did not escape neither; At illum Deus novo ac singulari
poenae genere adfecit, ut esset posteris documentum adversarios Dei s^pe dignam
scelere suo recipere mercedem: God took a new Course with him, and inflicted
upon him a new kind of Punishment, that he might teach Posterity, That the
Enemies of God do often meet with a Recompense worthy of their Wickedness; for
he being taken Prisoner by the Persians, lost not only his Sovereignty, which
he had most insolently abused, but his Liberty also, which he had deprived
others unjustly of; and he continued in wretched Servitude to the Day of his
Death; not only destitute of Help or Pity, but scorned and trodden upon by his
proud Enemy. Did the Christians of this Age petition for their old Persecutor,
did they refuse to be under the milder Government of his Son Gallienus, Eusebius.
l. 7. c. 13. missis literis persecutionem adversus nostros commotam sedavit.
because the Father was still living, though in Captivity? No, he tells us, That
this was added to his Punishment; that though he had a Son, which succeeded in
the Empire, yet there was no Revenger of his Captivity and Slavery, nec omnino
repetitus est, nor was he, in the least, ever demanded or desired.

Next after him arose Eusebius. H. E. l. 7. c. 30. p. 231.
Aurelian, a mad and a rash Prince, who was cut off in the beginning of his
Rage: After him came Eusebius. l. 8. c. 13. Lactantius de mortibus persecut.
Dioclesian, who was hardly persuaded to begin a Persecution, but raged more
than any of his Predecessors; soon after he fell into a Sickness, and was
thought by the Violence of it to have been dead; but though he escaped with his
Life, he was a long time disracted, and was forced by Galerious, Imperio
cedere, to resign the Empire, in the Year 305. Jaacius and chronicon
Alexandrinum, say, he lived to the Year 316.
and although he lived to the Year 313. which was nine Years after he was
deposed, none of the Christians of that Age desired he should again ascend the
Throne.

One of the last of the Pagan Princes, that persecuted the Church, was Licinus,
upon whom Constantine made War, for that very Cause, and reduced him to a
private Life, in Thrace, in the Year 324. and in the Year 325. put him to
death, for endeavoring to recover his Throne: But neither here did the
Christians, that were his Subjects, desire again to be under their Pagan
Persecuting Prince, rather than under their Deliverer, Constantine.

Julian the Apostate was the last Pagan Prince that reigned in the Roman
Empire, and he perished in Persia, by an unknown Hand, within two Years and one
Month; and was followed, both living and dead, with the Detestation of that,
and all the succeeding Ages. S. Ambrose, Lib. 1. cap. 1. 9.
as he is cited by Grotius, de jure belli and pacis, says, This Apostate had
many Christian Soldiers under him, who when he commanded them, To stand to
their Arms, against the common Enemy of their Country, obeyed him; but when he
commanded them to sight against the Christians, then they acknowledged the
Emperor of Heaven: That is, they refused to serve him in this. And the famous
Thebean Legion made this their Apology, We offer our Service against any Enemy;
but we esteem in an Impiety to stain them with the Bloods of Innocent Men: You
may command our Hands against the Wicked and your Enemies, but we cannot
butcher the Pious, and our Fellow Subjects. We do well remember, That we took
up Arms for, and not against our Countrymen; and we have ever fought for
Justice, for Piety, and the Preservation of the Innocent: These things have
hitherto been the Rewards of our Dangers. Shall we, oh Sir, ever be able to
keep our Faith and our promise to you; if we now fail of performing our Promise
to our God? They were then said to be led into France, to fight against the
Bagaudae, a sort of outlawed Christians, who were forced, by the Iniquity of
the Times, to take up Arms under Dioclesian; and were all of them destroyed by
Maximianus; so that if that Story be true, it is a pregnant Testimony, That he
Doctrine of Passive Obedience does not oblige any Man to lend his Assistance to
the Ruin of the true Religion.

Beside these Pagan Princes, Socratis H. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 12, 13, 27.
there were some Arian Princes, who treated the Catholics of their Times very
hardly; and though none of the Christians of those Times rebelled against them,
yet neither would the Catholics assist the Arian Princes against the Catholic
Bishops, as is plain in the Story of S. Ambrose, and the many Tumults at
Constantinople, Antioch and Alexandria, in those Times; and when these Princes
sell by the Justice of God, in Civil or Foreign Wars, their Ends were looked
upon as deserved: Thus Valens perished in Thrace, and Valentinian, the younger,
at Vienne, the one by the Hands of the Goths, and the other by the Procurement
of Arbogastes, an Usurper; and the untimely Deaths of these two Princes, proved
the Exaltation of Theodosius, the Resettler of the Catholic Religion, and the
extirper of Arianism, in the Roman Empire.

In all the various Events of these Times, the Providence of God ordered things
for the good of his Church, and the Christians of those Times, left them to his
Disposal, and submitted to those he set over them, quietly, and without
disputing their Rights or Titles; whereas Procopius, who claimed the Empire, as
cousin to Julian the Emperor, perished in the Attempt, without pity, or the
Regard of the Church.

There is no part of the Reign of James II. that has not been examined and
represented by many pens; so that it were a needless, but an ungrateful Task
for me, to rip it up again; it may suffice to say, in general, Never any of our
Princes so openly attempted the Ruin of the English Liberties, or went so far
in it; never did any Man more openly endeavor the Ruin of an established
Religion, or by more illegal Courses than he: nor Laws, nor Oaths, nor
Promises, nor Gratitude could restrain him; he broke through all the Barriers
God and Man had put in his Way, and seemed resolved to ruin us or Himself; no
Remonstrances from abroad, no Petitions at home, could work upon him, till he
saw the Sword coming to cut up the Gourd he had planted, and was so fond of;
then indeed, he seemed to relent and to give back; but still he would be
trusted; he would yield up nothing, but so as that he might, when the Danger
was over, reassume the same again. An English Parliament was the thing, in the
World, he most hated, because he foresaw, if it was Free, there was an end, for
ever, of the Hopes of setting up Popery in this Kingdom; and that was his main
and almost only Design; and yet, as fond as he ever seemed to be of an Absolute
and Uncontrollable Power, if he had been of our Church, he would not have
hazarded all for it, but he would have managed Things with some Reserve; but
the Jesuits he took into his Bosom, and his Queen, especially, spurred him on;
and put him upon these Courses, only by representing to him the Glory and Merit
of extirpating the Northern Heresies, and settling the Catholic Religion in
England.

Well, but what has he done since he left us, that may give us any Assurance,
we were mistaken, as to what was past, or may hope for better Usage for time to
come? Why, there have been some General Promises made: In the Letter, pretended
to be sent to the Lords and Commons of England, and after wards printed in
London, he, or some other Person for him, tells us; We are resolved, Nothing
shall be omitted on our Part (whenever we can with Safety return) that can
contribute toward the Redress of all former Errors, or present Disorders, or
add to the securing of the Protestant Religion, or the Property of every
individual Subject; intending to refer the whole to a Parliament, legally
called, freely elected, and held, without constraint; wherein we shall not only
have a particular regard to the Church of England, as by Law established, but
also give such Indulgence to Dissenters, as our People shall have no reason to
be jealous of, not expecting, for the future, any other favor to those of Our
own Persuasion, than the exercise of their Religion in their own private
Families.

This Letter bears date at S. Germans en Lay, Feb. 3. 1688-89:

The Letter to the Convention of Scotland runs in a higher strain.
WE think fit to let you know, That We have at all Times relied upon the
Faithfulness and Affection of you, Our Ancient People, so much, that in Our
greatest Misfortunes, heretofore, We had recou^se to your Assistance, and that
with good Success to Our Affairs: so now, again, We require of you to support
Our Royal Interest, expecting from you what becomes Loyal Faithful Subjects,
generous and honest Men, that will neither suffer your selves to be cajoled,
nor frighted into any Action misbecoming true hearted Scotchmen; and that to
support the Honor of the Nation, you will contemn the base Example of Disloyal
Men, and eternise your Names, by a Loyalty suitable to the many Professions you
have made to Us: in doing whereof you shall choose the safest part, since
thereby you will evite the Danger, you must needs undergo; the Infamy and
Disgrace you must bring upon your selves in this World, and the Condemnation
due to the Rebellious, in the next; and you will likewise have the Opportunity
to secure to your selves and your Posterity, the gracious Promises,
We have so often made of securing your Religion, Laws, Properties, Liberties and
Rights, which We are still resolved to perform, as soon as is possible for Us
to meet you safely in a Parliament, of Our Ancient Kingdom: In the mean time,
fear not to declare for Us, your Lawful Sovereign; who will not fail on Our
Parts, to give you such a speedy and powerful Assistance, as shall not only
enable you to defend your selves from any Foreign Attempt, but put you in a
Condition to assert our Right against our Enemies, who have depressed the same
by the blackest of Usurpations, the most unjust, as well as the most unnatural
of all Attempts; which the Almighty God may for a Time permit, and let the
Wicked Prosper, yet then must bring Confusion on such Workers of Iniquity. We
further let you know, That we will pardon all such as shall return to their
Duty, before the last Day of this Month, inclusive; and that We will punish
with the Rigor of Our Laws, all such as shall stand out in Rebellion against Us
or Our Authority.

Given on Board the S. Michael, March. 1. 1689.

A Jesuit, who printed a small Paper, under the Title of Advices given to his
R. H. M. the Prince of Orange, by one of his most faithful Servants. Your
Emissaries ( says he) made use of the Mantle of Religion, to create in the
Minds of the People (of England) false Impressions, of the Designs of the King
their Master; whilst they who knew the Bottom of the Business ( the Jesuits)
and his true Intentions as well as you, are fully persuaded, That this is a
good Prince, who desires nothing but to pass the remainder of his Life in
Peace; and who would be well-contented to obtain from his Parliament, the free
Exercise of his own Religion, without giving the least Disturbance to that
which the greater part of his Subjects profess. It is not possible for you to
take too much care to hinder this Truth from spreading it self amongst the
People, etc.

Thus the late King promises and threatens; and the true hearted Jesuit, who
would not for the World speak one Tittle of Untruth, to an Heretic of the
first Magnitude, voucheth for him, and would make the whole Society, that Holy
Society, which has so great an Influence over the Mind and Actions of that good
Prince, Garantee for the Performance of all these fine things: Nay, I will
undertake, if the English Heretics will once more put their Heads into the
Yoke, That Lewis the Fourteenth, too, shall pass his Royal Word and
unquestionable Faith, That James the Second shall, for the future, keep his
Faith with them, in spite of all the Canons of the Church of Rome to the
contrary, as well as he himself has his to his own Protestant Subjects.

The Letter to the Convention of Scotland, was dated on Board the S. Michael, a
French Ship, then in the Road of Breast; and the late King was then passing in
her into Ireland; where he arrived the 12 th of March at Kinsale, with twelve
French Men of War, three Fireships and eight Merchant-Ships. Now,
notwithstanding the King's Promise of Pardon to those of Brandon, several were
indicted at the Assizes, insomuch that thirty or forty of them fled and came to
Bristol; being frighted at the Bloody Proceedings against one Mr. Brown of
Cork, who was hanged, drawn and quartered at the same Assizes. Several
Petitions were also preferred for the Pardons of Sir Thomas Southwel and
Captain Mills and many others, who being taken in their Way to the North, were
carried to Galloway; and there tried and condemned to die, but the King
rejected their Petition; but however, reprieved them for three Weeks, deferring
it till his Arrival at Dublin, to which Place he set forward on the 21st of
March.

Nor was the rest of his Proceedings, in that miserable Kingdom unlike this
beginning, all the English being plundered of all their Horses and Arms first,
then of their Cattle and Household Stuff, and at last of their very Clothes,
that they might be reduced to a necessity of perishing by Hunger, Nakedness and
Want; and great numbers of them destroyed by pretended Legal Proceedings,
because they would not at first Summons open their Doors, and suffer the Rabble
to plunder them of all they had; which I have had from some of my near
Relations, who fled on that account.

The twenty fifth of March a Proclamation was issued by him for the sitting of
a Parliament the 7th of May, at Dublin, as it accordingly did: wherein they
passed these Acts.

I. An Act to levy 20000l. a Month for 13 Months. II. For repealing the Act of
Settlement, and restoring old Preprietors. III. For Liberty of Conscience. IV.
For taking off Penal Laws and Oaths. V. For taking off all Writs of Error and
Appeals to England. VI. For taking off Valuation Money and other Rights from
the Clergy. VII. For repealing the Act of the 23d. of October, 1641. VIII. No
benefit of Clergy for two Years. IX. All Patents for Offices void. X. Ireland
to be independent of England.
They seized in the mean time all the Protestants Estates who fled into
England; and all this they effected by the 26th of June.

1. After this they passed an Act for repealing Poyning's Law. 2. Against
counterfeiting Foreign Coins. 3. And an Act for the attainting of many hundreds
of the Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, who were fled to England.
But the Town of Londonderry holding out, and an Army being every Day expected
from England, the 18th of July this Parliament was prorogued till October: And
notwithstanding their Act for Liberty of Conscience, and the dreadful
Expectation of a sudden Revenge from England, the Popish Clergy took possession
of the Tithes and Church Revenues; and many of the Protestant Clergy, were
clapped up in Prison, in order to be sent into France.

All that our discontented Party, here in England, have to say to all this is,
That we must not believe all is told, as out of Ireland; but they mean, That we
must believe nothing of it, but call in King James, and try if he will use us
at the same rate.

We have a Proverb, That Experience is the Mistress of Fools; and certainly
none but such will come a second time under her Discipline, when they have so
lately tried it; and see every Day hundreds of the Nobility, Gentry and Clergy
of Ireland flee hither to save their Lives, with the loss of all besides, who
agree very exactly one with another in these dreadful Stories.

Now let it be considered, That nothing was asked by the Bishops, in their
Proposals, and by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in their Petition of the
17th of November, but a free and legal Parliament, and the redress of our
Grievances; and that this was the principal thing insisted on by the Prince of
Orange in his Declaration; viz. That a free and legal Parliament might settle
and adjust all things in Difference or Dispute; and that it was obstinately
refused till the 28 th of that Month, and then granted when it could be no
longer denied, the greatest part of the Nobility and Army being then gone over
to the Prince.

Let also that Passage in the Proclamation of the 30th of November be
considered. For the reconciling all Public breaches and obliterating the very
Memory of all past Miscarriages, We do hereby Exhort and kindly Admonish all
our Subjects to dispose themselves to Elect such Persons, for their
Representatives in Parliament, as may not be biased by Prejudice, or Passion,
but qualified with Parts, Experience and Prudence proper for this Conjuncture,
and agreeable to the Ends and Purposes of this Our Gracious Proclamation. And
after this, that by his Message of the 8th of December, sent by the three Lords
to the Prince of Orange, He promised, That he would consent to every thing that
could be reasonably required for the security of those that came to it; that
is, to the Parliament. And that the 10th of December he sent for the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen and Sheriffs of London to Whitehall, and again passed his Word to
them, That though the Queen and Child were gone for France, He would stay with
them; And though this Evening he received such an Answer from the Prince to his
Proposals, that he could not but acknowledge, It was fairer than he could or
did expect; Yet after all these solemn engagements he burnt the Writs for the
Summoning a Parliament, and went the very next Morning away for France, as his
Roman Catholic Friends had foretold he would above a fortnight before. And who
accordingly sent a Letter to him whilst he was at Salisbury, persuading him to
come back from thence, and withdraw himself out of the Kingdom, and leave it in
confusion; Assuring him, That within two years or less the Nation would be in
such Disorder, that he might come back and have his Ends of it: That is, Ruin
both our Civil Rights and our Religion.

When all these solemn promises were thus easily broken, or rather never
intended to be kept at the very time they were made, and all those he has since
made have been violated in Ireland, where only he had power to keep or break
his word, what can we conclude, but that, as a Minister of State told our
Planters, It is very undecent, not to say undutiful, to tax (this) King with
his Promises; Who of all Mankind has shown the least regard in time past to
them, and for time to come can never be blamed for any breach? the Parties that
take his word being alone responsible for their Incorrigible folly.

Some of these Men have confessed to me, That if ever he be restored they
expect to be treated as they were before (without Truth, Justice or Mercy) but
yet if it be his Right, he must have it. And they cannot think his Right can be
determined but by Death or a voluntary surrender, or a Conquest made by mere
Foreigners, to the utter Ruin of the English Nation. And they will admit no
Answer to these their Scruples, but what shall be palpable, convictive to that
degree that they can make no Objection against it. Now if they admit all the
dreadful consequences that attend this relapse, and yield up both Church and
Nation to certain and inevitable ruin, only that they may not be damned for
Perjury and Disobedience to a King that has left them when he might have
stayed; and now offers to return and do what he then refused; What shall we
also consent and sacrifice our selves and our Posterity to the humor or
scruples of these Men? Shall we suffer the English Church, Liberties, and the
very People of England to be destroyed to gratify two or three hundred
persons? I have been told from good hands, Bishop Ken.
That one of our Bishops said, Though he could not satisfy his own Scruples,
yet he thought the English Nation fools if ever they suffered King James to
return; and I may from hence reasonably conclude the far greatest part of our
Scruplers are satisfied in the main, and do heartily wish they could also be of
the same mind with the rest of their Brethren in the rest; so that the cause is
half obtained against them, and those that shall finally persist will, I hope,
not meet with much Compassion, it being scarce possible there should not be a
very great deal of Will in so much blindness.

Our Neighbors abroad have observed with wonder, L^ vrai Interet des Princes
Chretiens, P^ 176.
That England was delivered from an Arbitrary Government, which threatened the
Ruin and Desolation of the whole Nation, and the Destruction of our Religion,
without the shedding any of our Blood, and that the Army of our Deliverer has
committed no Disorder or Rapine in any of our Places through which it passed.
Now one would think the manner of our Deliverance were a Mercy almost equal to
the Deliverance; No, they cry, if King William the Third had entered England as
William the First did, and had slain fifty or sixty thousand English Men in a
Battle, then it had been a true Conquest, and would have justified our
submission, and God would not have been offended with us if we had transferred
our Allegiance from the beaten James to the Victorious King William. Now if Men
were like Beasts, altogether distitute of the use of Reason, and capable of no
Reflection but the terror of a brandished and irresistible Sword, then there
might perhaps be some force in this reason: but if a Man is conquered whenever
he is brought to submit to another; the Noblest as well as the most effectual
Conquest is that of the Pen; Swords conquer Bodies only, Reason and Interest,
Justice and Mercy, subdue Souls too, and at once bring the whole Man under;
whereas Brutish force can triumph over none but the brutish half of a Man. A
Lion or a Woolf may master my Body and bring me under his power, so that I
neither can nor durst resist him; but none but an Hero can bring me to a
willing Submission when I am free, none but an Hero would with his own hazard
deliver me from Slavery when I were oppressed. St. Peter says, (...). By whom
a Man is overcome, him he must serve; That is, he cannot resist him; and it is
as true, he whom I neither can nor durst resist, has conquered me. When James
the Second was desired to leave Whitehall and go to Ham; and sent to his now
Majesty for leave to go rather to Rochester, than to any other place; It was a
plain Confession he was no longer Free, i. e. That he was brought into bondage,
and consequently that he was conquered: if Conquest be nothing but the
depriving a Man of the power of resisting, as I take it to be; and that
Servitude or Bondage is nothing but the effect of that deprivation. And in his
Letter from Rochester he says, He did not think it convenient to expose
himself to be secured so as not to be at liberty to effect it (to redeem the
Nation from Slavery) and for that reason to withdraw, etc. That is, he left
England, because as long as he stayed in it he was a Captive and liable to be
secured. And by consequence he was conquered. The Roman Catholics too, and
those few of the Church of England, who still adhere to him, were conquered by
force of Arms; for they durst not resist, nay they durst not Print the Reasons
why they will not comply, which is a plain Confession they are subdued. The
rest of the Nation too was conquered not by the Sword, but by the Justice of
his Arms; and his Kindness to a miserable enslaved People designed for Ruin.
And after all this, to query whether it is a real Conquest, is very absurd.

But every Conquest will perhaps not create a just and good Title, but here it
is confessed the present King had the most just cause to make a War upon James
the Second, that ever Man had, by them who scruple to submit to him; He managed
this War also with the utmost justice, he did not enter into it till he had
tried all other ways to obtain Justice, and was denied it and persecuted into
boot, he offered to submit all his pretenses to an English Parliament: and when
that was rejected he managed the War with so exact a disciplie, with so little
injury to the rest of the Nation, that the want of the effects of War, Blood
and Rapine, is objected against his Victory.

Every Man has not the Right of making a Conquest: a Subject that rebels
against his Prince is but a Victorious Traitor if he prevail; but William the
Third was a Sovereign Prince when he entered England, and by the Law of Nations
had a right to vindicate his, and his Ladies Injuries, and obtain by the Sword,
what he could not get by a fair Treaty.

But to what end is War allowed at all, if the Cause and the Effect must be
separated, and the most just War in the end leave the Conqueror in the same
state he was before? No, but all Subjects, Right or Wrong, are bound to stand
by their Lawful Princes in their most unjust Quarrels: and if at last they are
subdued, their Allegiance must be reserved for the injurious beaten Prince till
he die or freely resign; that is, Victorious Sovereign Prince and a Prosperous
Rebel, and a just and an unjust War, shall, according to these Men's Notion,
have the same effect.

Evagrius, in his Apology for the Christian Religion against Zozimus the Pagan
Historian, Hist. Eccl. lib. III. cap. 41.
thus bespeaks him: Let us, if you please Sir, consider the ends of those
Princes who embraced the Pagan Superstition, and the Deaths of those Princes
that were Christians. Did not Caius Julius Caesar the first of them that
obtained the Empire of Rome, perish by Treachery? And was not Caius Caligula
Murdered by his own Soldiers? Was not Nero slain by one of his own Servants?
Did not Galba, Otho and Vitellius all perish by the Sword in the space of
sixteen Months? Did not Domitian poison his Brother Titus, and then he himself
fall by the Sword of one Stephanus? What will you say of Commodus? Did not
Narcissus lay violent hands upon him? And did not Pertinax and Julian fall by
the same means? Antoninus, the Son of Severus, slew Geta his Brother, and soon
after fell by the Sword of Martialis himself. Was not Macrinus the Emperor
taken Captive by his own Soldiers, and being led about the Streets of
Byzantium afterward, was he not most Traitorously slain by them? Aurelius
Antoninus the Emperor who was born at Emisa, a City of Syria, was slain with
his Mother. To what end should I speak of Maximinus, who was slain by his own
Soldiers? Of Gordian, who fell by the Swords of his too who were stirred up to
it by Philip? And were not Philip and Decius both slain by their Foreign
Enemies? Gallus and Velusianus by their own Armies? And had not Aemilian the
same Fate? Was not Valerian taken prisoner, and carried about by the Persians
till he died? Was not Galienus, the Son of Valerian, slain by Treachery, and
Carinus beheaded, and so the Empire fell into the hands of Dioclesian and those
he associated to him in the Empire; of which Maximianus Herculius, and his Son
Maxentius and Licinius all fell by the Sword? But from the time Constantine, a
Christian Prince, became Emperor, to this, see if you can find any one who has
reigned in Constantinople, except Julian the Apostate and Valens the Emperor,
who have fallen by the hands of their own Subjects or of Foreigners, who both
so grieviously afflicted the Christians; nor has any Tyrant usurped against any
of our Princes except Basiliscus, who rose up against Zeno the Emperor, and
drove him from his Palace; but was afterward overcome by Zeno, and put to
death. You cannot assign any other Emperor, but these two, that was slain in
all this time. This happened in the Year of Christ 476. And Licinius was put to
death in the Year 325. So that in the space of 151. Years no Christian Prince
had been Deposed or Murdered by Domestic or Foreign Enemies in the East: And
whereas, I observed before in the latter times of the Pagan Superstition, in
the space of 110. Years, there were twenty nine Emperors in this period, which
makes 151 Years, there was but twelve, of which number Julian and Valens were
cut off by the Justice of God for Persecuting his Church. Now the force of all
this Argument lies in this, See the 1. Collect, for the 5 th of November.
That the Providence of God watches over Pious Princes to preserve them from
Violence: and as he suffers not persecuting Princes to end their days in
Peace, he looks graciously upon his Servants to preserve their Souls from
violence and wrong, because they are such. But if it is said he has suffered
some good Princes to be oppressed as he did Henry the Sixth and Charles the
First; I say the Judgments of God are sometimes unscrutable, and those that
have any hand in such Actions, shall doubtlessly be responsible for it. But as
for those who are merely passive, as they could not hinder the ill things that
happened in their times, they may and ought to commit them to God; who in his
due time will punish all unjust Usurpers, either in their Persons or in their
Posterity.

But then this new Doctrine of standing by wicked persecuting Princes, to the
apparent and visible Ruin of the Church, or at least of those that embrace it,
was never heard of in the Church before, was never taught or practiced by the
Primitive Christians; and is not any part of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience
or Nonresistance: As they would not rebel against their Princes, how wicked or
cruel soever they were; so neither would they against God, whose only Right it
is to dispose of the Kingdoms of the World; without whose Approbation as well
as Permission, no Force ever did, or ever shall, prevail; who when he pleases
punishes the Wicked, and when he pleases pulls down not only unjust Usurpers,
but those who have the justest Title. Thuanus, Ann. 1559.
The great Thuanus makes this Reflection on the Deposition of Christian the
Second, King of Denmark if Princes will Reign well and happily, they must
govern their Affections, and not out of a violent lust of insulting over their
Subjects give up themselves to the Conduct of their Passions, or otherwise they
ought to assure themselves, God is a severe revenger, always ready and
delighting to pluck off their Thrones the most Proud and Insolent who shall
abuse that Power he has entrusted them with. Nor is this less true of lawful
Princes, than of unlawful Usurpers, no Title can exempt a Prince from being
responsible to the Justice of God, and he will use his Power as he thinks fit,
and punish one Man after one manner, and another in another; some in this
World, and others in the next; and the Church in the best of times accordingly
left it to him to dispose of the Government of the World: and as she did not
anticipate his Judgments by disturbing the Peace of the World, whatsoever she
suffered; so neither did she think her self more wise or just than he, but
submitted to those he was pleased in his Providence to set over her; and would
certainly have been very thankful for such a Deliverance as we of the Church of
England have had, by the Ministry of our King, who like another Constantine
has delivered us out of the hands of our Enemies, who designed to enslave and
ruin us and our Posterity for ever.

The Primitive Church in the best times took the words of St. Paul in their
plain and literal sense, Romans 13.
(...) (...). The powers that are, (i. e. in Possession) are ordained or
ordered of God. They never formalize or make any Exception, but Conquest,
Election, Usurpation, were to them all alike, if once the Man was Established
in the Throne; And whereas they so frequently affirm, Empires are given by God,
according to that of Tertullian, Apolog. cap. XXX. We Invocate for the
Preservation of the Emperors, the Eternal, True, Living God, him whom the
Emperors themselves would wish propitious above all others, for they know who
gave them the Empire (they know it as Men,) and who ga^e them their breath.
They feelingly know that he i^ the only God in whose Power they only are, etc.
There is no power but that of God that can touch the Person, the Power or the
Life of any Prince. Thus Soz. in his Ecclesiastical History, Lib. VI. c. 35.
reprehends the vanity of the Pagan Philosophers who had been too Inquisitive to
find who should succeed Valens; and the over great severity of that Prince in
Executing many who had no hand in it, because their Names began with the
Letters pretended to be discovered. If (says he) these things are once agreed
to depend ((...)) on the Motion or Course of the Stars, we ought to expect
((...)) The Prince that is thus decreed for us, whosoever it is: But if these
things are ordered by the counsel of God, why do Men pry curiously into them;
for the foresight or endeavors of Men can never find out the Will of God. And
if is were possible, it is not fit to be done, because the wisest of Men cannot
order them (the succession of Princes) better than God. The Ancient Fathers and
Primitive Christians do every where ascribe the Setting up and Pulling down of
Princes to God only, as they do Rain and other such things; and you shall
never find any Exception, of lawful, or unlawful Powers, that were supreme in
Fact in the Writings of the first Ages. To this purpose, see that Passage of
St. Augustine De Civitate Dei, lib. V. c. 21. cited above.

Some have alleged in answer to this, That we in England are under other
Circumstances than the Primitive Church were, both in Relation to our Laws and
our Oaths; for the Law, Sir Edward Coke in his Pleas of the Crown, Chap. 1. p.
7. says, upon the 25 E. 3. c. 2. This Statute is to be understood of a King in
Possession of the Crown and Kingdom; for if there be a King Regnant in
Possession of the Crown, although he be Rex de facto and non de jure; yet he is
Seignior le Roy within the Purvieu of this Statute, and the other that has
Right and is out of Possession, is not within this Act. Nay, If Treason be
committed against a King de facto and non de jure, and after the King de jure
comes to the Crown, he shall Punish the Treason done to the King, de facto.
And a Pardon granted by a King de jure, that is not also de facto, is void, for
which he cites 11 H. 7. c. 1. 4 E. 4. 1. 1 Ed. 4. 1, 2.

The words of the Statute are as follows.

The King our Sovereign Lord calling to his remembrance the Duty of Allegiance
of his Subjects of this Realm, 11 H. 7. c. 1
and that they by reason of the same are bound to serve their Prince and
Sovereign Lord for the time being in his Wars, for the Defense of him and the
Land, against every Rebellion, Power and Might reared against him, and with him
to enter and abide in service in Battle, if case so require; (2) and that for
the same service what fortune ever fall by chance in the same Battle against
the Mind and Will of the Prince (as in this Land some time passed has been
seen) that it is not reasonable, but against all Law, Reason, and good
Conscience, that the said Subjects going with their Sovereign Lord in Wars,
attending upon him in his Person, or being in other places by his commandment
within this Land or without, any thing should lose or forfeit for doing their
true Duty and Service of Allegiance, etc -- That for the said deed and true
Duty of Allegiance he or they be in no wise Convict or Attaint of high Treason,
ne of other Offenses for that cause by Act of Parliament or otherwise by any
Process of Law whereby he or any of them shall lose or forfeit Life, Lands,
Tenements, etc. or any other things, but to be for that Deed and Service
utterly discharged of any vexation, trouble or loss. And if any Act or Acts or
other Process of the Law hereafter thereupon for the same happen to be made
contrary to this Ordinance, that then that Act or Acts or other Process of the
Law, whatsoever they shall be, stand and be utterly void. (5) Provided always
that no Person or Persons shall take any Benefit or Advantage by this Act which
shall hereafter decline from his or their said Allegiance. Which is to be
understood of the King in being, as the rest is, and against the same King. To
this Statute it is alleged, That the Title of the Crown was then so ambiguous
and uncertain, that it was hard to know where the Right lay; which is a mere
Cavil. The Title was as well known then as it is now, and is a thing of that
Nature, that it can never be universally known; but the greatest part of
Mankind take those that are set over them, without further inquiry; nor is it
reasonable any Man should suffer for obeying them whom he cannot nor ought to
resist: So that what some have said, That every one is bound to take notice of
the right Title at his Peril is true, if the Person is in Possession, but false
if he is out of Possession.

Conquest, a voluntary Surrender, and a wilful Desertion of a Crown, will put
an End to the best founded Title in the World, as I think is universally
agreed; so that if the Party pretending, has a Title, why is he not in
Possession too? if he is outed by his own Act, I am absolved; if by the Force
and Power of another, why then, he is conquered: and both ways (especially if
I had no hand in it) I am, and ought to be absolved before God and Man.

But then not only the three Estates of England, but all the Princes and
Sovereign States in Christendom (except the King of France) have allowed King
William and Queen Mary, as the rightful Sovereigns of England; which is a kind
of giving Judgment against the late King, after hearing what has been alleged
on both sides. So that this Case is determined by all the ways that are
possible; and must absolve any Man that submits now to that which is the only
Supreme Power in England.

As to the Oaths taken to the late King, they create no new Obligation upon us
as to the Extent or Duration of our Allegiance; I was under the same
Obligations of Allegiance, before I was sworn, as I was afterward; and every
Subject of England, owes, by the Laws of England, a natural Allegiance to his
Prince before he is sworn, as every Man ows naturally Obedience to God, before
he enters into the Baptismal Covenant: And so the Primitive Christians were
under the same Obligation to their Princes we are, though I do not find they ever
swore any Allegiance to them.

2. This Allegiance is no everlasting Obligation as to time; Death, a voluntary
Resignation, a wilful Desertion, or a lawful Conquest will put an End to it.

3. Magna cha. c. 29. 2 E. 3. c. 8.
It is no wild, unlimited Obedience, whilst it lasts, but is plainly limited
by the Laws of God and the Laws of the Land, and if I obey further actively, I
am responsible to God and Man for it.

I come now to the Words of the Oaths, which may seem to create any Scruple;
which in the Oath of Supremacy I suppose may be these. I do promise that from
henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King's Highness, his
Heirs and Lawful Successors ( and to my Power) shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities granted or belonging
to the King's Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm.

Where first I observe, No Man is bound beyond his Power, but that all those
who stuck to the late King, till he left the Nation, and another took
Possession of his Place, are thereby disabled and freed from attempting any
further.

2. That the Authorities I am to defend are such only as belong to the Crown of
England by the Laws of England; which are to limit my Allegiance; but by the
Law of England, my Allegiance is now transferred to another, and cannot be due
to two in opposition each to other; so that if I persist in my Allegiance to
James II. I am punishable by these very Laws; therefore my Allegiance, which
was a legal Allegiance is determined.

That in the Oath of Allegiance, which may be objected, is this,

I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, and him and them will defend, to the uttermost of my Power, against
all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or
their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such
Sentence or otherwise, etc.

Now this Oath, which binds us to the Person, as the other did to the Power, is
capable of the same Limitation, and is to be limited both as to its Duration
and extent, by the Laws of England, and the Law of Nations; and therefore is
determinable the same way the other was.

The Power, and uttermost Power, reserved and expressed in these Oaths, is a
Legal Power, and therefore no Man is by these Oaths bound to exert his Natural
Power for any Prince, when he may by the Laws of England be punished as a
Traitor for so doing; it being a Legal and not an Illegal Allegiance we promise
by them.

If King James would have been contented with the Preheminences, Privileges,
Authorities and Jurisdictions granted and annexed, or belonging to the Crown of
England, I believe no Body questions but he had been still King of England; but
by grasping at others, which did not belong to him, he cut off his own
Succors, and hindered those that otherwise would have defended him and them
from doing it: He would not be content with those that belonged to him, and
they could not fight for, or defend any other; and between these two his Power
fell to the Ground, by his own Default; and his withdrawing put an End to his
Sovereignty; and put our present King and Queen in the actual Possession of all
those Legal Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities, which he
was formerly vested with; and it is now the same Sin to resist them, it was
formerly to resist him.

There may possibly be some, who will lightly regard what ever I or any other
Man of this Age can say to them; will they then vouchsafe to hear one of the
most Noble and Royal Orators that ever spoke to men, Constantine the Great, in
his Oration to the Holy Assembly.

Chap. 24. Of the calamitous Deaths of Decius, Valerian and Aurelian, three
Emperors who persecuted the Church.
And now I ask thee, Constantini oration ad sanctorum caetum.
O Decius, who did once insult over the Calamities of the Just, who did
hate the Church, who did inflict such Punishments on those who lived most
piously: What art thou doing in the other World? with what and how dreadful
Circumstances art thou surrounded? Yea, the remainder of thy Life (after it) in
this World, and the manner of thy* Death show thy Felicity, when thou and all
thy Army fell in the Scythian Fields: And the celebrated Roman Empire, by thy
Fall became (after this) contemptible to the Goths. And thou, O Valerian, when
thou did enter into a bloody War against the Servants of God, have thereby
made his Justice known to Men; being taken Prisoner by the Persians, and kept
in Chains in thy Purple and Royal Robes. After which thou were flayed (being
dead) by Sapores, King of Persia, and thy Skin, by his Order, ta^^ed and kept
as an eternal Trophy of thy Misfortune. And thou, O Aurelius, the unjustest and
most wicked Incendiary, how much have thou discovered his Justice, whilst madly
invading Thrace, thou were cut off in the Field, and did de^ile the surrows
of the Public Road with thy wicked Blood?

Chap. 25. Of Dioclesian, who basely resigned the Empire, and was struck with
Lightning for persecuting the Church.
Dioclesian also, after a wicked Slaughter and cruel Persecution, condemning
himself, through distraction, was reduced to a private Life, and punished with
the Restraint of a mean House. What did he get by his War against our God? Why,
that he was ever after afraid of Thunder and Lightning. Nicomedia says this,
and they who saw it will not be silent; among whom I my self was one. The
Palace was consumed, and his very Chamber burnt with Fire from Heaven; and
thereupon wise Men foretold what would follow, for they could not conceal their
Thoughts, nor suppress their Resentments at the ill things were done, but
openly and publicly, with assurance, said one to another, What madness is
this? what boasting in human Power for a Mortal to begin a War against God, and
injuriously to affront the most chaste and holy Religion? and without any Cause
or Provocation to contrive the Destruction of so many just Men, and of so
numerous a People? What a famous Master and teacher of Modesty to his Subjects
will he appear? How rarely he teaches his Soldiers to take Care of their
Countrymen? Why, they stab their fellow Subjects bravely, who in Fight never
saw the back of a beaten Enemy. At last the Providence of God undertook the
avenging this Impiety, though not without the public Hurt; for so much Blood had
been shed by him, that if he had slain as many of the Barbarians as he did of
his own Subjects, we might have procured a long Peace by it. But the whole
Roman Army being then in the Hand of a mean-spirited Prince, who had acquired
it by Force, his whole Army perished, when God was pleased to think fit to
restore the Romans to their ancient Liberty. The Voices of oppressed Men, who
cried to God for Help under their Burdens, and begged the Return of their
natural Liberty (are not forgotten;) nor the Praises they returned when they
had regained it, and saw an end of their Calamities: Did they not declare to
all the World, How much they admired the singular Providence and paternal Love
of God to men, when their Liberty, and the Equity of their Contracts was
restored?

That is, when they were delivered out of the Hands of perfidious Tyrants, and
became subject to a Prince who would keep his Faith and Promise to them.

They may be pleased to consider, How much of this was our Case; and ask their
Consciences, If the self-same Divine Justice and Providence has not appeared in
our Times also, and whether we have not as much Reason as they to be pleased
and thankful.

Having thus dispatched what I think fit for the present to be offered to the
Friends of the late King; I come now to that part of the Nation, who being
satisfied and highly pleased with the present State of Affairs; may therefore
be called, in contradistinction, the Williamists.

Many of these of late have appeared very pertly against the Doctrine of Non
resistance and Passive Obedience; and discoursed of it with a Contempt and
Scorn, as if it were one of the worst and most exploded Doctrines in the whole
World; and full as Antichristian as that of deposing Kings, and disposing of
their Kingdoms. Now, these two being directly contrary each to other, in all
probability one of them is true. If we of the Church of England are not in the
right with the Scriptures, and all Primitive Antiquity on our side; it is
fairly probable, They of the Deposing Church are; for their Claim is older than
the Peoples: But the Mischief is, the Devils is older than either; for he
pretended to our Savior, when he had showed him all the Kingdoms of the World,
and made a conditional Tender of them, (...). All this Power and Glory is
delivered into my Hands, and I give it to whomsoever I will: Now this was long
before People or Pope put in any Claim, and before the latter of these had any
Being. The Pope, it is true, claims under the People, but the Devil in his own
Right: But I believe neither of them can show their Charter, though the Devil
claimed by a Grant; and so I shall leave him and them, Pope and all, in the
entire possession of their several Rights, if any they have.

The Doctrine of Non-resistance has been often proved the genuine Doctrine of
the best Ages of the Church; and that so fully and clearly, that those who
would not yield to the Force of the Proof, have not been able to deny the Truth
of it, but have been forced to pretend it was only Temporary, and does not
oblige all Ages; which is hardly Sense; or that the Church is now in other
Circumstances than she was then; which is not true neither; for in some Places
she is now under the same or worse Circumstances; than she was in the three
first Centuries, and consequently, they at least, are under the same
Obligations the Primitive Christians were; and therefore this very Doctrine is
of eternal Verity, and will have its Use till the End of the World. The command
is general, the Examples of it are general, and it is now confessedly necessary
in Turkey, and all Countries where Christianity is oppressed; and by consequence
every where, except some Body can show, We have one Gospel for the Afflicted,
and another for the prosperous Days of the Church; or one Remedy, viz. that of
Patience was prescribed to our Ancestors, and another directly contrary to us;
which if any Man can show, when and where it was done, I shall be very thankful.

But it may be pretended it has been stretched too far; and that some of the
Church of England have written too much in Favor of Wicked and Tyrannical
Princes, even to the encouraging them to do worse than otherwise they would: To
this I say, The Heat of Controversy has in other Instances misled Men as well
as in this; and the Doctrine of Non-resistante is nevertheless true, though their
Notions of it should happen to prove too loose or too large. Let it then be
fairly and truly stated once for all, and then let it be as it ever has been,
The Glory of the Church of England, and the Bulwark of all Religious Kings and
States, against the Rage of Mutinous and Rebellious Spirits, who pretend to
sight for God's Truth, against the Laws and Governments of their Countries.

If any Man thinks some of the things that were done in the heat of the late
Revolution cannot be justified, without exploding this Doctrine: I say those
are the Faults of a few Men, and better it is to leave them to their own
Master, than to set up our selves against the Doctrines of Christianity to
excuse them. The Men of our Generation have all the Infirmities that have gone
along with the former; and being so highly provoked by a handful of perfidious
ungrateful Miscreants, what Wonder is it if the Temptation, which was so
strong, prevailed over the Restraint, and made them guilty of some
Irregularities, which according to the strict Rules of the Gospel, cannot be
justified; such things have happened in the best of the former Ages, and will
happen again in those that shall follow us. But the Rule of Christianity ought
to be preserved, notwithstanding, and delivered down to our Posterity just as
we received it.

Those that have appeared against this Doctrine have done their Majesty's Two
great Injuries. First, They have exasperated the Dissatisfied Party in the
Nation, and made them harder to be won over; they concluding, that this
Revolution was not the Work of God, because so many of those who have defended
it, have made it their business to ridicule or confute the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, as if there were no other way than that to justify it. But then
they are well assured this is as certain a Principle of the Christian Religion,
and was ever practiced by the Primitive Church in the five first Centuries; and
from thence they conculde, the Men that do this and all other that join with
them, have made a Defection from this Doctrine, and from the Church of England;
and they think themselves bound in Conscience to oppose all those that are thus
united, lest they should seem betrayers of this Loyal, Holy, Excellent
Doctrine, and of the Honor of that Church that has ever taught it.

Secondly, They have deprived them, as much as in them lies, of that religious
awe and reverence, which is due to all Crowned Heads and Sovereign States. If
they are the Ministers of God, if they are the Powers ordained by God, then is
all resistance of them a sin against God. But these Men write as if it were
lawful to resist when they pleased, and whom they pleased; which, if it is
true, I am very confident it will not be long before they will pretend they
have cause, or some other for them; and so all Princes shall be deprived of
their best Safeguard, the fear of God over-awing their Subjects, as the just
avenger of such as rebel against their rightful, lawful Princes, and the Laws
of their Country.

As there must be in every Country a Supreme Power lodged somewhere, against
which there is no Appeal but to God; so that Power must be acknowledged to be
Sacred and Irresistible, by the Laws of Christianity: and this is as true of
Commonwealths as Monarchies, for wheresoever the Supreme Power is lodged, it is
the Ordinance of God, approved by his Word, and settled by his Providence,
whosoever then resists that Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and shall
receive to themselves Damnation. He, then, that shall endeavor to destroy this
Obligation, and to persuade Men they are not bound in Conscience to submit to
the Laws and lawful Governors of their Country, contradicts this plain Doctrine
of the Apostle, and exposes the Supreme Powers in all Countries to the Rage
and Fury of the Multitude, or any Faction that is potent, and thinks it self
injured; and consequently he is an Enemy to all Government.

But then though I am bound not to resist, I am not equally bound to assist, my
hands may be tied both ways; If I live in a Pagan Country, where Christianity
is Persecuted by the Supreme Power, I must suffer and ought not to resist; but
then I am not to lend my assistance to that State to encourage or enable it to
destroy this Religion, but I must be merely passive in that case. And this was
the case of England, we were persecuted against Law, by a handful of Men, who
expected to ruin us by our own hands; and we were bound not to assist them in
this wicked and foolish Project; and for want of our assistance they could not
justify or carry on the Enterprise: and when they came to be called to an
Account by a Prince who was no Subject, and consequently was not under the
Obligation of not resisting their Injustice and Oppression; so they fell an
easy Victim to his Arms, and we were delivered out of their hand, not by any
resistance we made, but by refusing to assist them; and they that went no
farther than this (which it is certain the greatest part of the Nation did not)
are justifiable by the strictest Rules of Christianity, and the Practice of the
best Ages.

To conclude, I would advise even those who have no kindness for the Doctrine
of Non-resistance, to speak modestly of it; it has such Characters of Divinity
to show, that it will deserve this respect at their hands, if they are
Christians: And as to those that are not, those that despise all revealed
Religion (for they of late have been very witty against it) they ought to show
some reverence to it, for the sake of Government, and to preserve the Peace of
the World in which that sort of Men have a greater interest than others; for
their All lies in this World, and they pretend to nothing in the next; and if
the World be imbroyled, let the pretense be what it will, their happiness must
necessarily be very much abated, and perhaps their Machines destroyed, and then
there is an end of them.

FINIS.
LICENSED,

August 27. 1689. J. Fraser.


