A REPLY TO Mr. EDWARDS's Brief REFLECTIONS ON A Short Discourse of the True
Knowledge of Christ Jesus, etc.

To which is prefixed A PREFACE, Wherein something is said concerning Reason
and Antiquity, in the chief Controversies with the Socinians.

By S. Bold, Rector of Steeple, Dorset.

One is your Master, even Christ, Mat. 23.10. London, Printed for A. and J.
Churchill, at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row. 1697.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
I Have been preaching a considerable time on the Epistle of St. Paul to the
Philippians, and coming to the 8th Verse of the third Chapter of that Epistle,
I preached the Sermon on which Mr. Edwards has bestowed his Reflections. I had
not any Thoughts of making that Sermon more public than the other Sermons I
had preached on that Epistle, till I afterward found the Proposition laid down
in that Sermon, most unmercifully traduced by Mr. Edwards in his Books writ
against the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. The Sermon was published,
because I thought it did plainly manifest that the Proposition did not impair
any of the Doctrines taught in the New Testament, but did assert and secure to
them all, their Authority, did preserve them in the Places where Christ had set
them, and for the Uses for which he intended them. The Animadversions were
designed to intimate that Mr. Edwards had mistaken, or misrepresented the
Proposition, and to hint that in certain Respects the Considerations Mr.
Edwards had offered against the Proposition were deficient. But Mr. Edwards
has fancied other things, and therefore puts a different Construction on them
both.

I should be inclined to think it something strange that the Proposition
discoursed of in the following Papers (the Truth of which Proposition the most
Ingenious Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. has so fully
proved from the Testimony of Christ and his Apostles) should be so coarsely
treated, but that I am very well satisfied that there is no great Cause to
wonder, that even learned and good Men do differ in their Apprehensions about
Matters of no small Moment, and that neither Learning, nor Piety, no nor both
together, are always strong enough in this imperfect Estate, to restrain the
Fondness Men have for Notions they have a great while espoused, from expressing
it self in its Natural Dialect. The Primitive Christians had a more honorable
Esteem of this Proposition, when they thought it of much greater Consequence
than their Lives. The Christians were at first persecuted, not so much for any
particular Doctrines they professed to believe, but for Jesus's Name sake, that
is, for their owning Jesus to be the Messiah. And afterward, when the
Christians were murdered with a more immediate Respect to particular Doctrines
they would not renounce, because they knew Jesus, whom they believed to be the
Messiah, had taught them, or would not embrace Doctrines for which there was no
Proof that Christ ever taught them, it was the Respect they had to Jesus as the
Messiah, that did dignify their Sufferings, and advance them to the Crown of
Martyrdom. The great Point of Anti-Christianism (at least next to a professed
disowning Jesus to be the Messiah) consists in setting up an Authority to make
any thing a part of Religion, which Jesus Christ has not authorized. And the
great Malignity of that lies in this, that it involves a tacit denying that
Jesus is the Messiah.

Those who are of the Opinion, that true Christians are obliged to endeavor to
increase extensively in Knowledge and Faith, and yet think that the Belief of
more Articles than this, that Jesus is the Messiah, is indispensably necessary
to make or constitute a Man a Christian, may (if they consider Matters well)
perceive that the Notion of the Absolute Necessity of the Belief of more
Articles to make a Man a Christian, will prove in its just Consequences very
injurious to Christ's Authority. For those things, the Belief whereof does
constitute a Man a Christian, must be the Rule and Measure by which he is to
judge and determine what he is to endeavor to know and believe. So that
whatever he can be obliged to endeavor to know and believe, by virtue of his
being a Christian, must have a clear and plain Connection with every one of
those Articles, which are absolutely necessary to be believed to make him a
Christian. Its having ever so plain and immediate a Connection with one, or
two, or more of those Articles, will not prove he is obliged to believe it, if
there be yet more Articles, the Belief of which was necessary to make him a
Christian; because it answers not, or comes not up to that entire Rule, by
which he is to judge, whether he be obliged to believe it. For in that case it
falls as really short of answering the Rule by which he is to proceed, as a
Person's judging that a due believing that Jesus is the Messiah, makes a Man a
Christian, falls short of the Truth, if the Belief of more Articles is
indispensably necessary to make him a Christian. Thus his knowing that Jesus
Christ has revealed such a Doctrine, brings him not under an Obligation to
believe it, but he may notwithstanding that withold his Assent. If it shall
be said, that knowing Christ has revealed it, he is by virtue thereof obliged
to believe it with respect to the end for which it is revealed: I answer, that
if a due Belief that Jesus is the Messiah do not constitute a Man a Christian,
a Christian is to judge by all that which is necessarily to be believed to
constitute him a Christian, of his being obliged to believe any Point to any
Purpose in Religion; for what is necessary for any Purpose in Religion,
concerns him as he is a Christian, and so is not to be judged of by what does
not constitute him a Christian, but by what does constitute him a Christian, be
that the Belief of more or fewer Articles.

Mr. Edwards has thought fit to reproach the Proposition I speak of as a
Socinian Doctrine, and a way to extirpate the Christian Religion out of the
World, and to introduce Infidelity. But I think it is the only Point that can
with full Assurance be advanced and insisted on effectually, and with the
greatest Ease and Speed, to prostrate the Opposers of Christ's Divinity, and of
the Doctrine of the ever blessed Trinity, and to overthrow all the false and
corrupt Notions which disfigure the Christian Church, yea which do prevail in
the World. The Doctrines or Articles which Christians are to endeavor to
understand and believe, are those which are delivered in the New Testament. And
the Reason why they are to believe the Doctrines which are taught there, is the
Authority of Jesus, considered as the Messiah. Whoever believes that Jesus is
the Messiah, must assent to the Truth of every Proposition he knows that Jesus
has taught; for his Testimony is the Great Evidence of the Truth of those
Propositions. If any Man pretends to believe that Jesus is the Messiah, and yet
will reject or refuse to believe what he knows he has taught, he does thereby
manifest that he is not a true Christian, i. e. that he does not indeed believe
that Jesus is the Messiah. Those who say they would not believe such or such a
Doctrine, if it were expressly taught in the New Testament, do plainly declare
they do not own those Books to be divinely inspired. And if they should say
they would not believe them, if Jesus Christ himself did deliver them, they
would more immediately declare that they do not believe him to be the Messiah.
The Ebionites, who out of Design pretended to believe Jesus to be the Messiah,
were so sensible of this, that because they would not acknowledge him to be God,
they rejected the Books of the New Testament, and provided themselves another
Book (which had not that Doctrine in it) which they pretended did contain the
Doctrines which he taught.

It has been the way of those who have set themselves against the Holy
Scriptures, or some of the Doctrines taught in them, either to advance some
Doctrines as necessary to be believed, which are not taught in those sacred
Writings, or to alter some of the Doctrines taught in them, by annexing their
own Sense and Interpretation to the Words in which Jesus Christ and his
Apostles delivered them. Of this latter sort were those who opposed the
Divinity of Christ, and the Doctrine of the Trinity, which occasioned the
Primitive Christians to make it their Business to show that the Words which
Christ and his Apostles used did import a great deal more than what those
Persons pretended was the full Sense of them. Those false Teachers, and their
Successors, especially those who have of late contended against these
Doctrines, applied themselves to an Artifice very common amongst them who have
set up to combat the Doctrines of our Blessed Savior, and undermine the
Christian Religion, which is, to endeavor to enlarge the Controversy as much
as possible, that thus they might have the more room to turn in. They have by
this Means obtained certain unhappy Advantages. They have amused and bewildered
many of the weaker sort of People. They have found out many Evasions and Shifts
under which to hide and shelter themselves. They have created Persons of
prodigious Learning and Parts much unnecessary Trouble. Whereas bad they been
kept strictly to this one Point, that Jesus is the Messiah, and not suffered to
start from that and its immediate Consequence, the Controversy would have been
brought to a speedy Issue, by producing the Messias's own Words. For then the
utmost they could do would be only to talk of Accents, Articles, and Copies,
which I conceive are Topics they do not much care now to insist on; and
amongst other Reasons, (besides their having been so often baffled already)
because very few Persons (in comparison) would regard the Debate, when those
things would be all they could discourse of. But they have exceedingly extended
the Controversy, by prevailing with the Orthodox to fix on other Topics for
Discourse. They have greatly endangered the Truth, under a Pretense of being
revenged on those Terms the Ancient Christians had settled for the expressing
of their Sense concerning these Doctrines, in opposition to those who formerly
set themselves against these Doctrines. And thus the Controversy is run into
Antiquity and Reason. By which means the Socinians and the Orthodox have had
opportunity to produce very great Proofs of the Strength of their Natural
Endowments, and their acquired Accomplishments. Upon these Points we have had
of late very notable Encounters. The Orthodox have (all things considered)
acquitted themselves bravely, and with singular Dexterity (except some of them
falling together by the Ears one with another, that their Adversaries might
have some breathing Space, and a little Diversion to boot) but I am apt to
suspect that the great Reason why they have done so little Execution, is
because they have yielded, for a while, to lay aside the Sword of the Spirit,
the Testimony of the Messiah, and have consented to fight their Adversaries at
their own Weapons. Did I enjoy my former Health, I should think it a very
pleasant Diversion to see Prizes played this way by Persons who are well-skill'd
at these sort of Weapons, provided the Matters in Debate were of another
Nature. But in the present Matters these Methods seem to me little other than
if David had laid down his Sling and Pouch, and had gone forth to fight the
huffing Philistine in Readiness Armor. Neither Reason nor Antiquity can determine
any thing immediately concerning these Doctrines, whether they be true or not,
whether we are to believe them or no. Our Certainty of their Truth depends
entirely on the Testimony of Jesus Christ. The Proofs that Jesus is the Messiah
lie level to the Senses or Reason of Mankind. And if we have Reason to believe
that Jesus is the Messiah, and are convinced of that, his Testimony affords us
as good and satisfactory Reason, why we should believe what we know he has
taught, as the Testimony of our Senses can yield us, why we should believe any
Proposition which respects their proper Objects. Our Reason does not
immediately judge concerning the thing treated of in the Proposition, but
concerning the Evidence, whether it be such as by virtue of it we ought to
assent to the Proposition. The Reasonableness of our believing any particular
Doctrine, taught in the New Testament, as delivered there, depends upon the
Reasons we have to believe that Jesus is the Messiah. And if we are fully
satisfied that we have sufficient Reason to believe him to be the Messiah, our
Reason must certify us, that it is the most reasonable thing in the World to
believe whatever we know he has taught. For could there be any Reason to doubt
whether what he has said is true, we could not have sufficient Reason to
believe that he is the Messiah. If we believe him to be the Messiah, his
Testimony is the fullest Evidence we can desire of the Truth of what he has
taught. And if we allow the Evidence to be complete and full, tho we cannot
form a distinct Idea of the Matter treated of, we have all imaginable Reason to
believe the Proposition.

When our Adversaries talk of Reason, as to these Matters, they seem to mean,
that the things discoursed of must be brought down to that degree, that laying
aside Revelation, we may form distinct and clear Notions of the things
themselves, by the sole Exercise of our natural Faculties, so that by
contemplating them we may find out intrinsic Reasons to believe or assent to
the Propositions Christ has delivered concerning them. Which is the absurdest
thing that can be. For herein they require that the Nature of the things should
be altered, and they renounce Revelation, whilst they pretend to avow and own
it. And they might with every jot as much Reason, require that People should
judge of Sounds by their Eyes, and of Colors by their Fingers. If we were to
judge of the Matters themselves, and to form the Propositions originally our
selves, there would not be any need of such Revelation as we now have, the
Messiah would not have had any occasion to have said any thing of them, but
then we must have had new Faculties, and those proportioned to what is
discoursed of. But the Propositions being delivered down to us, there is no
need of our having new Faculties, it is enough to render it most reasonable for
us to believe the Propositions, that we have new Evidence administered to our
old Faculties.

When our most learned Divines speak of Reason, as to these Doctrines, they do
not speak of the Doctrines as delivered by Christ and his Apostles, for no
Reason can be assigned for our believing them under that precise Consideration,
but only the Testimony of Christ. But they speak of those Terms in which the
Church has delivered her Sense, in opposition to those who represented the
Words of Christ when applied to these Matters, as signifying no more than the
Words of any ordinary Man do, when concerned about most obvious and common
things. And thus they show that those Terms comprehend a great deal more in
them than that other sort of People pretend is signified by our Savior's
Words; and that the Notions these Terms do stand for, are very consonant to the
Reason of Mankind. But they do not pretend that these Terms, as strictly
expressing those Notions, do exhaust the whole that is comprised in our
Savior's Words. For should they do so, they would pretend to comprehend the
Matters themselves Christ does speak of, and to set them forth in a clearer
Light than he has done.

A Doctrine or Proposition is reasonable, when it truly relates or expresses
the Reason of the things about which it is concerned; that is, when the Subject
and Predicate have such a Connection in the Proposition, as does truly express
and signify the Connection there is betwixt what the Subject and Predicate do
stand for, and note in the things spoken of. Now there is a very great
Difference between my understanding the Reason, the Order, the Relation there
is between the things spoken of in the Proposition, i. e. wherein that Order
does consist, or what it is that constitutes that Order, and my having Reason
to believe the Proposition, which does relate and declare that there is a
certain Order, Relation, and Reason between them, or belonging to them.
Evidence is the Reason or Ground of my Assent and Belief. And tho the things
spoken of are in their own Nature above my reach, yet there may be such
Evidence of the Truth of the Proposition, as may be sufficient to oblige my
Belief of it. The Testimony of my Senses concerning their proper Objects, is
the Reason of my assenting to the Truth of Propositions which respect those
Objects, and not my being able to philosophize about those Objects, either
after the old or new way. I believe the Doctrines I know Christ has taught,
not because I can comprehend and philosophize on the Matters spoken of, but
because I know that Jesus, whom I believe to be the Messiah, has taught them.
He fully understood the Order of the Things he spoke of, and his Testimony is
as full Evidence to engage my Belief of whatever I know he has taught, as my
Sight is, to oblige my Assent to Propositions relating to the proper Objects of
that Sense. These Doctrines are not proposed to us for Speculation, but for our
Use and Benefit. We have Evidence enough, even as much as we can with Reason
desire, of the Truth of these Propositions, if we believe that Jesus is the
Messiah; and our blessed Savior has given us full Direction what Use we are
to make of them, that we may partake of the singular Advantages he will
communicate those ways. And if instead of quarrelling and wrangling about
Matters which are far above our loftiest Speculations, we would submissively
betake our selves to the Methods our Lord does advise and prescribe us, we
might confidently expect the most exhilarating Satisfaction concerning these
Points. If any Man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it
be of God, or whether I speak of my self. John 7.17.

Whereas the Socinians pretend that these Doctrines do contradict our natural
Notions: that is a Suggestion so gross, one might wonder how rational Men could
ever entertain such a dry and senseless Conceit, unless it has sprung from
hence, that hearing that these Doctrines must necessarily be believed to make
Men Christians, they have concluded that the Truth of these Doctrines must be
judged of by their natural Notions. And to speak the Truth freely, I know not
how to remove the Difficulty, as long as that Prejudice continues. But this I
dare affirm with the greatest Assurance, that it cannot with any Color be said
that any of the Doctrines which Christ has taught do contradict our natural
Notions, and therefore not these in particular: for they do not treat
concerning Matters of which we have any natural Notions. Now if these Matters
were spoken of in such a way, that to speak in the same manner concerning those
things of which we have natural Notions, would be a Contradiction to our
natural Notions, it cannot with any Sense be said, that there is such a
Contradiction, when the Matters discoursed of are such, as we have no natural
Notions of. The Application of Words must be according to the Truth of Things,
otherwise the Propositions would be false, and contradict the Truth. Jesus
Christ delivered his Doctrines in the Words he used, because those Words do
truly express the Reason there is in the things he spoke of; and we are to
believe those Propositions on his Authority, because he has faithfully related
the Truth concerning the Things he speaks of. And if we believe him to be the
Christ or Messiah, we can have no Pretense to doubt of the Truth of what we
know he has taught. Could we be satisfied that a certain Person has a
distinct Sense from what is common to Mankind, and that there are Objects
peculiar to that Sense, we should have as much Reason to believe what he says
concerning those Objects, as we have to be satisfied that he has such a Sense,
that there are Objects peculiar to it, and that he is a Person of Discernment
and Integrity. And if he should speak of those Objects in such a manner as
would be a Contradiction to our natural Notions, did he speak so concerning
those things which are the Objects of our Senses, and precisely under that
Consideration, we should have no Reason to say he contradicts our natural
Notions, whilst he discourses of things which we know nothing at all of, but
purely by his Information. He is to accommodate his Words to the Reason and
Truth of the Things he discourses of, not to the Notions we have of Matters
which are quite different. And the Reason we have to believe what be says of
those things, bears a Proportion to the Reasons we have to be satisfied of his
Credibility, and depends not at all on our forming clear and distinct Notions
of the things themselves, much less on our adjusting what he says to the
Notions we have of other things, which are perfectly of another Nature.

The main Business of Antiquity, with relation to these Doctrines, is either,
1st. To show upon what Occasion other Words than those in which Christ and his
Apostles delivered these Doctrines, were made use of in asserting and teaching
them. Or, 2dly. To show that the Primitive Christians did manifest that they
did believe the Words in which Christ and his Apostles delivered these
Doctrines, do comprehend a great deal more than what the Opposers of the
Divinity of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, pretend is the full Sense of them.
Or, 3dly. To show that the Sense in which we understand the Terms, in which we
ordinarily speak of these Doctrines, was the agreed and settled Sense of them,
in the Christian Church, when these Terms were fixed on to be ordinarily used
in discoursing of, and professing our Belief of these Doctrines.

Thus the Discourses about Reason and Antiquity do not immediately reach these
Doctrines, as Christ has taught them, but the way of expressing them when we
deliver our selves concerning them in other Words than Christ has done. When
we use other Terms in speaking of these Doctrines, than Christ has delivered
them in, our Words are accommodated to the natural Notions we have of Things:
And tho these Notions comprehend much more than the Notions do which we oppose,
yet they do not contain the whole Meaning of Christ, as delivered in the Words
he has used, for that far surpasses our Capacities. So that when all is done,
we must come to this at last, to believe these Doctrines as Christ has
delivered them, and for this very Reason, because he has taught them. Now
before a Person can be brought to this, he must believe that Jesus is the
Messiah. And if the due Belief that Jesus is the Messiah does not constitute a
Man a Christian, I cannot imagine how the Belief of other Articles can
constitute him a Christian, seeing that Belief is the formal Reason of his
believing the other Articles, and his believing other Articles is no more but a
repeated Belief of that Article, in proportion to the Occasions which are
administered to him for it. Produce as large a Proof as is possible, that the
Church has all along taught such a Doctrine, that she has taught it in such
Words, that she understood those Words in such a Sense, before a Person can be
satisfied regularly that he is obliged to believe it, he must be convinced that
Jesus is the Messiah, and he must be satisfied that that Jesus has taught it.
The like may be said as to Reason. When you have produced as many Reasons as
you can, that there may be more Subsistencies than one in the Divine Nature,
you can neither prove the Necessity, nor the Certainty, nor the Number of them,
by Reason. But as to all these Matters, the Testimony of the Messiah must
determine our Belief. Our Reason does not only fall short, as to the manner how
these things are, but also as to the Truth and Certainty of them. And our
Reason cannot assure us that this is all that is imported by and comprehended
in the Words, in which the Messiah has delivered his Doctrines.

Mr. Edwards in his Socinian Creed, p. 130. does style the Proposition
discoursed of, (tho he words it otherwise than it ought to be) A Mushroom
Notion, that has no Root and Foundation, and says, It is probable it will
soon decay and come to nothing. But this Notion is not of such a late Original
as he pretends, if Christ and his Apostles are to be credited concerning it.
And tho I pay Mr. Edwards a great Deference, yet I must declare I cannot but
prefer their Word to his. It is so far from having no Root and Foundation, that
it is the Root of the New Testament, and the Foundation on which the Christian
Church is built. And whereas be says, It is probable it will soon decay and
come to nothing; Probabilities are of little Weight, when placed in the
Balance against Certainties. I am persuaded it will continue safe to the end
of the World, because the Messiah has undertaken that the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it, Mat. 16.18.

If all the Deists, Scepticks, Socinians, etc. in the World, should pretend to
approve of the Proposition discoursed of, and that they do believe that Jesus
is the Messiah, I shall not renounce the Proposition on that account. But if
they continue regardless of, oppose, or refuse to endeavor to understand and
believe the particular Doctrines the Messiah has taught, I will maintain in
opposition to them all, that they do not believe that Jesus is the Messiah,
with such a Faith as is necessary to make a Man a Christian.

Tho I think I am not mistaken about the Point debated, yet I will attend
diligently to Scripture and Reason, and endeavor to yield a just Submission to
them, tho offered by the meanest Man living. But if Imperious Ramble shall drop
from the Learnedest Person in the whole Universe, touching this Matter, it will
not be honored with either of those Titles, but be utterly disregarded by,
Reader,

Your Faithful Servant, S. BOLD.

A Brief Reply to Mr. Edwards's Brief Reflections, etc.
THE Reverend Mr. Edwards has caused a Postscript to be tacked to his Socinian
Creed, entitled, Brief Reflections on a short Discourse of the true Knowledge
of Christ Jesus, etc. That Reverend Author, amongst his other Excellencies, is
taken notice of for his Skill in Critical Learning, which requires a guessing
Faculty. This Talent he has been pleased to exercise to a considerable Extent
in the present Papers, termed Brief Reflections, etc. But as it is often the
mishap of those who indulge much to Conjectures, that their Guesses are not
always right, so it happens to Mr. Edwards in the present Case: For
notwithstanding his Gatherings, and Findings, and many probable Shows, there is
not (to my particular knowledge) one word of Truth in the whole Lump of his
Guesses. He is every jot as much out in every particular here, as he was in his
former Writings, when he both assured his Reader he could not believe Mr. L.
was the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. and substituted his
Reasons why he could not believe it; and yet he is peremptory in these Papers,
that that same Gentleman was the Author of that Treatise. So that it is evident
Mr. Edwards is not so sure in his Guesses, no not when he has declared the
Grounds on which they are erected, as, that either other People, or he himself
may depend on them, as infallible Oracles, or of such Credibility, that any
stress should be laid on them; tho he sincerely protests that he intends to
give vent to Truth (and that only).

Mr. Edwards has thought fit to continue his late way of Writing in these
Papers, wherein (considering the number of Pages) there is as much Banter, as
in his Socinianism Unmasked. These parts of his Discourse I shall pass over
very lightly; for whatever Impression such Passages may make on those who have
not been inured to such kind of Treatment, they make very little on me, who
have been accustomed a long time together, to be entertained with such sort of
Reflections, not only from Persons in all Respects very much below Mr. Edwards,
but from some, who wore a more sublime Character, both in Church and State,
than Mr. Edwards does, (I do not say than he deserves in the Church) tho I am
of Opinion, if all their Reading were put together, it would not amount to one
half of what Mr. Edwards is Master of. These things only respect my Person, not
the Cause: and as for my self, I can bear with Peoples dealing with that as
they please; they can hardly entertain more contemptible Thoughts of me, than I
ought to have of my self. And if their loading me by their words, with all they
have a mind to, may but help me to be duly low in my own Thoughts, I shall reap
more Advantage by it, than they can from the Pleasure they feel in the exercise
of that Faculty. I have met with many, very much beneath Mr. Edwards, in
respect of laudable Accomplishments, every whit as ready and expert in this
sort of Talk as he appears to be, which makes me conclude, that this kind of
Discourse does not result from the eminency of Men's Parts, but that Mr.
Edwards's having made no greater a Proficiency in it, proceeds from Nature's
being under the restraint of those noble Endowments in him, which many want,
who have the other in common with him.

Indeed in some Pages, Mr. Edwards does use much softer, and more kind
Expressions than I could expect from him; for which excess of Charity, I return
him my thanks (provided the King of Ham may not be thought to have a Hand here)
as also that he has taken such speedy Care, by altering his Tone, to prevent
my being over much swollen, because of those favorable words which happened to
drop from his Pen. Wherein his Prudence, with respect to himself, may not be
altogether unworthy of Observation: for not knowing but my weakness might be
such, those gentle Words might from a Person of his Figure, perfectly overwhelm
me with Joy, that he might not be thought to have a Hand in my Death, he has
been pleased to determine me a Felo de se, saying he has dispatched himself.
Mr. Edwards is pleased to say, any Man may discern a Mercenary stroke all along
the Animadversions. This, it is true, I ought not to look upon as said to me,
because Mr. Edwards is positive I did not write them; but lest all who read
him, should not take his Word for it, and therefore think the Aspersion sticks
on me, I may take leave to say on my own behalf, that I think I have hardly
ever appeared on a fashionable Subject, or to accommodate my Discourse on any
Subject to a predominant Humor. I am certain I never knew any Man write
against me, who failed of speedy Preferment. And I heartily wish Mr. Edwards
may meet with the same Fortune, and that in some proportion to his just
Deserts, and those eminent Qualifications with which he is stored, and for
which I mightily reverence him. For tho I cannot justify every Expression he
uses, yet I am persuaded he is a very good Man, as well as a Person of very
much Reading. It Is true, there seems to be some Vinegar in his Ink; but I am
sensible that Men of warm and choleric Tempers are somewhat apt to be testy,
and may need some Grains of Allowance, (tho they may not apprehend it) as well
as those who are of such a cold and phlegmatic Constitution as I am. A pious
Zeal is not always in all Circumstances Judicious. A hot Fancy, when it begins
to rove, will (without a great deal of Care) take a large Compass; and when
upon the reflecting Pin, will have a fling at every thing within its view. And
therefore I do not wonder that the Sermon, Preface, Animadversions, Author, nay
a Gentleman quite unknown to me, if not to Mr. Edwards also, and Booksellers
should have a share, yea that the Street or Row should be brought in, and that
the Sign too, must come in for a Rarity.

The first thing Mr. Edwards lays to my charge in my Sermon is, that I have
contradicted the very Proposition I had laid down. Now if this be true, I am
undoubtedly guilty of a very great fault in Discourse. But tho Mode and Figure
were not necessary to confute what I had said, they would not have done any
hurt if they had been used to make the Contradiction manifest: Nor would it
have been an imputation to any Person's Ingenuity, who is professedly, and with
very good Reason against Clipped Christianity, to have set down my words entirely
without clipping of them.

To show that I contradict the Proposition I laid down, Mr. Edwards does first
of all set down the Proposition it self in these words; There is but one Point
or Article necessary to be believed for the making a Man a Christian. And then
he produces other words in my Sermon, which he says do contradict that
Proposition. This (says Mr. Edwards) he pretends to maintain as an undeniable
Truth ( viz. the forementioned Proposition) and yet he declares that other
Points are necessary to be believed. Sermon, page 32.

Answ. My words were thus, page 32. Tho the belief of other Points (or
Articles) is not necessary to constitute a Person a Christian, yet other things
(or Articles) are necessary to be believed by him who is a true Christian. I
did not say that other Articles are necessarily to be believed to make a Man a
Christian; if I had said so, I had contradicted the Proposition before
mentioned; but I only said there are other Articles necessary to be believed by
him who is already made a Christian, when he understands them, and knows that
Jesus Christ has taught them.

Again, Mr. Edwards produces part of a Sentence in p. 29. of my Sermon. The
words I confess are all mine, but they do no more contradict the Proposition I
laid down, than my words last discoursed of did contradict it; as the Reader
may plainly see, if he will take the Pains to read the whole Sentence as it
lies in that Page referred to, where he will find my Proposition, and the words
Mr. Edwards quotes in the same Sentence. Afterward Mr. Edwards sets down some
other words to make out his Charge, that I have contradicted the Proposition I
had laid down, referring to p. 33. of my Sermon. which words are not precisely
mine; but I do not insist on that, for as they are set down by him, they do not
contradict my Proposition. Mr. Edwards then adds, that I reckon up several
Articles and Propositions, which are the very same which he had mentioned in
his Discourses against the Conceit of one Article. I will not stay to compare
them, to see whether they are exactly the same. The Sermon was writ before I
saw his Discourses. I may have read them all somewhere or other, I pretend not
to be an Original, but I did not then mind any particular Author, where I had
read them altogether. Upon such Occasions I only set down what occurs to my
Mind, so far as I apprehend pertinent, without troubling my self to try whether
I can recollect where I have read any Sentence or Phrase. I am beholden to some
or other (for ought I know) for every Passage and Word I write. Now (says Mr.
Edwards) if there be other Points, and particular Articles, and those many,
which a sincere Christian is obliged, and that necessarily and indispensably,
to understand and believe, and assent unto (he should have said, to endeavor
to understand, etc.) then this Writer does in effect yield to that Proposition
which I maintained, viz. That the Belief of one Article is not sufficient to
make a Man a Christian, and consequently he runs counter to the Proposition
which he had laid down.

Answ. If there are more Articles, etc. which a sincere Christian is obliged to
endeavor to understand, and then believe, it does not immediately follow, that
the Belief of more than this one Article, That Jesus is the Messiah, is
necessary to make a Man a Christian. It must first be proved that the explicit
Knowledge and Belief of all those Articles, any Christian may be necessarily,
etc. obliged to endeavor to understand and believe, is necessary to make a Man
a Christian. And then it will follow, that the Belief of this Article, That
Jesus is the Messiah, is not sufficient to make a Man a Christian. But the
Discourse now, is not concerning the Truth of either Mr. Edwards's Opinion, or
of mine, touching that Matter, but whether I did contradict the Proposition I
had laid down. Now supposing the Proposition I had laid down were false, my
declaring that there are many Articles which a sincere Christian is necessarily
obliged to endeavor to understand and then believe, does not contradict my
Proposition; for my Proposition was not, That a sincere Christian is not
obliged to endeavor to know, and believe any more than this one Article, That
Jesus is the Messiah. If it were clearly proved, that Jesus Christ has taught,
that the explicit Knowledge and Belief of all those Articles, which any
Christian can be necessarily obliged to endeavor to know and believe, is
absolutely necessary to make a Man a Christian, then it might very fairly be
said, that my Proposition does contradict the Truth; but it could not with any
color, even then, be pretended that my declaring that there are other
Articles, which sincere Christians are necessarily obliged to endeavor to know
and believe, does contradict the Proposition I had laid down. For (says Mr.
Edwards) I bring the Business to this issue, If the believing of one single
Article be enough to constitute a Man a Christian, then the Belief of something
more is not necessary, and indispensable.

Answ. If the right Belief of this single Article, that Jesus is the Messiah,
be enough to constitute a Man a sincere Christian, then the Belief of something
more is not necessary, indispensably necessary to make a Man a Christian. Nor
has Mr. Edwards produced any Passage out of my Sermon, which affirms that any
thing more is necessarily, etc. to be believed, to constitute a Man a
Christian. For (says Mr. Edwards) the knowing or believing of more may be some
Ornament and Embellishment to him, ( viz. a Christian) yet it cannot be said
that it is necessary and indispensable.

Answ. True, it cannot be said to be necessary to make him a Christian, but it
may be said to be necessary, and that he is indispensably obliged to endeavor
to know it, and believe it, with respect to those Ends and Purposes for which
it is revealed, and for which he is commanded to endeavor to know and believe
it. If Mr. Edwards speaks here of knowing and believing Doctrines which Jesus
Christ and his Apostles have taught and revealed, (for if he means knowing and
believing other Matters, it is not to our purpose) the distinguishing of
Gospel-Doctrines into necessary, and such as are only for Ornament and
Embellishment, seems somewhat harsh to me: A Distinction in Matters of Faith,
very like to that in Practicals, between Evangelical Precepts and Counsels. The
Reason Mr. Edwards does assign for his saying that the knowing and believing of
more than what is necessary to constitute a Man a Christian, cannot be said to
be necessary and indispensable, is this, because nothing is so ( viz. necessary
and indispensable) in Christianity, but what contributes to the making a Man a
Christian, a sincere Christian.

Answ. We are now discoursing concerning the Articles which are necessarily to
be believed (whether one or more) not concerning the Faith with which they are
to be believed, therefore what is necessary to a Man's being a sincere
Christian is not the Subject of our Enquiry here. By this term Christianity,
therefore Mr. Edwards must mean the Articles necessarily to be believed to make
a Man a Christian. And the term Christianity, in this Proposition, There is
nothing necessary and indispensable in Christianity, but what contributes to
the making a Man a Christian, must then signify either a certain precise Number
of Articles collected out of the New Testament, the Belief of every one of
which is indispensably necessary to make a Man a Christian: Or, all the
Doctrines, Propositions, and Articles, which Christ and his Apostles have
taught, and are contained in the New Testament. If Mr. Edwards understands
Christianity in this latter Sense, then this Proposition, There is nothing
indispensably necessary in Christianity but what contributes to the making a
Man a Christian, must be understood (I think) in one of these Senses.

1. There is no Doctrine, Proposition, or Article in the New Testament, but the
explicit Knowledge and Belief of it is indispensably necessary to make a Man a
Christian; because there is no Doctrine, etc. in the New Testament, but what
contributes to the making of a Man a Christian. And if this be his Meaning,
then the Articles he has reckoned up are not sufficient, when believed, to
make a Man a Christian, because there are a great many more Articles in the New
Testament than those he has named. And it will be very hard for any Man to
prove, that no Man can be a Christian till he has an explicit Knowledge and
Belief of every particular Article taught in the New Testament.

2. There is no Article, etc. taught in the New Testament that is indispensably
necessary to any purpose, but what is indispensably necessary to make a Man a
Christian; and that because there is no Article there, necessary to any
purpose, but what contributes to the making a Man a Christian. If this be his
Sense, then no Man who is already a Christian, can (in his Judgment) be under
an indispensable Obligation to endeavor to know and believe any thing more of
the Mind of Christ, than he knows already. He is not indispensably obliged to
endeavor to grow in Knowledge and Faith, at least extensively: but if there be
more Doctrines in the New Testament than he already understands and believes,
he is perfectly at liberty with respect to them all. He may endeavor to know
and believe them if he thinks fit, else not. Now if this be true, my saying
that there are other Articles, which those who are Christians already are
indispensably obliged to endeavor to know and then believe, is false, but yet
it does not contradict the Proposition I had laid down.

3. There is no Article in the New Testament indispensably necessary to make a
Man a Christian, but what contributes to make a Man a Christian. If this is Mr.
Edwards's meaning, there may be much of Truth in it, tho there seems to be more
than what is true in it. There is no Article in the New Testament indispensably
necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, but what is indispensably
necessary to that purpose. This is most true and certain. But if Mr. Edwards
does mean that there is nothing in the New Testament that may contribute to the
making a Man a Christian, but it is indispensably necessary to be believed to
make any Man a Christian, I think he is much mistaken. For there are many
things the Knowledge whereof may contribute to make a Man a Christian, and yet
the Knowledge of them does not make him a Christian. And more things may
contribute to the making of one Man a Christian, and fewer to the making of
another Man a Christian. There is a very great Difference between what may
contribute to the making of a Man a Christian, and what is indispensably
necessary to constitute and make a Man a Christian. But let this be as it will,
it does not prove the Contradiction insisted on. Supposing Mr. Edwards in the
right in all these Matters, they amount to no more, than that either my
Proposition is false, or that what I have said in other Places of my Sermon are
false; but they do not prove that those Passages do contradict the Proposition
I had laid down, which is the thing Mr. Edwards labors to prove. If the term
Christianity, in the Proposition we are speaking of, be taken in the first
Sense, then there is supposed a certain Number of Articles necessarily to be
believed to make a Man a Christian, and so the Proposition amounts to this;
There is no Article amongst those which are necessarily to be believed to make
a Man a Christian, but what contributes to the making a Man a Christian. And if
there be more Articles than this, that Jesus is the Messiah, necessarily to be
believed to make a Man a Christian, then it is granted, that every one of them
must contribute as much as pertains unto it, by Christ's Appointment, to make a
Man a Christian. But whether the Belief of this Article alone, that Jesus is
the Messiah, or whether the Belief of more Articles be indispensably necessary
by Christ's Appointment to make a Man a Christian, is not the Point now betwixt
Mr. Edwards and me, but whether the Passages he has produced out of my Sermon
do contradict the Proposition I had laid down. But Mr. Edwards's Proposition,
taken in this Sense, is nothing to the Contradiction he speaks of. Wherefore
(says Mr. Edwards) it undeniably follows that when this Gentleman acknowledges
that there are more Articles than this one proposed to be believed, and that
necessarily and indispensably, he must needs grant that those Articles which
are thus necessary and indispensable, are necessary to make a Man a Christian.

Answ. If I had said there were more Articles than that one, proposed to be
necessarily believed to make a Man a Christian, I had granted what Mr. Edwards
does say I must needs grant, and then I had contradicted the Proposition I had
laid down; but no such Passage is produced by Mr. Edwards out of my Sermon.
When I said there were more Articles necessary to be believed, I said they were
necessary to be believed, when known by him who is a true Christian, not
necessary to be believed to make him a Christian, who is a Christian before he
believes or knows them; but necessary to those Ends for which Christ has
ordained them to be believed by them who are Christians. And when I say there
are many Points or Articles which Jesus Christ has taught and revealed, which
sincere Christians are indispensably obliged to endeavor to understand, and
then believe; the indispensable Obligation I speak of arises from Christ's
exerting his Authority in commanding them who are Christians to endeavor to
know and believe those Points, and from their solemn Engagement to do so, in
their resigning up themselves entirely to him. Which methinks should be very
clear to every one who will acknowledge that Christ's Command, and a Christian's
most solemn Engagement, can bring him under an indispensable Obligation. And
now I think the Case is plain; and if there be Prejudice on either side, let
the indifferent Reader judge who is most likely to be mastered by it.

He goes on (says Mr. Edwards) still to contradict himself, saying a true
Christian must assent unto this, That Christ Jesus is God, p. 35.

Answ. My Words were these, When a true Christian understands that Christ Jesus
has taught that he is God, he must assent unto it. Observe it (says Mr.
Edwards) He Must, he owns here that there is an absolute Necessity of this
Belief.

Answ. What? to make a Man a Christian? I neither said so, nor did I say there
was an absolute Necessity of that Belief. I was speaking of one who is a
Christian; and such an one, I said, is under an indispensable Obligation to
endeavor to understand what Christ has taught concerning himself; and
understanding that he has taught that he is God, he must assent to it, it is
his Duty to do so, he is under an Obediential Necessity to assent to it.
Whereupon (says Mr. Edwards) I ask him, Is this Belief necessary to make a Man
a Christian or not?

Answ. Seeing my Words were so very plain, I cannot understand what occasion
there was to ask this Question. I will not encroach on their Propriety, who
assume to themselves the Knack of Guessing, but will declare my Sense freely. I
mean no Ill. And if I am mistaken, or in an Error, I am ready to receive
Instruction, to be convinced by good Evidence, and to be reduced to the Truth.
I think this Belief is not absolutely necessary to make a Man a Christian; and
that no Man can believe aright that Jesus is God, till he is a Christian, and
believes it because he knows that Jesus, whom he believes to be the Christ or
Messiah, has taught it, at least till he knows that he who was to be the
Messiah is God. And in this case he must know that Jesus was the Messiah,
before he can know he is God. If any Man pretend he can or does rationally
believe that Jesus is God, upon any other account, I am pretty certain he does
not believe it as a Christian ought to believe it. It Is well if a clamorous
decrying this Notion, that the right Belief that Jesus is the Messiah, is that
which constitutes and makes a Man a Christian, does not contribute to further
Socinianism, etc. tho contrary to the Intentions and Designs of learned and
good Men, who happen to yield a little further to their Passions than in
strictness they ought. That Jesus is God, is an Article to be believed by those
who are Christians, not by those who are not yet Christians. Men cannot judge of
Matters, nor believe any thing but according to the Light and Evidence they do
enjoy. And if we make the Belief of this and other Articles which are peculiar
to those who are already Christians, indispensably necessary to make Men
Christians, they who are not Christians will judge of this and those other
Articles, according to that Light they have, whereby to judge of things in their
present State. I do not wonder that many are Socinians, and that many do treat
the great Articles of the Gospel so very indecently. For hearing that these
Articles are to be believed to make them Christians, they will and must judge of
them by the mere Light of Nature and Reason, and therefore will not admit of
any thing but what lies level with, or is proportionate to the Light by which
they are to judge. Let the Articles necessarily to be believed be more or fewer,
they will judge of every one of them by the same Rule, and must do so, till they
have another Rule to judge of Matters by. And till a Man is a Christian, he has
no Rule whereby to determine his Judgment and Faith absolutely, but natural
Light and Reason. I think it is as unfair to exact Belief of any Man that Jesus
is God, before he is a Christian, as to require a Man to judge aright concerning
an Object peculiar to a Sense, that he has not. Did People generally heartily
believe Jesus to be the Messiah, I am persuaded a much greater Veneration would
be manifested for the Books which make up the New Testament, and the Doctrines
delivered in them, than is commonly discovered. I apprehend that the irreverent
Opposition that is made to some of the greatest and most momentous Doctrines
taught in the New Testament, proceeds more from the want of a due Belief that
Jesus is the Messiah, than from an Affectation to combat those Doctrines. When
a Man does duly believe that Jesus is the Messiah, he has as satisfying
Evidence of the Truth of every Article he attains to know Jesus has taught, as
the brightest natural Evidence can be, to satisfy concerning Matters within the
Verge and Compass of Nature. The Grounds, the Motives, the Inducements (I speak
not concerning supernatural Influences on the Mind and Heart) to believe what
is indispensably necessary to be believed to make Men Christians, are
accommodated to our natural and rational Powers. But I cannot say so concerning
the particular Doctrines of the Gospel, which are to be believed for this very
Reason, Because Jesus has revealed and taught them. Natural Reason is of great
use in order to our being Christians, and so it is after we are Christians; but
it is not the immediate Rule by which our Belief of the Doctrines delivered in
the Gospel is to be determined; for that is to be founded on, and resolved into
Christ's Authority, exerted in his declaring and teaching those Points.

He cannot say (says Mr. Edwards) It is not, (viz. That the Belief that Jesus
is God, is not necessary to make a Man a Christian) because to believe him to
be God, who really is so, is no indifferent thing in Christianity.

Answ. A Man must know that Jesus is God, before he can believe him to be God:
And if a Man cannot know him to be God, before he is a Christian, then that
Belief is not absolutely necessary to constitute a Man a Christian. But what
Mr. Edwards does mean by Christianity here, is as hard to understand, as in
some other Places where the same Term is used by him. If he mean, that when a
Christian knows that it is taught in the New Testament, that such an one is
really God, it is no indifferent thing whether he believe it or no, that is, he
is not left to his Liberty to believe it or not, he says the very Truth. But
if he means that a Person cannot be a Christian, till he believes that
whomsoever the New Testament does declare is really God, is so; I am so far
from saying so, that I think he must be a Christian before he can believe them
to be so, notwithstanding they really are so. Indeed no Man can be a true
Christian till he believes him to be God who really is so; he must believe the
true and living God: But that is so far from constituting a Man a Christian,
that it is the very first Principle and Ground of Natural Religion; therefore I
do not think that to be Mr. Edwards's meaning here. But (says Mr. Edwards)
this is absolutely requisite to constitute a Man a Christian; for a Man cannot
be such, unless he has a Knowledge of him that is true God.

Answ. It is absolutely requisite to constitute a Man a Christian, to know him
who is true God; for otherwise, he who is a Christian, could not be under any
Obligation to believe Jesus to be God. But notwithstanding Jesus is really God,
and a Man cannot be a Christian without knowing this Jesus, who is really God;
it will not follow from thence, that the knowing him to be God, is absolutely
necessary to make a Man a Christian. It is not a Man's believing that Jesus is
God, that constitutes him a Christian: what can constitute a Man a Christian,
but the right and due believing him to be the Christ or Messiah, who really is
so? It was not his being God, that constituted him the Christ or Messiah; for
then he would not have been freely, but necessarily the Christ and Savior of
Sinners. A Man cannot be a true Christian, unless he knows him who is true God;
because he who is the Messiah or Christ, is true God; and a Man cannot be a
true Christian, unless he know him who is the Messiah or Christ. But it is not
the knowing him to be true God, but the right knowing of him to be the Messiah,
or Christ, that does constitute or make a Man a Christian: could a Man know him
to be God, without knowing him to be the Christ, this Knowledge would but
constitute him a Theist, not a Christian. Whether it does inevitably follow
from what I had said, that I must hold, that the assenting to this Proposition,
that Christ Jesus is God, is necessary to make a Man a Christian; and whether I
have in effect positively said (as Mr. Edwards does phrase it) that the
believing of more than that one Article before mentioned, is absolutely
requisite to make a Man a Christian, I leave the Reader now to determine. But
for my own part, I am not sensible that I have yet contradicted the Proposition
I had laid down, which is the thing Mr. Edwards is still upon.

In another Place (says Mr. Edwards) speaking of the Account which the
Scripture gives of the Holy Spirit, viz. That he is God, he adds, that a true
Christian is as much obliged to believe this, as to believe that Jesus is the
Christ, page 40.

Answ. What my words are, may be seen in the Page referred to. But certainly I
did not say, that a Person is as much obliged to believe that, to make him a
Christian, as he is to believe that Jesus is the Christ, to make him a
Christian. See here (says Mr. Edwards) the force and energy of Truth, it will
make its way through the Teeth of those who oppose it.

Answ. Let the Reader consider my words referred to before, and then conclude
whether the Force and Strength of Prejudice does not appear so great as to
prevail sometimes with People to oppose Truth in spite of their Teeth, and
Lips, yea and Eyes too.

Mr. Edwards says I have plainly and professedly contradicted the Proposition
I had laid down; for this (says he) is the Case, If a true Christian be as
much obliged to believe one as the other, then it is certain that Christianity
is as much concerned in the Belief of the one as of the other; and if so, then
a Man cannot be a Christian without this Belief.

Answ. The former part of that Speech may be true, or otherwise, according to
the Sense in which the term Christianity shall be understood. But there is no
consequence at all, that because one who is a Christian, may be as much obliged
to believe that Truth, or Doctrine, as the other; therefore the Belief of it is
so necessary, that a Man cannot be a Christian without it. It is as necessary
for me to believe that Jesus was at Cana of Galilee, and turned Water into Wine
there, as it is, that he was Crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem; because
I have the same Evidence for the one, I have for the other. But I cannot say it
is of as much importance for a Man to know the one, as it is to know the other;
much less can I say that no Man can be a Christian, till he knows and believes
that Jesus was at Cana in Galilee, etc. And tho I cannot submit to this
nonsense, that a Man can be a Christian, tho he believe not those things
without which he cannot be a Christian; Yet if any Man will call this
nonsense, viz. That a Man may be a Christian without the explicit Belief of
several Articles, which after he is a Christian, he may be obliged to believe,
I can submit very easily, and with a great deal of Reason to it.

Mr. Edwards having thus concluded his Proof of my self-Contradiction, is
pleased in the next Page to set down these words. Tho he appears in the Form of
a Preacher, yet he has said nothing answerable to the specious Title of his
Sermon, The true Knowledge of Christ Jesus; but on the contrary, has said very
ill things, to the lessening, and impairing, yea to the defaming of that
Knowledge and Belief of our Savior, and of the Articles of Christianity, which
are necessarily required of us.

Answ. If Mr. Edwards had affirmed that I had said nothing answerable to what
he would have said on that great Subject, The true Knowledge of Christ Jesus,
had he undertaken to discourse of it, I should readily agree to it: But seeing
he says I have said nothing answerable to the Title of my Sermon, it would not
have been unfair to have set down the true Title of my Sermon, which was, A
short Discourse of the true Knowledge, etc. And if I have said nothing
answerable to the Subject, yet the Sermon is something answerable to the Title;
for then it must be acknowledged short with a Witness. If I have said (as Mr.
Edwards affirms) any thing to the lessening, impairing, or defaming of the
Knowledge and Belief of our Savior, or of any Articles in the New Testament, I
cannot be sorry enough for it. I am sure I had no Design to say any thing of
that Nature or Tendency; I think I have expressly asserted, that all the
Doctrines in the New Testament are of Divine Authority; that being known by
Christians to be taught there, they must be believed by them; that Christians
are obliged to use their utmost endeavors to know them; and that Peoples
attaining to a Knowledge of them before they are true Christians, may contribute
much to the bringing of them to be true Christians. Indeed I did not assert,
that the Belief of them all is indispensably necessary to make and constitute a
Man a Christian, but did declare it was my Opinion, that the right Belief of
this one Article, That Jesus is the Christ or Messiah, does constitute and make
a Man a Christian. Now whether the Belief of this one Article alone, or of more
Articles, be indispensably necessary to make a Man a Christian, does not depend
on my Judgment, nor on the Judgment of any other Man. That must be learned from
Christ and his Apostles: If they have determined for more than the one before
mentioned, then more are necessary, let who will say the contrary. If they have
determined for the one abovenamed, then that alone is indispensably necessary
to the purpose spoken of, tho all the World should oppose it, and say it is not
sufficient for that end, but more Articles must necessarily be believed to make
or constitute a Man a Christian. Every honest and good Man, who discourses of
the Point, will speak according to the best of his Judgment. And if any Persons
differ in their Judgments about this, recourse is to be had to the New
Testament, to see who accords best with what Christ and his Apostles have said
upon the Matter. Now this I am certain of, that Jesus Christ, and his Apostles,
do insist upon this one Article, to be believed to make Men Christians, and
that they have taught many other Doctrines in order to their being known,
believed, and made use of. Upon the best Inquiry I have been able yet to make,
I cannot find that they have required the Belief of any of those other
Doctrines, as absolutely necessary to make a Man a Christian. The Reverend Mr.
Edwards, and many other very Learned and Godly Persons (whom I very greatly
honor, and reverence for their Labors, Piety, and extraordinary
Accomplishments) do think, they perceive that Christ and his Apostles did teach
and deliver some of those Doctrines, as necessarily to be believed, to make a
Man a Christian. There is then some mistake on one side, or on the other. Now
before I entertain a disparaging Thought concerning any of those, who are of a
different Judgment from me in this Matter, the Point ought to be placed in a
very good Light, and be exceeding clear on my side: And an equitable Person
will perhaps reckon I may with Reason expect that the other Point be made very
plain, before those who espouse it, do grow Stormy and Tempestuous, because I
declare my Opinion, and calmly represent wherein I conceive the weakness of
what any of them do offer for the Support or Illustration of their Judgment,
does lie. It is agreed on both sides, that Jesus Christ and his Apostles have
taught, that the Belief of that one Article I insist on, is indispensably
necessary to constitute and make a Man a Christian. They alledg several Texts
to prove certain other Propositions, as necessarily to be believed to make a
Man a Christian, as that other Article is. I acknowledge the Scriptures they
quote, are full Proof that the Propositions contained in them, are Divine
Truths. But that is not the thing for which they produce those Scriptures, for
so far we are agreed; but they produce them as Proofs, that Jesus Christ, and
his Apostles, have taught, that the explicit Belief of those Propositions, is
indispensably necessary to make a Man a Christian. I own they fully prove the
former, but I am utterly at a loss to find how they prove the latter, which is
the thing they are brought to prove, and the very Point concerning which we
differ, viz. That Jesus Christ and his Apostles have as plainly taught (not
that these Propositions are Divine Truths, but) that the Belief of these
Propositions, is as necessary to constitute or make a Man a Christian, as they
have taught that the Belief that Jesus is the Christ or Messiah, is necessary
to make a Man a Christian.

Great Care is to be taken to preserve the Doctrines of the New Testament, in
their Purity, and in their proper Order. All the particular Doctrines there
taught, are the Doctrines of Christ; they are revealed that they may be
learned, and then believed upon his Authority; every one of them has its
peculiar and proper Intendment, and is to be used and improved especially for
that purpose. If a Person insists on the Necessity of one Article, for a
purpose for which Christ did not intend it, he attributes that to it, which
does not belong to it. And if a Person oppose and reject the Necessity of any
Article, as to the purpose for which it was intended, he does not give it its
full due. In this Case we are not only to consider, whether Christ has taught
and revealed such or such an Article, but also for what end and purpose he does
more especially require it should be learned and believed. Now it is agreed on
all Hands, that the Belief that Jesus is the Messiah, is by Christ's
appointment, necessary to make a Man a Christian. The Notion that the due and
right Belief of this alone, does constitute a Man a Christian, preserves to all
the other Articles, all the Necessity that Christ assigns them, unless it can
be made out, that he has made the Belief of every one of them, or of a certain
Number of them necessary to this very purpose: And till that be very clearly
proved, there seems no great Reason, that he who advances the aforesaid
Notion, should be treated presently as if he came immediately out of the
Bottomless-pit, and would fill the whole World with Locusts, and worse Plagues
than ever Egypt was afflicted with, if not doomed peremptorily and without
delay, to bear all the invidious Characters and Epithets that an exalted fiery
Genius can make a shift to jumble together.

The Notion of the one Article, may induce those who embrace it, to esteem more
Persons Christians than the other Notion can allow of; for they of the former,
must reckon all those Christians, who give credible Evidence that they believe
indeed that Jesus is the Messiah, and accept of, and submit to him as their
Lord: and thus far I fancy the Advantage is on the former's side, for I
conceive there is no hurt in letting Charity, as well as Patience, have its
perfect Work. And if I be not much mistaken, that Notion contributes most to
engage People to take particular Care, that the Belief of Jesus's being the
Messiah, may be very well, and firmly settled in their Hearts: yea, it seems to
me, to be the surest way to bring them to the sound Belief of the other
Articles. But let these things pass for Suggestions, that come from a cold
phlegmatic Temper; yet methinks this Notion should be acknowledged to comport
best with the Honor of the Gospel, since it acquaints Christians, that by
virtue of their being Christians, on the account of their unfeigned Belief of
this Point, they are under an indispensable Obligation to endeavor continually
to increase in the Knowledge and Belief of what Christ and his Apostles have
taught. Whereas by the other Notion, (according to Mr. Edwards) when once they
believe as much as is necessary to make them Christians, they need not concern
themselves to know any thing more of what Christ and his Apostles have taught,
except for Ornament-sake.

This we are sure of, that Jesus Christ and his Apostles do lay a particular
stress on this one Article, for the Purpose discoursed of: And it is not so
evident that they require the explicit Belief of any more Articles as
absolutely necessary to make a Man a Christian.

Besides, if the Nature of the thing be well considered, viz. what we mean when
we use the term Christian, it may afford some Light to this Matter. Is the true
Account of a Christian, one who believes just such a number of Doctrines? or
one who believes in Jesus Christ? who owns Jesus to be the Christ, and
therefore has devoted and yielded up himself entirely to learn from, and be
governed and saved by him?

Moreover, if all those Articles Mr. Edwards insists on are not to be expressly
mentioned in the Definition or Description of that Faith which justifies a
Sinner, and constitutes him a Christian, then something will be left out of it,
which must necessarily be explicitly believed, according to his Notion, in
order to his Justification, and to his being a Christian; but if no particular
Article besides this, that Jesus is the Christ, is to be inserted into it, then
I conceive it must be granted, that is is only the Belief of that Article that
does make and constitute a Man a Christian. In a word, if the Belief of more
Articles be necessary to make a Man a Christian, then those who are for the
Necessity of the one Article alone as to this purpose, do not attribute to
other Articles their full due; and if the right Belief of that one Article be
all that is absolutely necessary to make a Man a Christian, then those who
insist on the explicit Belief of more Articles, as absolutely necessary to that
purpose, attribute more to them than Christ Jesus has ordered. And it may be
worth their Consideration, whether they do not derogate therein from the Honor
due to Jesus as the Messiah. If the Lord Jesus has appropriated this unto
himself, that the due believing him to be the Christ or Messiah, shall of it
self constitute and make a Man a Christian, so that he will own and acknowledge
those for his Disciples, and to be Christians, who do so believe him to be the
Messiah, as to consign themselves entirely to him, we cannot introduce any
other Articles (tho only such as he has expressly taught) to be Sharers with
this Article in this Business, but we raise them to a Post he has not assigned
them. Believe as many Articles which Christ has certainly taught as you can,
and let them all have all the Honor Christ appoints them to have, and use them
for the Purposes he assigns them to, but set not any of them without his
certain Order in the Throne with himself. Jesus Christ and his Apostles have
constantly insisted on the Necessity of Peoples believing this Article, that
Jesus is the Messiah, to make them Christians: And if they have not as
particularly discriminated some other Articles as thus necessarily to be
believed to make Men Christians, from the rest they have taught, Men may sooner
exceed the Bounds they ought to observe, when they betake themselves to single
out more Articles as necessarily to be believed to make Men Christians; I say,
they may sooner exceed their just Limits, than even a forward Imagination will
suggest.

Mr. Edwards in the next place is for addressing himself more closely to me (if
he can do it) than he has done already. And here he speaks of my debasing my
self and the Post I am in. But what he has said does not convince me, that I
debase my self, or the Post I am in, by publishing the Truth: And the
Proposition I laid down may be the Truth, tho it were granted I had
contradicted it in my Sermon. It is my asserting the Proposition (I conceive)
which he reckons my debasing my self, etc. not the Contradiction. For he has
got over that Part of his Charge, and is to speak more closely to me (if he
can) than that amounted to. Nor do I think it a debasing of my self to
endeavor to set a Gospel Truth in its true Light, let who will advance it,
when I perceive any Attempts made to obscure and darken it. But if that great
and eminent Person was the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, Mr.
Edwards now affirms was the Author of it, he can be no Disparagement to the
Cause. Any rational Person may then be satisfied, there is more to be said for
it than every hasty Opposer may be aware of. Nor do I wonder Mr. Edwards should
find so much fault with my way of Writing, since he undertakes to blame some
Expressions in that Author, whose Words are so accurately adapted to what he
speaks of, that I thought no Man who pretended to judge of Styles, would have
reflected on him on that account. As for those sorts of Sparks Mr. Edwards
reckons up in the next place, I have no Acquaintance with any of them, no more
than I have with the Field-Officer, whom I never heard of till now. But if any
of those kinds of Folk Mr. Edwards does speak of have been induced by reading
the Reasonableness of Christianity, to believe aright that Jesus is the
Messiah, and do therefore seriously endeavor to know and believe the other
Doctrines Christ and his Apostles have taught, and do behave them agreeably
thereunto, they do not deserve the Denominations he gives them. If they
continue Deists, Scepticks, etc. and yet pretend to admire the main Point, the
Reasonableness of Christianity has advanced, they exceedingly pervert it, and
carry themselves most unreasonably. But we must not quit the Truth, because the
greatest Enemies to it do pretend to approve it, but rather acquaint the World
with the right and true Use they should make of it. We shall make but ill Work
on it if we will quarrel Divine Truths, and sacrifice the Doctrines of the
Gospel, whenever bad Men shall out of Design set up for, and cry them up. If
they find they can prevail this way, it will not be long before they will get,
not this Article, but every one of those Mr. Edwards has a mind should be
absolutely necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, from us.

Mr. Edwards being in the mood, has found out a way both to make me a
Journey-man to, and to rank me with the Patrons of the same Person, in less
than the space of one whole Page. But that Eminent Person he speaks of needs
not any of the Patrons he has assigned.

As for my unknown Friends who have signified their Affection by Mr. Edwards's
Pen, I heartily thank them for their Respects; and would much rather they
should fear without, than with Cause. I would not willingly disoblige any Man,
but be a Friend to every Man, and serve all Men to the utmost of my Power. But
Friends or Enemies make little Alteration with me, when Truth is concerned.
Their Expectation from one Article to none, I suppose is brought in rather for
Wit than for Friendship, and therefore I must pass over that bluntly, for I
pretend not to the Faculty. Yet I would tell them seriously, that those who
shall insist on the Absolute Necessity of twenty Articles to be believed, to
make a Man a Christian, if they make but little account of that one I insist
on, may sooner part with their whole score, than another who is well settled in
the Belief of that one, will either part with it, or any other Article he knows
is founded upon that one. However, Let him that thinks he stands take heed
lest he fall. If my Friends have by this time, in any measure recovered their
Amazement, I would, in order to their better Establishment, and to prevent
their being so easily staggered again, propound a few Questions to them,
supposing all along what Answers they would make to them. I would ask them: 1.
Do you believe or think that you are Christians? Answ. Yes. 2. Upon what
Ground, or for what Reason do you believe that? Answ. Because we do believe all
those Articles which are necessarily to be believed to make People Christians.
3. What be those Articles which must necessarily be believed to make People
Christians? Answ. Here I will suppose them to name all those Articles Mr.
Edwards has mentioned. 4. Upon what Ground do you assent unto, and believe
these Articles? Answ. Because Jesus Christ and his Apostles have taught that
these Articles are necessarily to be believed to make Men Christians. Very
well; but not to interrupt our Discourse now, I will consider at present but
one part of your Answer, viz. That you believe these Articles, because you know
that Jesus Christ and his Apostles have taught them. For I conceive you here
ground your Belief upon their Authority, and so believe them, because you know
they taught them, before you believe them under that precise and formal
Consideration, as Articles necessarily to be believed to make you Christians.
For I suppose you have that Esteem and Veneration for Jesus Christ, as to look
upon your selves obliged to believe whatever you know he has taught. Therefore
I ask, 5. Were you not Christians before you believed all these Articles,
because you knew that Jesus Christ and his Apostles had taught them? Answ. No,
for who can submit to such Nonsense as to believe or think they are Christians,
who do not believe those things, without the Belief of which they cannot be
Christians? 6. Why do you believe these Articles, because Jesus and his
Apostles have taught them, rather than because any other Persons have taught
them? Answ. We believe them, upon our knowing that the Apostles taught them,
because we know the Apostles were commissioned by Jesus to publish his Mind,
and Will, and Doctrines to the World. And we believe what we know Jesus has
taught, because we believe he was the Christ or Messiah. 7. Why do you believe,
or what has induced and determined you to believe that Jesus is the Messiah?
Here I doubt, with many Persons, the main stop would be. But I will suppose my
Friends can answer this Question with very good Judgment; tho they might tell
me without answering in a Circle, and believing as the Collier did, that they
believed Jesus to be the Messiah, because they believed the forementioned
Articles: that is, they understood those Articles, and did believe them to be
Truths, on other Considerations, distinct from this, that Jesus whom now they
believe to be the Messiah had taught them; and that Belief of them did
contribute much to induce them to believe that Jesus was the Messiah. Here I
shall only mind my Friends, that that former Belief of these Articles, tho
joined with the consequent Belief that Jesus is the Messiah, is not pretended
to be that which made them Christians; but their believing those same Articles
after another manner, and upon a distinct Consideration, after they did duly
believe Jesus to be the Christ, from that or those Considerations on which they
believed them before, is that which made them Christians: for you could not
believe them, because they were taught by Jesus as the Messiah, till you did
believe him to be the Messiah, tho you might upon other Considerations be
induced to believe those Articles to be true. Now if my Friends think they have
given very good rational Evidence, from which they may justly persuade
themselves that they are Christians; I must tell them, they may be very good
Christians, but they have not produced any Proof that they are Christians,
according to their own Notion. Indeed if that Proposition be true, at which
upon my laying it down Mr. Edwards says they have been staggered, they may
this way prove that they are Christians. But if the Belief of all those
Articles be absolutely necessary to make them Christians, the precise Belief of
all of them cannot be such a Proof or Evidence that they are Christians, as we
are speaking of: For we speak not of inward Sensation (if I may use that term)
or Sentiment, as Monsieur Claud and some French Authors speak, but of
discoursive rational Proof, and this as to Matters of Faith. A Man's believing
that Jesus is the Messiah, is no Proof that he believes any one of the
particular Doctrines taught in the Gospel. But his believing particular
Doctrines for this Reason, because Jesus whom he believes to be the Messiah,
has taught them, is a good Proof that he does believe that Jesus is the
Messiah. And if the Belief of more Articles than this one, that Jesus is the
Messiah, is absolutely necessary to make a Man a Christian, it is utterly
impossible that any Man should obtain a rational, discoursive, argumentative
Satisfaction, that he is a Christian, with respect to Matters of Faith, tho I
may safely enough extend the Assertion further. For let a Man believe ever so
many particular Doctrines, taught by Christ and his Apostles, that Belief will
prove no more, but that he believes Jesus is the Messiah. The Belief of those
Articles can be no Evidence with respect to one another, that is, the Belief of
one of those Articles cannot be a Proof that you believe another, tho you do
really believe it. Now methinks the Resolution of this Question, What is it
that does make or constitute a Man a Christian, ought to issue in that into
which all the Evidences respecting (I will say) both Faith and Practice, that
can be justly produced to prove a Man a Christian, must be resolved; and that
is (if I be not much mistaken) a Belief that Jesus is the Messiah. But now I
return to the latter part of the Answer given to my 4th Question, and with
regard to that I would ask my Friends, 8. How do you know that Jesus Christ
has required the Belief of all those Articles you have named, as absolutely
necessary to make People Christians? Here you must take notice, that it will
not serve your turn, to show that Jesus Christ has taught them all, and then
say that they are therefore to be believed. For the very same is to be said of
a great many more Points. But you must answer how you come to be satisfied,
that Jesus Christ does require the explicit Belief of every one of those
Articles, as necessary to make People Christians. If you answer, that such and
such a learned and godly Man does say so: You are to be minded that that Answer
is feeble, in the present case; and that you build your Persuasion, that you
are Christians, on a very weak bottom. What will you answer when you are told,
that other learned and godly Men have insisted on certain other Articles (and I
could name some of no mean Character who have been very earnest for some
Points, which I think Jesus Christ has not taught) as necessary to be believed
to make Men Christians? If those who insist on some other Articles as
necessarily to be believed to make Men Christians, be in the right, you are not
yet Christians, notwithstanding you believe all those Articles most firmly,
which you have named, because there are more or other Articles necessarily to
be believed to make you Christians. But supposing all those Articles you have
mentioned are necessarily to be believed to make Men Christians, I ask you in
the last place, 9. How do you know that these are all the Articles which are
necessarily to be believed to make Men Christians? For it is past doubt, that
Jesus Christ has revealed and taught many more Articles to be believed. Can
you show now, that he has more expressly or plainly declared that this precise
Number you insist on, are absolutely necessary to be believed to make People
Christians, than he has that any, or all of the rest are? If not, who has
Authority to distinguish in this case, where he has not distinguished, so as
to determine this and this Article, etc. are necessarily to be believed to make
Men Christians, but that and the other Article are not necessary, whenas there
is the same Authority for Peoples believing the one as the other, when known?

In the next place, Mr. Edwards does particularly and with Earnestness exhort
and entreat me to attend, and apply my self to what he apprehends of great
moment to me on this occasion. I shall therefore now more particularly address
my self to him. Reverend Sir, I receive your Exhortation and Counsel with a
Gratitude (as near as I can) proportioned to the Kindness with which you tender
it; and will endeavor to make a good Use of it, depending for Preservation and
Stability in the Faith of the Gospel, on Jesus as the Messiah. But, Sir, it is
not the first time I have met with an honest warm Exhortation that has had no
Connection with what has been pretended to be the Ground of it. I receive it
kindly, considered in it self. But, Sir, if any Persons who are not
well-disposed shall happen to read it, and perceiving on how sandy a Foundation
it is built, shall conclude all your, and perhaps other good Men's fervent
Exhortations and pathetick Obtestations, are the Effects of Indiscretion, and
stand upon no better a bottom than this, the Damage would not have been very
great if this had been communicated privately, and not committed to public
view. And, Sir, having pondered John 6.67. I am not satisfied, that by going
back there, is meant an unfeigned well-grounded Belief, that Jesus was the
Christ or Messiah, and an entertaining the Doctrines and Articles he taught,
purely upon his Authority, but the direct contrary: Nor do I see any Reason to
think, that that kind of Faith was the Cause of Judas's betraying his Lord, but
that going away, and betraying, was from their want of that sort of Faith and
Christianity.

A Reply to Mr. Edwards's Reflections on the Animadversions.
MR. Edwards employs above two Pages here in relating his Guesses, and his
Reasons for them, and determines I was not the Author of them; so that he is
willing to excuse me from the crude and shallow things offered in them to the
Public; yet he is partly of the Mind I was desired to publish them as my own,
after they had been transmitted to me. And in another Place, after he is
positive that I was not the Compiler of the Animadversions, he says (because
he apprehended that he had something for his Advantage, with respect to me) it
is probable I might prick in here and there a fine Flower; which seems to be
said for no other Reason, but to make way for his bringing in, as he thought,
some finer Flowers of his own. I will not concern my self about his Guesses,
nor their Supporters, any further than by taking notice of the Reason he gives,
why I was desired to publish the Animadversions as my own, viz. That it might
be said, that a Man with a Name, etc. warranted the late Author of the
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. To which I have this to say, That a much
more Reverend (Rector) I am sure I may say DIVINE, than the Rector of Steeple,
has vouched that strange Notion, for which some do decry the Author of the
Reasonableness, etc. and the Animadverter. Nor am I afraid, or ashamed to
subscribe my Name to any one Article I know that Reverend Divine has taught.
That Reverend Man had a Name, and did with open Face, and without a Vizour,
warrant the Proposition laid down by the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. and contradicted not in my Sermon, but in the Books the
Animadversions relate to. This Reverend Person I speak of, was the most
Reverend St. John, who with open Face, and without a Vizour has taught, That
whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, 1 John 5.1. which
every one, I suppose, will acknowledge to be as much as to say, a Christian. Now
if the Belief of more Articles was absolutely necessary to make a Person a
Christian, let a Man believe this with what sort of Faith soever, it could not
with Truth be said, that whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born
of God. But I am very confident St. John knew as well, what was necessarily to
be believed to make a Man a Christian, as the most Reverend Man that has lived
since his Days. Thus there was no need that I should be desired to publish the
Animadversions as my own, that the Notion might come forth with a Name; for it
was openly warranted by a much better Name before.

As for the unsufferable Blunder Mr. Edwards has found out in the Epistle to
the Reader, any one who looks upon the Epistle it self, may perceive the right
of that Matter (reading cursorily instead of cursory, as Mr. Edwards has well
and truly observed) when it is determined whether the word Treatise does more
properly belong to the Reasonableness of Christianity, or to a single Sermon:
For the Press was out no more in printing that instead of this, than it was in
the other word Mr. Edwards has been pleased to rectify. Mr. Edwards's
endeavor to make the Animadverter contradict himself, is just the same with
what he did to show I had in my Sermon contradicted the Proposition I had laid
down; and that having been answered, there is no need of replying to the
Charge, here being no auxiliary Strength added to it. But I like his making
those Doctrines taught in the New Testament, which are not absolutely necessary
to be believed to make Men Christians, mere Conveniences here, with respect to
those who are Christians, no better than I did his making them merely
Ornamental in his Reflections on my Sermon. There is no one Doctrine taught in
the New Testament, but it is absolutely necessary to make up the entire Body of
that Revelation Christ has committed to his Church; yet I am not certain that
Mr. Edwards will say, that it is absolutely necessary to the making of any Man
a Christian, that he must explicitly know and believe every Doctrine contained
in those Writings; for then there will be nothing left for Convenience and
Ornament.

Mr. Edwards says, it is worth the Reader's observing that notwithstanding he
had in 12 Pages together (viz. from the 8th to the 20th) proved that several
Propositions are necessary to believed in order to our being Christians; yet
this sham-Animadverter attends not to any one of the Particulars which he had
mentioned, nor offers any thing against them, but only in a lumping way, dooms
them all in these magisterial Words, I do not see any Proof he produces, page
21.

Answ. The matter is truly thus; The Animadverter did not take much notice of
the number of the Pages, for if that had been 1200, it had been the same thing
to him. But he acknowledged the Places of Scripture Mr. Edwards did quote in
those Pages, were full Proof of the Truth and Divine Authority of the
Propositions contained in them, yea he owned that the Knowledge of those
Propositions might conduce much to dispose People to be Christians. But neither
of these things was the Matter in Question, but this, viz. Whether Mr. Edwards
had proved that Jesus Christ and his Apostles had taught, that the Belief of
those Propositions was indispensably necessary to make Men Christians. The
Animadverter did not affirm that Mr. Edwards had not said he had fully proved
what he had undertaken to prove, viz. the Point just now mentioned: But it
seems the Animadverter was so ill natured, he would not take Mr. Edwards's bare
word for Proof, but having read those Pages, declared what was the utmost that
Mr. Edwards's Proof did extend to, and that he did not see any Proof produced
in those Pages of this Point. That Jesus Christ or his Apostles had taught,
that those Propositions must necessarily be explicitly understood and believed
to make a Man a Christian; which was the Point to be proved. Thus he delivered
his own Sense, but without the least intimation that all the World must be led
either by his, or Mr. Edwards's Eyes. He left the Reader to try, whether he
could see in those Pages any Proof, that Christ and his Apostles had taught,
that the Belief of those Propositions is absolutely necessary to make a Man a
Christian; and thither I must refer the Reader too, to try his Skill, for I
cannot see any thing like a Proof of that which was the thing to be proved. Now
I think an Animadverter deals very fairly, if he takes notice how far what is
offered for Proof can reach, and then observes what was the precise Point to be
proved, and leaves the Reader to try whether he can stretch what was produced,
and make it come up to the very Point that was to be proved.

Then Mr. Edwards finds fault with the Animadverter for passing over those
Pages so lightly, where he evinced this Truth, that the Son of God, and the
Messiah, were not Terms of the very same Signification, nay that among the Jews
they were not reckoned so; for the Animadverter says no more to all this, but
that he did not perceive that Mr. Edwards pretended to offer the least Proof
that these Terms were not synonimous Terms in our Savior's time.

Answ. Mr. Edwards might have evinced both the Points he names, and yet not
have proved that they were not synonimous Terms amongst the Jews at that time.
I have looked over those Pages Mr. Edwards refers to, and if I understand him
aright, he does hardly allow of any synonimous Terms in the same Language. For
all Terms considered singly in themselves, do stand for distinct Ideas. Terms
(I conceive) are said to be synonimous, on the account of their being alike
applied, to express or signify one and the same Subject or Thing. And thus,
whether the one or the other be made use of with reference to that thing, the
whole is signified by that which is used, that would be signified if the other
were used. And when both are used together, there is not a Tautology, but the
latter is brought in by way of Apposition. Thus, tho Face, Ground, and Knees,
stand for distinct Ideas, considered simply in themselves, yet if these
Phrases, to fall on the Face, to fall on the Ground, etc. were commonly used
amongst a People, to signify one certain Posture, he that should use one of
those Phrases would say the very same thing as he, or another would, should he
or the other express themselves by one of the other Phrases, notwithstanding
Ground, Face, and Knees, be not the same things, neither do those Words signify
the same things amongst that People, when considered singly in themselves. But
that the terms Messiah, and the Son of God, when applied to him whose Titles
they are, were not reckoned amongst the Jews to be terms of the very same
Signification, is a Passage I cannot find in those 5 or 6 Pages where Mr.
Edwards says he has evinced it. That those terms, Messiah, and the Son of
God, simply considered, have not the very same Signification, is so evident,
there is no need of a Text to prove it. And as for that Text, Acts 8.37. what
Mr. Edwards does say concerning it, amounts to this, that if Christ and the Son
of God are there of the same Signification, the Words do sound thus, I believe
that Jesus Christ is Christ. But I think they amount to somewhat more, viz.
that Jesus Christ is The Christ. It cannot be denied that Jesus Christ is
sometimes used in the New Testament as a proper Name, as in John 17.3. and if
it be so used in Acts 8.37. that Text will not answer Mr. Edwards's Design. But
whether there is such an absurd Tautology, if those Terms be taken in that Text
to be of the same Signification, as Mr. Edwards says there is then, in that
Confession, I shall leave the Reader to judge, when I have set down the Account
the Author of the Reasonableness, etc. does give of the Sense of that Text, p.
34. I believe that he whom you call Jesus Christ, is really and truly the
Messiah that was promised. I acknowledge there were different Grounds of those
two Denominations, (and so I am apt to think there were of all synonimous
Terms) but when they came to be indifferently used, to design the same Person,
each of them in its full Latitude comprehended all that the other did, tho when
considered apart, as to the Grounds and Reasons of their Application, they had
distinct and peculiar Significations. The famously Learned and Reverend Bishop
Pierson says, that to be the Christ, and to be the Son of God, were by the
Jews themselves accounted equivalent. Exposit. on the Creed, p. 105. I
acknowledge Mr. Edwards has closely urged what he has delivered in the Pages
he speaks of, but I can no more perceive that he has at all proved that the
Terms spoken of were not synonimous Terms amongst the Jews in our Savior's
time, than the Animadverter could. And therefore I may say that whatever Olaus
Magnus's Gladiator might do, by looking on his Adversaries Weapons, it was not
possible for the Animadverter to blunt the Edg of Mr. Edwards's Arguments here,
because they never had any. There may perhaps be some Keenness in some of his
Words and Phrases, but as for his other Weapons the Gladiator himself would
have lost his Labor in looking upon them.

Mr. Edwards then says, he had secured his Proposition before he formed his
Syllogisms, and therefore it was not necessary to add any further Medium, and
to proceed to another Syllogism, as the Reader may satisfy himself.

Answ. Let the Reader then satisfy himself; I will only mind him that the Point
Mr. Edwards was to prove was this, That there are other Doctrines besides this,
that Jesus is the Messiah, necessarily to be believed to make a Man a
Christian. The Medium he uses to prove this, is, that there are other
Doctrines besides this, required ( viz. by Christ or his Apostles, for they are
their Words he does alledg to prove that other Doctrines are required) to be
believed to make a Man a Christian. Now if he has proved every Proposition
laid down in the Chapter before that in which his Syllogisms are, to be a
Doctrine taught by Jesus Christ or his Apostles, that is not the Point; you
must see whether he has proved that Jesus Christ and his Apostles have
required the explicit Knowledge and Belief of every one of those Propositions to
make a Man a Christian. It is not enough if he has proved that they have
required them to be believed; but the Proof must be, that they have required
them to be believed particularly for this very purpose, to make a Man a
Christian. And if Mr. Edwards has done that, still his Syllogisms will be
faulty, even according to his own Words. For if the very thing he had been
proving was this, that other Propositions besides this, that Jesus is the
Messiah, are necessarily to be known and believed to make a Man a Christian,
and had been proving this by the Testimony of Christ and his Apostles, showing
that they have required the Belief of more Propositions as indispensably
necessary to make a Man a Christian, when he reduced the Sum of his Discourse
into Syllogisms, that very Medium by which he had been proving his Proposition,
should be brought into his Syllogisms, otherwise the Sum of his Discourse could
not be there. And that is not in either of his Syllogisms. What he pretends he
has proved is not this, that all those things which have immediate Respect to
the Occasion, Author, etc. of our Salvation, are to be believed; but this, That
Jesus Christ or his Apostles have required an explicit Knowledge and Belief of
all those things which have immediate Respect to the Occasion, etc. of our
Salvation, as indispensably necessary to make a Man a Christian. I might also
observe to the Reader, that allowing Mr. Edwards's Syllogism to comprise the
Sum of his Discourse, it proves a great deal too much; for it proves that the
Belief of all those Propositions he has laid down in his former Chapter, is
not sufficient to make a Man a Christian. For all those who do acknowledge there
is not any thing in the New Testament but what Jesus Christ has revealed,
cannot deny that every Proposition in the New Testament has immediate Respect
to the Author of our Salvation. So that by virtue of his Syllogism no Man can
be a true Christian, till he has an explicit Belief of every Proposition that
is taught or delivered in the New Testament.

Mr. Edwards reflects on the Animadverter's Confidence, and taking a liberty to
assert what he pleases, because he says there is no Enquiry in the
Reasonableness of Christianity concerning Faith subjectively considered.

Answ. I will not retort the Aspersion. But I must say, that those are not the
Animadverter's Words. He does take notice that subjective Faith is spoken of in
that Treatise; and so it might be, and yet not be the Point that Author did
chiefly propose to enquire into. Who is so fit to satisfy us what it was he
proposed to enquire after, as the Author himself? who tells us, it was what God
requires us to believe now under the Gospel, ( viz. to make or constitute us
Christians) Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. p. 25. Yet a little before he
spoke of Faith, subjectively considered. I do not know, neither do I pretend to
guess what that Author's Judgment is concerning certain particular Doctrines
taught in the New Testament. He may be as Orthodox in every one of them, for
ought I know, as any Man in the World. But this I am certain of, the Accounts
he gives occasionally in this Treatise of Faith considered subjectively,
comprehend not only the Assent of the Understanding, but the Consent or
Approbation of the Will, and also a firm Trust and Reliance; which I think is
as full an Account of that Faith as Mr. Edwards has given of it. But
notwithstanding that Author has spoken of Faith, considered subjectively,
which the Animadverter did not deny, but expressly affirmed, as may be seen in
the Animadversions, p. 32. yet the thing that Author proposed to enquire after
was, what Articles are required to be believed to make a Man a Christian. Again
says Mr. Edwards, How can this Animadverter come off with peremptorily
declaring that subjective Faith is not enquired into in the Treatise of the
Reasonableness of Christianity, when in another Place, p. 35, 36. he avers that
Christian Faith, and Christianity, considered subjectively, are the same?

Answ. The Animadverter does not any where declare what he is here said to
declare, and therefore cannot fairly be charged with declaring it peremptorily.
But if he had declared it peremptorily, what Connection is there betwixt that
and his averring that Christian Faith and Christianity, considered
subjectively, are the same, that it should be thought in that case so hard a
thing for him to come off, unless he had likewise peremptorily declared that
the Author of the Reasonableness principally designed to discourse of
Christianity considered subjectively? Perhaps it will still be said, the
Animadverter has averred that Christian Faith, and Christianity, considered
subjectively, are the same. It Is true, there are those Words in the
Animadversions. For Mr. Edwards having said, that the Belief of Jesus's being
the Messiah, was one of the first and leading Acts of Christian Faith; the
Animadverter took notice, that Christian Faith in that Proposition Mr. Edwards
had laid down, must be understood subjectively, because an Act of Christian
Faith cannot be understood in any other Sense, as the Animadverter's Words are,
in the Parenthesis Mr. Edwards has been pleased to leave out of the Sentence
he quotes. So that what the Animadverter said was this, Christian Faith
considered subjectively, and Christianity considered subjectively, are the very
same. Now is not this very true, and consistent enough with his saying that the
Enquiry the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity proposed to make, was
not concerning Christian Faith considered subjectively, but objectively? Should
another Person have published such weak and sorry Stuff, and have suggested it
as an invincible Difficulty to be got over, peradventure some would have said,
One would have thought a Man might be ashamed to appear in the World with such
poor Tackling.

In the next place, Mr. Edwards is much offended, because the Animadverter
passed over the 4th and 8th Chapters of his Socinianism unmasked, and some of
his former Pages, with a bare Acknowledgment that he was too dull to perceive
any Appearance of Reasoning in them. In which (says Mr. Edwards) there is
nothing tolerable or excusable, but this one thing, his Truth and Modesty, (by
the way, I may take notice that Truth and Modesty may pass for two things with
some who are not over-fraught with an Opinion of their own innumerable
Excellencies; and that it would be no inconsiderable Ornament to some Books, if
much of either were to be found in them) in confessing himself to be dull,
which yet the Reader was convinced of before this Acknowledgment.

Answ. Poor Animadverter! well worthy to be pitied! who having been at the
pains to read over a great many flaunting Pages, to find out something that had
at least the Appearance of Reason, and finding no such thing, was forced at
last to entertain the Reader with a most obvious Truth, having the Modesty to
appropriate that to himself, rather than blame the Author. But why should this
Omission be so unexcusable and intolerable? The Animadverter did not promise to
reply to every thing Mr. Edwards had writ in those Books; and he did take
notice of as much as concerned the one Article. If a Man could not modestly lay
down his Opinion of the absolute Necessity of believing only that Jesus is the
Messiah to make a Man a Christian, with an intimation that the due Belief of
that one Article brought People under an indispensable Obligation to endeavor
to know and believe all the other Articles that Christ and his Apostles have
taught, but immediately an Vnder-puller to Racovianism, Turkish Spy, and twenty
more such sulphureons Eruptions must biaze abroad against him; what might be
expected if those dainty Strictures the Animadverter has passed over so gently
had been brought under a severe Examination? One would think an Author were
grown very pettish, if he think himself unsufferably affronted, when his Books
are touched by a Reader, who has not so much Penetration as to perceive
Reason, where there is none. But the Animadverter was not decisive that there
was not Reason in those Parts of Mr. Edwards's Books; he only acknowledged he
did not perceive the Reasons which might lie hid there, and left the Reader to
try his Skill, whether he could find out what had escaped him when he looked
over those Pages. Now I have read over those Chapters and Pages the
Animadverter past over in such an intolerable and unexcusable manner, and can
find no more Appearance of Reasoning in them than he did. But without any
Offense to a piece of Mr. Edwards's one thing, I may say I am not so dull but I
can perceive in those Chapters and Pages a great many empty Flourishes, many
obvious Mistakes, and a great many things not consistent with strict Reasoning.
In those Chapters I meet with these and such like Sayings, This great Mufty (
viz. the Author of the Reasonableness, etc.) has given us a hopeful Draught of
Christianity; and it was fit the English Reader should know that a Turk
according to him is a Christian, for he makes the same Faith serve them both.
The very Devils are capable of all that Faith which he ( viz. the Author of the
Reasonableness, etc.) says makes a Christian Man. He ( viz. the Author of the
Reasonableness, etc.) tells them again and again, that a Christian Man, or
Member of Christ, need not know or believe any more than that one individual
Point which he mentions. Here is an effectual Plot to undermine
Stationers' Hall, for all Systems and Bodies of Divinity, Philosophy, etc. must
be cashiered: whatever looks like System must not be bought or sold. This will
fall heavy on the Gentlemen of St. Paul 's Churchyard, and other Places. If
other People can perceive any great Strength of Argumentation in these and many
like Passages, much Good may their Sagacity do them. I may be content they
should pass for pretty Flowers to enchant the thoughtless, but I must decline
Truth, if I should say, I can take them for potent Reasons.

Mr. Edwards, amongst his other Findings, seems to have found a piece of Wit
where nothing but Truth was intended. And tho the same Genius that found out
the Wit may hide or spoil it at pleasure, the Country-man's Saying was as true
as the other, which is as much as I was concerned in. Yet it may be his
Agonistick Effort, to spoil the Wit he had espied, by jumping from the Steeple
of a Church to the Name of a Parish, will pass with some for no more than a C
-- Pun.

In the next place Mr. Edwards gives a very particular Account whom he
understands by Men of Art. And indeed he has exceedingly dignified the Phrase,
making it synonimous with other Terms, which properly denote Persons and
Societies, for which I have a very profound Veneration. (I see now he is not at
utter Defiance with synonimous Terms, provided the word Synonimous be left
out.) I value no Man the less for his having had the Happiness of an University
Education, but am very ready to pay unto such all the Respect due to the
Characters they have that way acquired, and to receive from them all the
Instruction my shallow Capacity can admit. I have a very great Esteem for all
the sober Heads both of our Church, and of those who dissent from it in the
Point of Discipline and Ceremonies. I highly honor the whole Body of
Protestant and Reformed Churches abroad as well as at home. But whether these
are properly to be called Artists in Religion, others may determine. I use not
the Phrase in that Sense. I would not disparage any of them to such a degree as
I conceive that does import. No, I abhor the Thought of imputing to them I
reverence so much and so justly, that they should be Masters of the Trick of
importing and advancing the rate of Countreband Goods in Religion. But there
are some things in all the Parties I know any thing of, which are not of
Christ's Institution; and there are some Persons in every Party who appear to
lay more stress on those things than can be justified, so that they seem to
appropriate Christianity to themselves, and will very hardly allow others to be
Members of the Church of Christ, who come not up to their Terms. These are the
Persons on every side, I call the Men of Art. And if any have a mind to applaud
their being in a Confederacy on that account, I do not desire to enter into
their Secret. I affect not any divining Denominations and Characters amongst
those who heartily believe Jesus to be the Messiah, entirely depend on his
Merits, faithfully submit to his Authority, and diligently observe his Laws. I
prefer the Communion of the Church of England, for many Reasons, before any
other I know in the World; yet there are some things relating to her, which I
do not think to be of her Essence, nor indispensably necessary to her truest
Advantage and Honor. I am not so fond of some of these things as many some
Years past appeared to be. My Business is not to endeavor to draw People to a
Party precisely under that Consideration, which imports neither more nor less,
according to my Apprehension, than making them Sectaries and Schismatics,
properly so called. I am desirous to contribute what I can to bring People to
be true Christians, who are not so, and to further those who are so, toward
the Knowledge and Belief of all the Doctrines that Christ and his Apostles have
taught, and in all Godliness of Living. And I am ready, according to what
Ability I have, to remove unjust Prejudices and ill-grounded Scruples, which
any have unhappily imbibed with respect to that Communion, I think on several
Accounts most eligible. But I cannot come up to that Height, to think that none
are Christians and Members of the Church of Christ, who are not in every thing
of my Persuasion. I express my self thus freely, that none may harbor unjust
Prejudices concerning me, but make what Use they please of what I have said.
For I desire not any of the temporal Advantages of the Church of England, if
any of those things be really of her Essence, or any way regularly conducing to
her truest Benefit, which I think are not so.

Mr. Edwards and I have declared our Opinions about the Book called the
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. and we differ exceedingly in our Opinions.
He says, he is sure he has proved his. (And in other Places he acquaints his
Reader that he has fully proved what he has undertaken against that Book.) I
will not say any thing peremptorily in the Matter. But I think a clear plain
Proof will discover it self. I confess I am apt to suspect a Person is somewhat
conscious that what he offers for Proof has some Defect, when he is very
importunate with People to take his Word for it, that he has proved the
Matter. And if those People Mr. Edwards has found are more confirmed of late
than ever in the Truth of what he has writ on this Subject, have obtained
their Confirmation this way, I think they are Persons rather to be pitied for
their Weakness, than to be reckoned Patterns worthy to be imitated.

To conclude, if any Man shall produce plain and clear Proof that Jesus Christ
or his Apostles have taught that the Belief of any one Article besides that
which we have been discoursing of, is absolutely necessary to make or
constitute a Man a Christian, I hope I shall be as ready to offer my right Hand
to burn the Sermon the Animadversions, and these Papers, as any Man in the
World shall be to require it. But Persons telling me that I scorn Reason and
Argument, and multiplying such kind of Phrases, or saying with what Assurance
soever that they have proved, yea fully proved it, will not convince me. As
Fines and Imprisonments did not formerly in another case, alter my Judgment,
(and here by the way I may acquaint those who are still living, and were most
eager and fierce, and did resent with an Excess of Passion, my suggesting to
them whose Work they were doing, that if they have not been convinced by the
Course of Affairs since, they may now receive full Satisfaction that I was not
so much mistaken as they at least in pretense thought I was, if any Credit be
due to a certain Book which came to my Hands the latter end of the last Week,
along with the Papers to which I have been replying, entitled, The Secret
History of Whitehall, from the Restoration of Charles II. down to the
Abdication, etc.) I say, as Fines, Imprisonments, and the predominant Language
of those Times, did not alter my Judgment then in another case, so Raillery and
Banter will not do it in the present Case. If all the soaring Writers in Europe
should bestow their invidious Epithets on me, and vent their fanciful
metaphorical Flirts against me on this Account, I think I shall stand my
Ground, and pass the whole over with a deserved Contempt.

FINIS.

