THE INDIAN HISTORY OF ANAXANDER AND ORAZIA; WHEREIN Are mingled the Adventures
of ALCIDARIS of Cambaya, and the Loves of PIROXENUS.

Written in French by Monsieur de Boys-Robert, and Translated into English,

By W. G. Esquire.

CONCERNING The excellency of this History, read the Letter of Monsieur du
Balzac next after the Preface.

LONDON, Printed by S. G. for J. Kirton, and are to be sold as his Shop at the
Kings Arm^, in S. Paul's Church yard, 1657.

AN ADVICE OF THE AUTHOR OF THE ORIGINAL, Which may serve as a Preface to the
Reader.
ALthough I list to pass here but as a bare Translator of Anaxanders Loves,
and Alcidaris Adventures, and to make my self more recommendable to thee, seek
my authority from the Arabians and Indians; I assure my self, Reader, thou will
be hardly persuaded that this History is true. However it be, seeing my aim is
but to please thee, and with pleasure to divert thee, I care not much whether
thou read my Book as a History or Fable, so it do content thee. If I did love
to say much, I would easily prove, that there are in those brave Romances which
are after the nature of Epique Poems, instructions fit for all States, that
vice may be abhorred, and virtue cherished, as well as in Histories; and, in
Romances, so much the more, as he that writes them proposes ever perfection to
himself, and sets those virtues in a more eminent degree, whereof examples are
presented us by Histories. Besides, there are but few Histories, which do not
either lie or flatter, as they forget troublesome truths, they publish lies
that do oblige, and commonly discover other men's imperfections, to comply with
some malicious minds, and sacrifize to envy: But the composers of Epique Poems,
and Romances, are exempt from that black malice and most base complacency. They
describe things not as they are, but as they ought to be; It Is without interest,
that they condemn foul deeds, and Treasons, and that they honor Justice,
Wisdom, and Valor. They make the guilty blush in their Consciences, as well as
true Historians, and can tell better how, than they, to animate men's hearts in
the defense of right, and reason, even to the last breath of life. Besides,
that their design is but to be acceptable, and stir up diverse passions in the
Readers, they instruct them nevertheless and edify them, so as after reading
them, they grow much greater friends to virtue than before. As for my self, who
cannot brag of those persuasive, moving gifts, I boast at lest, to come thus
near a true History, that I observe the justness of times, that I describe
exactly the Situation of Countries, and Regions, and that I relate the customs
and ceremonies of the people, at least of such as may give any pleasure to the
Readers, estranging my self from such things as may be harsh to their minds, or
trouble them. As many as have been in the eastern voyage, and seen the Mogul's
Court, who is called, great Achebar, of his Subjects, know that of all Asia
they are the best men on horseback that they are great makers of Carrouzels,
but that at their public feasts they mostly use the sports of Fencing. Those
who have seen, as well as those that have described the Kingdom of Narsinga,
agree all of them, that duels are more used there than in any part of the
world; that in times past they have been condemned, and the duellists
grievously punished, but that of late years, they were fain to suffer them,
hoping by that means to abolish them. What I have said of the nuptials and
interments of their Princes, is confirmed likewise by diverse as well ancient as
modern Historians; So as (Reader) it rests only that I satisfy thee of the
time, amnd true race of Tamberlain, from whom I make Anaxander to be descended.

Thou shall know then, (if thou please to believe what Albacen an Arabian
Historian says, who lived in Tamberlains time, and who in two different Volumes
has writ his two childrens lives) that after the death of that great Captain,
who was the Prince of Zaguetays son, all his Countries, which were of a great
extent, were divided between the two children Santochio, and Letrochio, and his
chief Captains, Axallo, Odmar, Synopes, Colonel of his Infantry, and the Prince
of ^^^ai^ his kinsman; that Santochio had for his share, being the ^^dest son,
Zaguetay, which was his fathers inheritance, and Letrochio, the younger, took
possession of a good part of the Indes, on this side Ganges A hundred years
after Alhacen, another Arabian called Ologbet, who has written the History of
the Kings of Gouzarate, says that Letrochio, Tamberlains son, left his
Countries and possessions, to his only son H^mar, who was able to preserve
Cambaya only, by reason his other Subjects revolted from his obedience. This
Hamar had diverse children, of whom the eldest was called Alagmet, who died very
young, and from the second, called Abduli, came the great Alcidaris, the father
of Alcidaris and Anaxander, which he had by two wives. He was surnamed the
great, because he had done many memorable actions from his youth up, chastis'd
many of his rebel Subjects, having overcome them in sundry Battles, and
recovered much Land, and many Provinces which had been taken from his father
Hamar; among others the Kingdom of Candahar, otherwise called Sablestan,
situate on the North of the Kingdom of Cabul, and that of Mandoa, situate
between the Kingdoms of Cambaya, and Cytor. Nevertheless he left the enjoyment
of them to King Babor, he paying the accustomed Tribute imposed on him by his
ancestors. This Babor had one only daughter called Berenica, whom Alcidaris
married, from her came the young Alcidaris; and our Anaxander came from
Anaxarette Queen of Dulcinda. These two brothers being well united, regained by
their valor in time, whatsoever Hamar had lost, and conquered a part of those
countries, possessed this day by the great Mogul, who boasheth to be the sole
remainder of their race: But I describe their Loves only and their first
adventures, purposing to do some better thing hereafter, if I understand,
Reader, that this little work has pleased thee. And now I entreat thee, not to
blame me for sundry faults escaped by misfortune in the impression; I have
corrected such as have come to my knowledge, and if I have been so happy as to
have stolen some importunate hours from thee, I crave no other reward, but that
thou will amend what I have not observed Farewell.

A letter written by Monsieur du Balzac, To a Lady of quality, accompanied with
the Indian History of Anaxander and Orazia.
Madam,
BEing not able to wait on you according to my promise, when you went from
hence; I believe, I shall not do you injury, if I commend you better company.
It Is that book I send you, which you heard so much praised, and which, you
thought to carry with you into those parts, for a comfort in your absence from
the Court. It is certainly worth your estimation, and as great impatience, as I
knew you did expect it with. And, if in times past, the belly of a Queen from
whence a Prince was to be born, used to be crowned, I wonder not, that you,
before the birth thereof approved it. 'Twill without doubt, relish again your
palate, which those ill lines of mine, you have sometimes made me send you,
have much distasted. It will afford you wherewithal, to shorten the longest
days, even of this season; and means, to entertain your self lone, and reason
too, to thank me for my abence. For, to speak truth, all visits, will be
uneasy to you, during so sweet diversion, as so fine a lecture has prepared
for you, and whoever shall disturb you in it, must undoubtedly receive your
secret cu^se, whatever complements good manners may oblige you to make show of.

For me, Madam, who will have me believe, my judgment not extremely ill, and
that my opinions are sound enough, I must confess, that laying aside the love
I bear the Author of this work, I have observed many things therein, which I
would praise even in my enemy. He will pardon me, if I tell you, he is one of
the most acceptable liars I yet ever saw; and it is very certain, that I never
complained of his cheats, till he had done deceiving me, because they lasted no
longer. I will not conceal my weakness: I knew I saw the picture of a feigned
thing, and yet I felt as violent motions, as the thing real would have stirred
in me, if it had been true, and that I had beheld it with mine own eyes.
sometimes I was sorry, and sometimes glad, as Monsieur de Boys-Robert was
pleased to tell me, of good or ill fortune: me though, I was in earnest
interested in the affairs of his imaginary Kings; I had many fears for poor
Anaxander, which are beyond expression: and Lisimantus misfortunes, very
littleless troubled my mind, and in the very extremities I saw them both, I
offered vows for their safety, at the instant, when they were delivered
miraculously. In fine, Madam, although my heart be reasonably hard, and my
eyes, not very inclinable to water, some tears fell from me, in spite of my
teeth, and I was ashamed that they were another man's dreams, and visions, which
moved me to so feeling and so real sorrows, and not my own evils. It is a most
tyranni^al power, which a man's sense usurps over his reason, and which
manifestly shows us, that the neighborhood of the imagination, is extr^mely
contagious to the parts intellectual, and that that proud creature, which
thinks (...) made to command all others, consists of a great deal more body,
than soul. The Author of the Ethiopian History gave me many times such frights,
and I cannot at this day read him, but with being deceived. As for other
Romances, you know I am not greedy of them; and indeed, the greatest part are
(...) Heliodorus's disguised, or as the late ^ishop of Air said, of the
children that came to Theagenes and Cari^leas Marriage, who so exactly
resentbled their father and mother, as not a hair difference. I promise you
Madam, you shall here see what is new, and the Courts true tongue speak, of
which, you have so perfect a knowledge. I confess somewhat there is, in some
places, a little like roesie, and not entirely according to the strictness of
our rules; But I am told, that those kind of beauties become Romances, and
that all that manner of writing is without the reach of our jurisdiction.
Before I shut up my letter I have something pleasant to tell you of, etc.

These Books are lately printed, and are sold at the Kings Arms in Paul's
Churchyard.
The Administration of Cardinal Richelieu, containing the History of the most
important Aff^irs of Christendom, more particularly of England, from Anno 1624.
to 1634

A Collection out of the best approved Authors, containing near six hundred
several Histories of Visions, Apparitions, Prophecies, Spirits, Divinations,
and other wonderful Illusions of the Devil, also of diverse Astrological
Predictions.

The Man in the Moon, or a Discourse of a Voyage into the Moon by Domingo
Gonzales. Also Nuncius Inanimatus Englished.

A Restitution of Decayed Intelligence in Antiquities, concerning the English
Nation, by the Study and Travel of Richard Verstegan.

The History and Character of the Bishop^, in the Reigns of Q. Elizabeth and K.
James, written by Sir John Harrington.

The Magistrates Authority in matters of Religion: Or the right of the state in
the Church, a Discourse written by the learned Hugo Gro^ius.

Of Government and Obedience as they stand directed and determined by Scripture
and Reason, Four books, by John Hall of Richmond.

Two Play's of M. James Shirley, The Constant Maid, a Comedy, and S. Patrick
for Jreland.

That Excellent Tragedy of Bussie D' Ambois written by M. George Chapman.

The Philosophy commonly called the Morals, written by the learned Philosopher
Plutarch.

THE INDIAN HISTORY OF ANAXANDER AND OF ORAZIA.
The first BOOK.
As soon as the sad knowledge of Arontus death, arrived at Baticalus, where the
King but late retired, to enjoy the fruits of Lisimantus Victory, who had
regained from his Enemies the Country of Canara; As soon, I say, as that sad
noise had run throughout the City, all Sports and Passe-times ceast, and their
triumphant Tunes were changed to woeful Moanes, and the unlook'd-for mourning
which the Court put on, spread suddenly thorowout the Kingdom of Narsinga,
which, in that youthful Prince, had loft the flower of all their hopes.

This sorrow was so universal, and this loss so generally felt, that any man
seemed guilty, without tears, and none did dare, although in public, to keep
in his sorrow, for fear of being judged persidious, or a Traitor.

But the fair Orazia, more than all, with grief unspeakable, received the
knowledge of that loss; and though her self obtained thereby three Kingdoms,
she could not yet endure the everlasting separation from that only brother whom
she so tenderly had loved, and of whose dear regards of her, she had so great
assurances; Her beauteous mouth, which through excess of love, had caused all
the world to sigh, sighed now its self through her excess of sorrow; her lovely
eyes, which commonly were called the living Fountains of the Graces, and of
Loves, were now, but lasting springs of ever-flowing tears. And though she
strove her utmost, to destroy that beauty, by the clouds she daily cast upon
them, yet did they not forbear to send their beams abroad, and shine with
equal force, as does the Sun, sometimes betwixt two showers.

The Princess Lisimena, whose society, but lately was so sweet, and acceptable
to her, and in whose bosom she was wont to lock in safety, her displeasures,
and delights, grew now incapable of serving her with any consolation, nay, to
speak truth, her self much needed it.

This Goodly Princess, whom late incensed war, within the King her Fathers
Country of ^eylan, had drawn into those parts, shared greatly in the common
sorrow of the Kingdom, which was then her sanctuary, and seemed as much
afflicted, as if her Father had been spoiled of all his Countries; whom formne,
and the valor of Lisimantus had made victorious over the King of Maldives, and
who had (...) his Empire over all his enemies possessions: Lasimena (I say)
forgot the pleasures of these Conqueslis, and only would remember that great
loss; so late received in that Country, which she loved equal with her own,
although she had not had an obligation, by the Laws of nature, and of blood.

Now, as she never failed from always being with Orazia, to assist in the
contrivances of new Pastimes, far was it from her thoughts, to leave her in the
woeful case, whereto this new misfortune had reduced her: But how was their
entertainment now altered from their former conversation? for, whereas they
were wont to breath, no other thing, than sweetness, and content, they now
could nothing else but mix confusedly their tears, and sighs, not able to speak
a word.

Thus, in embraces they were found, when Saradin, Arontus faithful squire,
with a countenance bearing deaths picture in it, entered the Princess Chamber,
and kneeling, said, Madam, behold the first time, ever I unwillingly observed
my Masters commands; and surely I obey him now in this last service, in duty to
a sorrowful Commission: and saying this, he from his pocket drew a
handkerchief to wipe his tears, which ran about his face abundantly, and in his
other hand, holding a Letter sealed with Arontus Signet, Madam (said he) see
the last relics of that generous Prince, which made all India tremble at him;
dying, he ever named you, and when he saw Physicians left him, having but two
hours time to live, he spent that space to let you see his last desires, under
his dying hand, in this short letter, which he wanted strength to finish: yet,
had he care, to have it sealed in his presence, whiles he lived, and among all
his people, who lamented him about his bed, within his Tent, he chose out me,
and thus said to me; Saradin, as soon as mine eyes close, go to my Sister, and
tell her she observe what I advise her by this Letter, which thou shall trust
no other hand with, than her own; scarce had he said these words, but that his
soul followed them, and took its flight to heaven.

The fair Orazia, who had not need of this addition to her sorrow, had
notwithstanding resolution enough to open the letter, which she received from
the faithful squire: But yet her tears which choked her eyes, gave her not
leave so soon to see that it contained these words.

Arontus Letter to Orazia.
MY deer Sister, the little time I have to live, I spend in teaching thee to
bear my death with comfort. I pray thee trouble not thy self, because it could
not be more glorious, for it has succeeded the destruction of our enemies, whom
I have over-thrown in battle. The only grief I have in dying, is, that I
cannot with my person, clear a truth unto you, which is needful you should
know. Those accomplished Knights, who under names of Ariomant, and Calistenus
have so long aisguis'd themselves among us, are two of the most renowned
Princess of Asia; and I conjure thee to observe the Gods intention, and thy
Brothers last will, which do ordain the first of them, to be thy husband: he is
the son of great Al --


The poor Prince would have said Al^idaris, King of Cambaye, and Father to the
generous Anaxander, whose qualities, and manners he intended to describe, if so
his hand had power to second his desire: but strength upon a sudden failing
him, by reason of his mortal wounds received, he was constrained to leave
unperfected his Letter, and in his presence have it sealed as it was, to keep
his promise, given the Prince Anaxander, and his Cousin Proxenus, that he would
never make them known, but to his Sister Orazia, nor make their birth apparent,
till they were fit, to show themselves, in Princes equipage, before the King of
Narsinga.

This letter did redouble her affliction, and among the violent touches of her
sorrow, waked her amourous dislurbances. After she had a thousand times accused
the heavens, and cursed Arontus fatal victory, which cost his life; coming at
length, to cast her eyes upon the notice he had given her in his Letter,
(admire the force and power of love) a sudden alteration surprised her, and
moved her thoughts from the sad mourning of her brother, to reflect upon her
Lover. She always had opinion, that Ariomant, whose actions were so Kingly,
must be of eminent quality; and notwithstanding his so humble fashion in the
King her Fathers Court, she knew, that in his eyes and Courage, there was
somewhat great and famous.

But at that instant, she received so glorious a testimony of his birth, she
neither could disguise apprehension, nor dissemble from Lisimenaes eyes, the
passion she was in, to be more fully satisfied; For which cause, drawing
Saradin apart, My friend (said she) to him, since the misfortune happened to us
by thy Masters loss, hat testimony has Ariamont given, who now commands the
Army: Madam, answered Saradin, since that woeful day, where in the Prince,
forced to leave us, gave him the guidance of our Troops, he has so worthily
discharged himself, that though he be a stranger, and known by nothing but his
actions, he has not purchased the smallest jealousy; all our Captains, with
delight obey him, and though the Prince had not himself appointed him as chief,
I think he had been chosen by the Armies general consent. His wisdom and his
valor are so met, and so full of every virtue sit to make up a commander, that
if there be any thing, which may administer a comfort to us, in this dire
mischance, it is, to see our Prince his power has fallen into so noble hands.

The Princess received a twofold mitigation of her sorrow, when she learnt
that he, to whom she had already given her heart, not knowing his descent, was
not alone a Prince by birth, but that his reputation was so great, and
universally admired by all the King her Fathers subjects, as that she saw fair
likely-hoods, of good success unto her loves.

The only curiosity she had to know his parentage, and over what people he
commanded, did yet keep her unsatisfied; and gathering by Saradins discourse,
that in the Army, he was not held for what he was, she guest there was some
reason, why he published not himself, and that she could not know the truth
thereof, except himself did tell it her.

This was the reason why, among so many other questions asked of Saradin, she
enquired of him, whether his return would not be shortly. Madam, answered the
faithful squire, as soon as he shall have conquered that rest of the Kingdom
of Decan, which had been made a prey unto those two revolted slaves, whom we
have punished, and overthrown in battle, he will bring back the victorious
army, which as you know have decreed sacred honors to my Master, whose
precious body embalmed, will be within a few days conducted hither, drawn in a
triumphant Chariot, which shall accompany his pompous funerals. It cannot be
long ere they return; for the Decanians ravished with joy to be delivered from
two slaves, who have driven out all their blood Royal from their government,
came every day to yield themselves unto the valiant Ariomant, and bring him
still their City keys, and Castles likewise. And that poor people, incapable
of defending themselves, with pleasure rank them under the Kings dominion,
whose clemency they know, as surely as his justice.

The fair Orazia not able at that time to learn more news, of her deer
Ariomant, with much impatience looked for his return, and still she sought her
common comforts from Lisimena, from whom she could not hide the new occasions
of her joy, nor yet conceal her Lovers birth, which from her Brothers Letter
(which the Gods would not allow an end to,) she began to know; But she conjured
her, she should keep it secret, and make no mention of it till a fitter season.

Mean while, for her diversions, and to beguile the time of Ariomants absence,
she often talked with Saradin, and made him repeat the praises, which she
already had tasted, with so much content in his behalf, whom more than all the
world she loved. And because she would make Saradin entirely hers, whose
faithfulness she knew unparalled, her chief squire being slain in the
battle, she chose Saradin to succeed him, to which, she got the King her
Fathers consent, who was much pleased to give him that reward, as worthy of his
long good services.

If hitherto, I have not spoken of that great Monarchs sorrow, and excessive
grief, for loss of his dear son, upon whose magnanimity, and valor, he had
built his rest, and hopes, it is to speak truly, that I hold his woes
unspeakable; Besides, in telling you the little strength he had to meet that
unexpected news, and the despair which more than once had tempted him to do
violence on himself, I fear to lay a blemish on the other actions of his life.
Let us forget his sorrows, and his over-passion then, and call to mind the
constancy wherewith he shortly after armed himself, and resolution which he
took, to honor, (as his army had desired) his deer Arontus memory, and
funerals.

He always kept the brave Lisimantus with him, and so much valued the courage
of that invincible Knight, as that he dared not in his presence show his great
resentments; and truly 'twas from him, he had more comfort than from any other,
being a man, who had despised a thousand deaths; and one, who though his life
were glorious for a thousand brave exploits, yet found no sweetness in it, for
the bloody discoutentments he each day received in the scorn of beauteous
Lisimena.

But whiles accommodations are preparing to solemnize the funeral pomps of
that Prince whom they expect, and whose body, glorious though without a soul,
craves the honor of a triumph, it is requisite, that by the way, I tell you
somewhat of this Lisimantus, who for his virtue, merits in this place, to have
a short abridgement of his life recorded.

He was a Soldier under fortunes banner, who from his infancy being given a
Page unto the Princess Lisimena, and after given again unto the King of Zeilan
her father, as you shall see in the sequel of this story, from step to step
advanced him by his courage, and by his excellent conduct rose to the greatest
charges in the Kingdom; and so far forth, as after Arbiran's death, he followed
him, and was made general of that great Army, which has of late triumphed
over the King of Maldives. All the Indian Chronicles are full of memorable
actions, by him done in that long war; and you shall by and by learn from his
own mouth, the reason why, to take upon him the name of Lisimantus, he forsook
his own, a name he borrowed from the King his Masters only daughter, to whom
from his first rising he was bold to send sighs, and amorous aspects.

The fair Lisimena (so was the Princess called,) besides a private inclination
which she had to cherish that accomplished Knight, for his own merits sake, did
yet besides account her self obliged thereto, for great and noted services,
which every day he did unto the Crown of Zeilan, whose chief support, and prop
he was: but the great courage of her heart, and honor, which she valued more
than all things else, caused her to undervalue in her thoughts, the secret love
of that unknown young man, whom she had seen to come so poorly fitted to the
King her Fathers Court, who knew no more than she, his birth, and could not
enough wonder at the boldness which he took, not only to send forth his looks
toward her, but even to sigh in presence of her, whiles the whole Court saw
and knew it; because it was a Law throughout the Indes, that a Princess could
not marry but her equal, nor without much dishonor, suffer the addresses of a
man, who were not Kingly born. And in some parts the Law was more severe than
others, as in the Kingdom of Decan, where death was added to the shame of that
Princess, who should unequally dispose her self. Which is at present yet the
Custom among the Negres as well of the Kingdom of Cambaye, as Calecut, and all
the parts of Malabar. Not one however dared to speak his thoughts of Lisimantus
open love, envy it self was silent, as well for that they knew the greatness of
his humor, as the respect which they were bound to owe the power of his
command, wherein he did so worthily acquit himself.

The King observed him as well as others, but that his wisdom did oblige him
to distemble what he saw, because in truth he was very necessary, as the
chiefest instrument of that revenge he had ordained for his greatest enemy, the
King of Maldives, who had for wantonness assaulted him, and sworn his ruin;
But for fear of causing greater passion which he daily saw to grow in
Lisimantus, it seemed him best to separate his daughter for some time, and send
her to his brothers in Law, and friend, the King of Narsingus Court, to keep
her Cousin Orazia company. He wanted not a color for this act, for they had
lately understood by an intelligencer, that the King of Maldives who was then
lately beaten in two sea fights by Lisimantus, made great preparation, to
besiege the City of Colombo, where the King of Zeilan commonly held his Court,
and he conceived he should have less cause to fear, when as his daughter who
was the greatest treasure that he had, (though in his Countries Pearl, and
Emeraulds and Saphires are found abundantly) should remain in safety.

This resolution he no sooner took but put in execution, and sent his only
daughter (who long since lost her Mother) to Narsinga, with an equipage which
well became her greatness.

Lisimantus would most gladly have diverted that voyage, had he dared, and had
opposed his courage to the Kings fear, if that he should not have too openly
declared himself, and with insolency abused the prosperity of his fortune and
his Arms; this made him hide his discontent, and yielding to necessity,
permitted her to go away, who had fomented still his courage, and was cause of
all the goodly actions he had done.

It was indeed the King of Maldives project, to besiege the City of Colombo,
that in some sort he might repair his several assronts, received in many Sea
fights: But by the impatient courage of Lisimantus, he was prevented, who
sinding they were slow in coming, and perceiving how the King his Masters
Forces were augmented by the late aid sent by the King of Narsinga his Brother
in Law, thought sit to prevent the enemy, and go lay battery to Bandos, his
chiefest fortress, which was not far from the Isle of Male, where then he made
his warlike provisions. And that which put him upon the enterprise, was, that
he had intelligence within the place; he proposed it to the council of war,
who approved thereof, and was so happy, as his plot succeeded for the King his
Masters advantage; he took that Castle under the King of Maldives nose, who was
come to succor it, sunck diverse of his great ships, and in a word, to finish
all his victories, he defeated absolutely the King of Maldives, who fled into
the farthest parts of the Isles of Palandurus; he got all his Countries,
wherewith he enlarged his Masters, and did such notable things, and worthy of
admiration, as will never be forgotten, as you shall more at large perceive in
the fifth Book of this History; for I mean now to tell you only, what
adventures brought him to the City of Baticalus.

No sooner was he returned victorious into the Island of Zeilan, but the King
had notice, that the two revolted slaves, the faithless Rozalcan and his
Brother Zabain, who had usurped the Kingdom of Decan, and driven out of all
their lawful Princes, not contented with the Signiories of those twelve mighty
Provinces, would yet augment themselves, at the charges of the King of
Narsinga, from whom, already they had taken the Country of Canara which
bordered on them, and lay convenient for their purpose. As soon as the King of
Zeilan knew hereof, having no more to fear now from the King of Maldives, whose
pride was well abated, though nothing more than how to succor and revenge his
friend, his neighbor, and allie, the King of Narsinga, to whom he sent back
his Troops, adding as many of his own subjects, under the conduct of
Lisimantus, whose service by the same occasion he presented him, if in the
present necessity of his affairs he thought him needful.

You may imagine if our Heroes, who did seek but new occasion, to employ his
courage in, was very glad to find it in a place, where he was sure to see the
sweetest object of his thoughts, he did not run, he flew unto it, and being
arrived at Bisnagar, where then the King of Narsinga was, he had the honor to
divide the Royal Army, with the Prince Arontus, only heir to those great
Kingdoms, of Narsinga, Bisnagar, and of Orixa; But Arontus, as great reason
was, did choose, and took the greatest and the hardest task to undergo.

Lisimantus then, with those Troops which he brought out of Zeilan, were sent
to re-obtain the Country of Canara from the enemies, and the Prince Arontus led
his Army into the Kingdom of Decan, resolving to root out those two slaves,
which had revolted from their Prince, and caused so many, and so diverse
mischiefs; he therein bore himself so bravely, that having met them in the
field, and with the pride of all their Army, he gave them battle, he slew
Zabain with his own hand, and aided by the valor of Ariomont and Callistenus,
had so glorious a success, as that he rooted out those Monsters, of whom, the
one as I have said, with his own hand he slew; but from the other had his
mortal wound, who was then presently taken prisoner, and by and by, shall serve
to adorn the Funeral Triumph of that Prince, falln in his victory, and whom to
sorrow for, we begun already.

Before those passags in Decan, Lisimantus had already done so well his duty,
as he regained the Province of Canara, so famous for those three Cities, Onor,
Mangalor, and Baticalus; and after he had put to death, or banished far enough
from thence, all those who had been constant to those slaves, who faith-less
had opposed themselves against his power, he sent a post to give knowledge of
it to the King of Narsinga; which when he understood, as well because he would
enjoy the fruits of that valiant Cavaliers victory, as for his near being to
Decan, and sooner having advertisements from his Son, he left the great City of
Bisnagar, and removed his whole Court to Baticalus, which heretofore had been
the ancient burying place of the first Kings of Narsinga, when they abode in
the Country of Canara, and shall serve shortly in the same stead unto the
generous Arontus.

There 'twas, that Lisimantus saw again the dearest object of his passion,
there 'twas that all his great desires awaked, and where he thought, having
overcome his enemies, he should obtain fair Lisimena; But, though that beauteous
Princess knew sufficiently Lisimantus merits, and was not ignorant of one of
all those services he did her Father, the evil relish of his petty birth,
diverted her from loving him, and from his conversation too, for fear lest
those perfections which she noted in his mind and body, might at length gain on
her, and light a fire, which was already kindling in her heart, which then she
might not know to quench.

The fair Orazia knew all the secrets of her soul, as she had likewise opened
hers to Lisimena, and whiles each entertained other with their amorous
resentments, there came a Post from the King of Zeilan, who craved again his
daughter, and prayed the King of Narsinga, to send her back, because there was
no stir or trouble now within his Countries: But this news greatly grieved
Orazia, who was like to lose, and may be, lose for ever that deer Princess,
unto whom, besides so near a blood, so great and perfect friendship had united
her. However, little was that sorrow, to another which befell her shortly
after, by the arivall of a Post come from Decan, who as I said, brought her the
woeful news of her only brother, Arontus death. But, for we have already
mentioned the honors meant unto him, although dead, and the provisions fitted
for his triumph; Let us go on in our story, and renew no more, the plaints, and
griefs, which but too often already, I have for a loss so general, repeated.

Scarce had a Month been spent since that sad news had entered Baticalus, when a
Post from Ariomant came to the King, to give him notice of his Victorious
Armies coming home, which waited on the glorious body of his Son: Immediately
that valiant King, forgetting or dissembling his inward sorrow, caused the
stately sumptuous Convoy to be fitted, which, by night, and with this ceremony,
passed from the gate of the great street of Baticalus, to the Royal Palace.

First, the whole street was spread with black Velvet, and at each window burnt
six Torches (throughout every story) of Virgin wax, to show the pomp of that
Solemnity. All the Soldiers, who in that War had followed him, past File and
File, in streaming tears, trayling their Pikes upon the ground, as conquered
people, rather than victorious; their brazen Drums in mourning cases, beat but
now, and then, and gave a certain doleful sound, which moved new horror in the
people; when as the Foot companies, (which were a great number,) had all passed
by, the Cavalry in Sable Arms appeared, their horse Caparisons of the same
color, having the fights of their Helmets down, and holding but the shivers of
Lances in their hands; their Trumpets, but half blown, sent forth most
lamentable sounds or rather cries, which now made melt the hearts of those, who
formerly they had encouraged; next them, came Ariomant, who really afflicted,
hid not his face, as did the rest, but in his eyes would have them see the
sadness of his heart, and in this sorrowful appearance he did seem so handsome,
that Orazia, who observed him passing by, was doubly (but for diverse causes)
moved, by his tears; ^allistenus, was by his side, who nothing differed from
him, save that his Sable plume was not so long as his; the Chariot followed
them close after, which drawn by six black horses, carried the Cypres smelling
Coffin, where lay; the body of Arontus, and over it, his Image fixed, in Kingly
rober, holding his Scepter in his hand. Rosal^on was on his knees, chained at
the feet of this Effigies, who looked in his face, and round about him, there
marched in much pain, by reason of their chains, the chief of those who had
rebelled, and Traiterous Villains to their King, had taken party with a pair of
Slaves. Before the pillar^ of the Chariot, there hung, as Trophies, every piece
of the Princes Armor, from head to foot, and at the hinder pillars were made
fast some of the Ensigns and the Warlike spoyl^s, which he had gotten from the
two Usurpers, and what the Chariot could not carry, were borne on Elephants,
which followed them, in coverings of black Velvet.

In this glorious, and mournful equipage, Arontus body was carried as far as
the Temple of the Royal Palace, which was the ancient place of burying their
Kings. There had they raised a stately Altar, on which was set the Image of the
Prince, exceeding like him, which they honored with Persumes, and lighted Lamps
were placed about it; And, that according to the ancient custom, that ceremony,
might last for ever, a yearly sum was settled, and people appointed, who with
great molten Censers, almost like those wherewith they worshipped the gods,
should still persume that Image, and see that everlastingly those Lamps should
burn; at the feet of the Effigies, was set this inscription in Arabique verses,
which I have in our language thus translated.

In thickest of my Victory,
When my strong arm, in honor high
Did strew their Camp, with dread, and fear,
Twice wounded, by two deadly darts,
Triumphing ore the rebels hearts,
Death, did his triumphs on me rear.
As soon as they were gone forth from the Temple, Rosalcan, whom the
Executioners had seized, by the Kings command, had his head struck off at the
gate, and was slain as a sacrifice unto the Princes Guardian Angels.

When all the Funeral ceremonies were ended, and the great sorrow overpast, the
King, who had a manlike heart, diverting by degrees his trouble, sought comfort
in the great perfections of his Daughter, which was left him, the rare Orarza,
who, gaining every day, new charms from the return her of dearest Lover, grew
a continual object of delight, to all that saw her; her beauteous face,
shining, within that great and obscure Veil, had more force, than when the Sun
bursts through the cloud, which in foul weather environ it: Love never leaves
her eyes, in greatest sadness, nor in her strictest mourning do her graces ever
quit her.

Before the Kings departure from Baticalus, he made provision for disorders in
the Kingdom, and chiefly to restrain the liberty, of private Combats, which
the War had lately very much renewed among his brave Nobility. Indeed, they
gave too great a way, unto that brute, and boundless fury, and thereby too much
wronged their courage, which exalted them above all other Nations far: For
preventing therefore anew, the progress of this mischief, which from day to
day got strength, the Council was assembled, and the King ordained a Law
severe, whereby, without exception, of or rank, or quality whatever, it was
decreed, that the infringers should unpardonably pass the Hangmans hands, and
have their heads struck off, besides the loss of offices, and goods, which
should remain confiscate to the King, and that the execution might be sure, and
that all hope of favor for the future might be clean taken away, his Majesty
swore solemnly, before the Altars, on the sacred Books, and by his Fathers
soul, to make due execution of it; nor that his Son, if yet alive, should have
exemption from the Law, if he should give himself to that inhumane course, and
thereby run the hazard of it.

This strict Ordinance, repressed exceedingly the fierceness of that ready
youth, who were compelled to hide their often resentments after injuries
received, and restrained their too too heady forwardness, wherein, so
indiscreetly they had laid the chiefest point of honor. When as sufficient
provision had been made for this disorder, and, that the King, had, for the
good, and quiet of his people, settled other wholesome Laws, and strengthened all
the Holds of Canara, with faithful Governors, and meet provisions, he commanded
all manner of Carriages, and Wagons to be ready, for that within eight days,
he would depart from Baticalus; and for more acceptance to the King of Zeylan,
who desired his Daughter, he meant to wait on her himself unto the nearest Port
for her convenience, with which advertisement he bid the Post return unto the
King his Master.

This resolution of the Kings, pleased greatly Lisimantus, who being to be
chief of that Conduct meaned to declare himself upon the way, and let Lisimena
know, (who saw too much already) his great passion so her love. In Baticalus he
had never opportunity to speak in private to her, though for that end, he had
employed his subtilest contrivances, and so far forth, as what by gifts and
flattering, he had won a little Page of hers, called Aquilant, whom she much
loved, and was ever of her train; with him he had the boldness to trust a
Letter, which contained his secret Loves, and told him, it was an intelligence
that much concerned his Mistress service, and that he should not fail, to be
careful in the delivery, without telling her from whence it came, for that she
would her self find well enough, and that undoubtedly, she would think much
the better of him; This little innocent, gave indeed the paper to Lisimena, who
verily thinking it to be some notice which concerned her good, or else the King
her fathers, immediately opened it, and was amazed to find what follows
written in it.

Lisimantus Letter to Lisimena.
Madame,
I Know that instantly you will accuse my rashness, and condemn as guilty my
desires; because it was never heard, and chiefly in this Country, that a Subject,
should presume to speak unto his Princess, openly of Love; But come what may,
and whatsoever evil be prepared for me, I am forced to yield unto the motions
of my soul, and make my hands as guilty; by those lines, as are mine eyes, who
have already taken boldness, to declare my passion to you. If from the gods, I
have received any merit, which may cause you to endure, and not reject the Love
I make you; I conjure you Madam, not to stick upon your Country Laws, for they
concern not me, in punishing unequal Marriages, having (however mean I am
esteemed to be) enough to make me by my courage, and my glorious enterprises
equal to the greatest Kings; It Is true, I think not Madam, that I am descended
from a Kingly parentage, nor can I show the titles of my family, in ancient
characters of graven Marble; but, since my loves necessity, compels me to a
little vaunt; to make up by my actions, what I want in birth, I mean to draw
some luster from my proper virtue, and am glader far, to ow my glory to my
Sword, than to my Grand^ires merits. Yet though I might be able to reckon Kings
among my ancestors, I had rather much, be estimable for the number I had
overcome, than even from those I should derive my self extracted; And since the
gods have deigned so great a favor to my arms, as to enlarge the King your
fathers Countries, and root out his Enemies, why should I fear, to promise
other Conquests to my self herafter? Is there so hard a Victory to get, which
that I may be worthy of your Love, I will not undertake? And if at most it be,
that for your husband, you desire a King, bid me depose the mightiest of all
Asia, that, with that title I may have the honor to possess you, and may
find, no other obstacle to my ambition.


Lisimena was marvellously surprised at this Letter, and exceedingly chid the
little Aquilant, forbidding him, for ever after upon pain of being turned away,
to have to do with Lisimantus matters. Notwithstanding, whatever resolution she
had taken, to dissemble, and conceal the trouble, which this accomplished
knights affection caused her, she could not choose but tell her other self, her
deer Orazia, each particular, being persuaded, for so much she loved her, and
so sure belief had of her, that though she told her all, she never would let
out one secret from her heart. My sister (said she) for so they called each
other;) what reason is there I should give my self to love a subject, who, even
himself seems to confess the poverty of his descent, and is guilty of such
meanness, as never yet to any body, would he declare the place where he was
born; yet I cannot hate him, for he is too lovely qualified; your self can
testify, of some of his good actions; and, as I think, I should both trespass
on my honor, and our Laws, to show consent to his entreaties; so should I anger
Love, if absolutely, I should scorn them. What shall I do my deer sister, in
these two extremitie^, wherewith I am so equally pressed? I entreat you to give
me such counsel, as your self would accept, provided it be built on honor,
which I never mean to violate.

Orazia, who but lately had the same resentments for her Ariomant, whilst his
condition was unknown unto her, and who knew that Love does not consider
qualities; or set a difference between parties, was in as much trouble as
Lisimena, to flatter her passion without offending her, or herself; for her own
ends, forbad her to advise for a Lisimenaes dvantage, in the impatient and
extreme desire she had, to procure that Ariomant might secretly come to her, to
be satisfied from his own mouth, touching the Story of his life, and the whole
truth of his original; which being not possible, without the knowledge of
Lisimena, who day nor night was absent from her, she thought, that if
Lisimantus should have access to his Princess, at those times when she should
have a mind to entertain her Lover, besides that Ariomant would never yield to
make himself known before so many people, there would be likewise too many
witnesses, unto a matter, which was as yet not time to be revealed to any body;
all these considerations, caused her to insist upon the unhappy quality of a
subject, and to tell Lisimena, that though her Lover, so virtuous, and
accomplished as he was, being a subject to the King her father, and the
meanness of his birth but too too sure; she should do her self great wrong to
speak with him in private, and to allow his open Love; she wished her, to have a
little patience, seeing her honor was more deer unto her than his love, and it
may be Lisimantus great achievements would so touch the King, who had already
spied his amorous inclination, as that he voluntarily might give him his
succession, by making her his wife.

See here how Orazia diverted Lisimena from the desire to which she exceedingly
inclined, to admit, and talk with Lisimantus, who was as beautiful, as bold,
and being no less eloquent, than valiant, had doubtlessely, at first dash,
greatly shaken this Princesses resolution. Lets leave her then in her concealed
trouble, and likewise the sad memory, of all the anguish, caused by Arontus
death, and turn us to our Lovers joy, who with a alike desire, seek how to meet
again, and burn with one impatience.

Ariomant knew nothing of the care, which poor Arontus had, lying a dying, to
advertise his sister of his high descent; and meaning with his deer friend
Callistenus to retuan into Cambaye, that suddenly they might come back in
Princes equipage, and consummate their faithful Loves; he labored to receive
the fair Orazia's commands, and meant before he went, to tell her secretly, his
great extraction, that as yet he might be more acceptable unto her, and more
worthy of her favors, which he had already but too much a acquired, when
Saradin the Princess new Squire, to whom she had given trust of all her
secrets, came to him from her, and said as follows, to his no less great
astonishment, than Joy.

Illustrious Ariomant (said he,) without Magic, I can tell the trouble you are
in; and have no other errant, than to help you out; I know you labor to be
private with the Princess; and what say you, if she desire it too, and if
already knowing by Divine revelation part of your greatness, she have sent me
to you, to entreat your company, as soon as may be, and to hear the story of
your life, and matters, which but from your self she cannot learn. Wonder not
Sir, said he; you have seen me formerly a servant to Arontus, and my long, and
known fidelity in several affairs, has made me acceptable to the Princess, who
has done me the honor to think me fit to exercise an office in her house,
which by the death of her chief Squire, fell vacant; besides, she has thought
fit to open me her heart, and tell me how she loves you, which she has
Inherited, from her Brother, who so dearly tendered you; come go with me if you
desire to know more; for I am only charged to bring you where she is, and have
detained you with my past discourse, that you might only trust my faith and
word.

Sure Ariomants passion must have been extreme, seeing his heart, which till
that time seemed insensible, or at least ordinary in its joy, appeared now a
long time in his countenance disordered by the alteration which that pleasing
news had caused in him; we may from thence collect, that Love is the most
tickling, and delicate, of all the motions of the soul; for commonly, the
greatest courages, are most indifferent to every other joy, than those, which
come from the successes of their Loves.

When our brave Hero, was recovered from his transport, he thanked the
faithful Saradin, for having by his care delivered him from so great trouble,
and followed him alone, without the least distrust, unto the little Garden of
Fountains, where the amorous Princess did expect him.

The Sun already had been set, an hour, or more, and the Moon, being about the
Full, without offense of any Cloud, began to shine, when the fair Orazia as well
to take the free contentment, of the freshness, of so fair, and clear, a night,
as without hinderance, to give access unto her Lover, walked alone, save with
the Princess of Zeilan, in the little Garden which accompanied their
neighboring privacies, and which was common to them both, wherein they had
forbidden any body to be seen. Although she with impatience looked for
Ariomant, she could not choose but be surprised at his coming; she stayed her
in a verdant Parlor, and dewed with a Crystal Fountain, which being placed
against the wall, ran out into the City; for there it was that Saradin must
bring him in, for fear least in the walk, some of the Princess household might
discover him, because their windows looked into the Garden.

No sooner had that lovely Prince appeared to her eyes, by whom he was as much
beloved, as he loved, but Love and Joy transporting him, he kneeled, and after
having kissed her hand: Madam said he, is it possible, that you have thought me
worthy of so great a happiness, and glory: hold me no longer in suspense, tell
me, ah tell me, if my eyes deceive me, or whether it be a real act of my good
fortune, which presents me to you. His wonder did not so much blind him, but he
knew his duty toward Lisimena; wherefore he rose immediately to give her
salutations, with as great civility, as gracefulness, before he thus was
answered by Orazia. Most generous Prince, said she, you can no longer hide you
from me, The gods have granted me discovery of part of your illustrious birth;
and surely, being as you are, the real proofs you shall here receive of my
affection, and esteem, will be but much below your merit; do not, I pray you
therefore feign, (before this Princess, whose perfect union with me, gives us
both but one desire,) to tell me that, at full, which but in part, has yet
arrived my knowledge. Tell me of all the fortunes you have ran, before your
coming hither, and above all, conceal not from me, the chief cause, that
guided you, into these parts.

Madam, replied Ariomant, since for the glory of us mortals, you are here
below, and since you are by all acknowledged, for a most visible divinity on
earth, I cannot wonder at your knowledge of me. Goddesses, cannot be ignorant,
of any thing; they pierce into meant hearts, and wills; And being so, how comes
it Madam, you demand of me, the cause that brought me hither? can it be
possible, that you, who have read over my heart, have not found there, your
Picture drawn by Cupids hand. In truth, I thought whiles we abode at Bisnagar,
I had made that doubt clear enough, and feared, I had thereby transgressed. For
though, from that time you had known the truth of my extraction, I ought not
for all that, so much to hazard me, as to declare my love unto you, nor should
have had a ground, to flatter me with any hope; I knew, it must be needs some
God, that should enjoy you, and that never any, such as you resemble, subject
themselves, except in ancient stories, to the love of mortal men.

Their complements had longer lasted if an accident had not prevented them; The
King did use to visit his daughter the Princess, twice, or thrice a week, in
her retirement, and sometimes used to walk with her in her little Garden: this
caused Saradin, whose care provided for all chances, after he had left our
Lovers together, to play the sentinel, not fearing, after so strict charge was
given, that any save the King would venture to come in; and when he saw, that
his Majesty not finding Orazia in her chamber, went toward the Garden, he ran
before him, to give notice of it, to them; This news, somewhat troubled the
company, who after Orazia had commanded Ariomant, to be next evening with his
deer Callistenus at the same place, were fain, for that time to divide
themselves.

This visit, though she loved her Father very well, was nothing acceptable: for
she impatiently desired to know his name, and quallity, whom yet she knew, but
by the name of Ariomant, although indeed she was not ignorant that he was born
a Prince; besides, that Ariomant supposing she had know his whole extraction,
was wonderfully doubtful, who should have instructed her, not daring to
imagine that Arontus had in dying faild his promise; for he had ever promised
him, and Callistenus too, that he would never make them known, save to his
Sister Orazia, till themselves were fit, and in condition, to appear before the
King of Narsingus as their qualities required; and death preventing him, he
thought, (as was most likely,) that he had committed that secret to the
faithful Saradin; doubtful however, he retired as then, resolved to be next
night, in due obedience to his Mistresses commands, where now they met, and
very shortly after to embarque himself for Cambaye, that with as much speed as
may be, he might return with Callistenus, (who had like interest to come back
with him,) in a pompous train, and fashion, worthy of their royal greatness.
Scarce had he set his foot within his lodging, but his dear Callistenus meeting
him, knew by hit eyes, the pleasure that took up his heart, and presently he
found himself engaged to tell him of his sweet adventure; which better to
communicate, they lay that night together, which they spent in pleasing talk,
till next day administered more ample cause of joy; for though this pleasure
seemed to have respect alone to Ariomant; Callistenus who so entirely loved
him, participated also of it, and so much, as very near to show the same
impatience, and desire.

If now, Prince Ariomant for his part languisht in that amorous expectation,
The fair Orazia lived in a sweet unquietness, on hers; little that night she
rested, and the dry once come, she numbered every hour, and minute of the same;
she thought a thousand times, the sun had slack'd his wonted course, and
dreamed on nothing, but the silence of a night, more happy than the former,
that with more convenience she might again behold him, whose gracefulness, and
sweet behavior, formed themselves a thousand times that day to her
imagination. Her wishes, when the Sun had set, were granted; for instead
thereof, she saw her dearest Ariomant appear, whose sight was more pleasing
unto her eyes, and warmth more acceptable to her soul: he with his friend,
thought first to have been at the place, but found himself prevented by the
Princess great impatience, who had scarce given Lisimena time to end her
Supper, for her have to draw her to that pleasing and delightful place.

She was of brown but clear complexion, as all the beauties commonly of Asia,
are; But in all Europe was not found a favor, more exact, nor delicate than
hers, she had no part of all her face, which was not accompanied with special
graces; and eyes, which for their sweetness might be feared, had yet more
boldness to acquire men's hearts, than others.

When she went to find the Princess Lisimena in her Chamber, she had cast
carelessly about her, a kind of Indian garment, of black Satin, without any
other Ornament, than a cutwork, very delicate, wherewith her smock was edged,
and turned back upon her garment; about her neck she only wore a bobbin, her
hair was black, and curled by nature into slaves, hung in some places on her
neck, whose luster was the more set off, and though it was in careless manner
that it hung, yet seemed it not without a kind of art. It Is true, her mourning
did require more modesty, than at that time her habit showed; and yet did
Lisimena think her too severe; Sister (said she) so much mourning does not
become you well, on this occasion, where nothing but content should be expressed,
and therewithal, rather in jest, than earnest, she untied her string from her
neck, and in its room, hung on, a string of costly Pearl, which lay upon her
Table; next, under color of the heat, which was not over, she trust her
foresleeves up unto her elbowes, and delivered her a rich Bracelet of Diamonds
which she wore her self, pulled off her Gloves, that her fair hands might show
themselves, and took away the Handkerchief, that hid her neck, and would not
conceal from Ariomant a part of her perfections; After this manner, Lisimena
accompanied her deer Orazia, to her closet, wraped with leaves, without more
company than little Aquilant, whom they distrusted not, and bore his Mistress
train, for that she had not time enough for haste to make her self unready.

A very little time had they been there, when Ariomant, together with his
faithful friend Callistenus, slid secretly into the door, which lay toward
the City, and whereof, he had the key delivered him. Many, and happy were the
complements that past on either side, But, though there be no excellency,
wherewith they were not accompanied, and all their words selected, such as love
formed in their mouths, delighting to propose, and answer for our Lovers, I
forbear repeating of them, lest the Readers take offense, and because Ariomant
perceived by Orazia's discourse, that she yet knew not his extraction, and that
she longed to know it from his mouth, which, he would gladly have excused, if
manners would have let him; But seeing no way how he could refuse, at length,
being all four sat, and that their silence witnessed their defires to hear; he
thus began to say.

THE HISTORY OF ANAXANDER AND OF ORAZIA.
The second BOOK.
MOst fair, and virtuous Princess, seeing you desire to know who I am, and from
my own mouth to learn the History, of mine, and the companion of my
misfortunes, my deer Friend Callistenus his Life; I am most willing to obey
you; and although, our Crosses have been great, and perilous, our voyage more
than common, yet find I more contentment, than displeasure in reflecting on
them, when I call to mind, how you are the sole object of our hazards, and that
for your love only we have undertaken them.

But ere I ship me in that long discourse, it is fit I justify the good
opinion, you have of my birth, that if our merits be not equal, you may at
leastwise find our qualities, as like as our affections; and that you may be
able to make good the honor you have done me, to accept my service, ere you
very well had known me.

It cannot be, but you have often heard of Alcidaris, who being descended from
the great Tamberlin, and only remainder of his race, has to the Empire of
Cambaye, joined the Kingdoms of Dulcinde, Candahar, and Mandao, and who at
present, with your Father, shares the Sovereignty of all the Indes. From him
it is (Madame,) whence I derive my self, and who has bred me, in the hope of
all his Kingdoms, which surely I should scorn, but for the hope I have to
reign in them, one day, with you. Hereat the Princess Orazia could not conceal
her joy of heart, to be beloved by so great a Prince, but interrupting him, did
say, that both the greatness, and deservings of Alcidaris, were as the Sun, so
known unto her. But, replied Ariomant, because we are not so near neighbors,
but that many Hills, and Rivers separate us, and for it may be you have never
heard of all the passages of my Fathers Life, which do concern my Story; I must
briefly tell you, that this Prince at five and twenty years of age, was Heir
unto the Kingdom of Guzarat, which you call otherwise, Cambaye; he married,
(more for policy of state, than force of love,) the Princess Berenica, who was
only daughter, and heir, unto the King of Candahar, and of Mandao his
neighbor, and his tributary (who shortly after died) and by that match
enlarged his limits to the Northern parts, even to the Mountain of Nogrocot,
which the Greeks call Paropamisse, from whence the famous River Indus springs,
which, but for only watering our Lands, gives name to all the Indes.

But this unhappy Queen, who did Idolatrise her Husbands virtues, lived but a
short time with him, after her fathers death, but on whole year; wherein, she
gave him all imaginable proofs of perfect love, and so far forth, as having in
her self free power, she gave him, be it, whether the child wherewith she went
did live, or otherwise, her two fair Crowns; and just as soon as she had
brought that little Prince into the world, with pains incredible, she, choked
in her Convulsions; and the first hour of her childbed, gave the last unto her
life.

Now though Alcidaris were not ensirely so much tender of her, at she of him,
nor had the just, same feelings, that she had, yet could not choose but by that
unexpected death, receive most strong impressions; great was the grief he
showed, and whatsoever pomp, the quality of so great, and virtuous a Princess,
as she was, required, did wait upon his mourning, and her Funerals.

But as there is no wound, however it may seem incurable, but time may heal,
this which Alcidaris received, was not so great, as that there needed a whole
age to comfort him; for after one year ended, he became most passionably
enamored of the Queen Anaxareta, who, by the death of her brother Spimantus,
newly being arrived, was heir unto the Kingdom of Dulcinda, which, does on the
one side border on the King my fathers Countries, and on Persia on the other.

The reason why so passionately he pursued that Love, was, that besides his
pleasure, there was profit in it; and thought, that by uniting Dulcinda to his
other Kingdoms, he should be an equal powerful neighbor to the Persian.

Persuaded by these reasons, but more by love, that forced him, he sent one
named Pirobus, and of the ablest of his Kingdom, in Embassage to the Queen
Anaxareta. He was received, as coming from so great a Prince, with much
magnificence: but wondered greatly, that the answer he received was no more
favorable: She only told him thus, that the King of Cambaye had done her a
great deal of honor, but that the King her brother, being so lately dead, and
having scarce wiped off her tears, it could not be, she should so soon forget
him, nor in such haste run from his Funerals, to her own espousals; and
therefore prayed the King his Master, not to hold it strange, that she desired
more time to think thereof.

This Ambassador, who was a man of great discretion, and knew the extreme
passion of Alcidaris, resting but poorly satisfied with this answer, and knew
his Master would be likewise so, bethought him, that of Force, some greater
reason must restrain the Queen than of her brothers death, who almost two years
since had died, and should have caused her greater joy, than sorrow; for which
cause, he makes adresses to the chiefest Statist there, and dives into him, to
discover, if he could, his Mistress meanings; he shows him, how the King of
Cambaye, was her near neighbor, and one of the most powerful Monarchs of the
Indies. That over and above, his greatness, and his wealth, he had all
qualities which might commend a man to a fair Ladies acceptance; that in all
Asia, his Mistress could not find a fitter match; that there needed no long
time, to think upon a matter which depended only on her will; And, that he knew
not what to infer by the coldness of her answer, save that she loved some
other, since she neglected the desires of a Prince so mighty, and one, who
could not be, but a great strength unto her.

This Statesman who desired to pay him with more solid reasons than the Queen
had done, thought, it was no matter of importance if he told him, what he guest
she thought, which was, that being of a mighty spirit, and knowing that
Alcidaris had had a son by the Queen Berenica, who as himself, was called
Alcadaris, and should when he were dead, possess his Kingdoms, she could not
abide, that those, that should proceed from her, should ever happen to be
seconds, or in rank, or in affection; and being able to dispose of the Kingdom
of Dulcinda, she thought she might do better, to choose out a Gentleman, her
Subject, who should be her creature, and by whom she might have children heirs
to her possessions, than to match a King, of whose inheritance she could not
see a hope for hers. And this said he, in my opinion is the cause, that backs
the Queen: for she is not so ignorant, both of the qualities, and virtues of
the King your Master, but that she holds him for the man of most advantage for
her choice, save only that his heir is born already.

Pirobus, more satisfied herewith, than by the reasons given him from the
Queen, though very little notwithstanding, seeing how far from giving comfort
to his Master, returns toward him, and from point to point gives him account
of his Embassage. Alcidaris, as well as possible he could, dissembled the
disquiet this il news procured him, and I know not if his love obliged him, or,
that as yet, some little hope remained for him. But, as if heaven would favor
his desires, about eight, or ten months end, report ran all about, that the
young Prince Alcidaris was very sick, and that his tender age, not able to
defend it self, against the strong assaults of a continued Feavor, death had
delivered him. The sorrow which the King put on, was so great, that for the
space of forty days, he suffered not himself to be seen by any creatures,
except Pirobus, his faithful Counselor. The noise of his great loss
immediately was spread throughout, and came to the Queen Anaxaretas ears, who,
seeing that great obstacle removed, desired no greater thing in all the world
than that alliance; and in a word to end, Pirobus being sent the second time
had his desire, and some few days after, did Alcidaris possess both
Anaxaretas beauties, and her Kingdoms, peacefully. Now Madam, from that happy
Marriage I am sprung, and named Anaxander from my Mothers name.

Almost about the same time I was born, Ametista, Queen of Citor, and only
sister to the King my father, was delivered of Piroxenus, whom you see here
under name of Callistenus; we were bred up and taught together; and besides our
age, and blood, which knit us in a perfect friendship, nature augmented it by
so exact a correspondency of humors, as never was observed the least disparity
in our opinions; and truly since our friendship has foundation but on virtue
only, it is not to be admired, that from a cause eternal, such effects of
everlastingness are seen.

The wise Evander, from my tendrest youth had me in government, and Alcidaris,
who much desired to frame me after the example of that honorable man, drew him
from the Province of Carmanie, on very great expense: for he was Master of some
nine or ten Languages, and ignorant of nothing, that another man did know. He
had not only care of me, but likewise had an eye to Piroxenus, whom he found
exceeding capable of his good doctrines; and we both so well profited by his
instructions, as we soon learned all the secrets of the Persian and Arabique
tongues, which travel mostly, throughout all the Indies this side Ganges.

Besides the recreations of our minds, we exercised our bodies likewise; and
familiarly disguising our selves, on days of ceremony, or delight, we got the
prizes with our Lances, and at Fencing too; and such as had our names in
question used to say, that if we were not above seventeen years of age, we
might procure the envy of the most expert and accomplished Knights of Gouzarat.
I ask you humble pardon Madam, if in this, or any other part of my discourse, I
chance to speak in commendation of my own exploits, since I have said already,
that the gods disposed my humor like to Piroxenus, and therefore cannot
without prejudice to him, speak meanly of my self; and seeing we have both
pursued the same adventures, there is no glory which I may have stolen, but he
shareth with me in the theft.

We were of eighteen years complete, before we felt the smallest sense of Love;
and did enjoy, all harmless pleasures, that our age aloud. If sometimes,
wearied with our exercise, or tired with Hunting, we frequented Dancing
Matches, and bestowed our time in visiting of Ladies, it was only for civility,
or manners sake; or rather, through persuasions of Evander, who, finding us, to
have obtained enough of what he showed us, said often to the King, we wanted
nothing but a little Love, and that the least time we should take delight to
spend with Ladies, would accompish us, for people of breeding; because, said
he, Love has this proper to it self, to waken, and refine the mind, and raise
it to high meditations, making it likewise able for most glorious undertakings.

With such discourses likewise did he often entertain us, wherein we much
delighted; and sure, we were like those, who from a far, discover beauteous
prospects, but know not what ways lead unto them; we every day saw store of
beauties within the City of Campanel, where commonly Alcidaris does hold his
Court: but in their faces, found not the effects of good Evanders words. But on
a day, being in the Queen Anaxareta's Closet, where least of any thing I
thought of Love, that god upon a sudden made me know his power, and let me
see, that if till then he had omitted me, it was only, by a favor extraordinary,
to reserve me, pure, and whole, to serve the most incomparable Orazia.

Being I say, within the Queen my mothers Closet, where certain Merchants of
Arabia which traded into China, were allowed to enter, and had about them, all
the rarities of those parts they had past through; They unfolded, among others
that they had, a Picture, which surpised the eyes of all the Curt, and made
them instantly confessed, that if it were a piece drawn by the life, the Lady
that it represented was the greatest beauty of the world; you are not much
deceived, said one of the Merchants, for it is an original, after the Princess
Orazia, drawn by a Chinois Painter, now abiding in the Kingdom of Narsingus, at
a great allowance of the Kings, as being the renowned Painter of the Indies;
And this fair Orazia, is sole daughter to that mighty King, worthy indeed, more
for her rare perfections, to nommand all men, than for her great descent.

No sooner had I cast my eyes upon that beauteous Picture, but suddenly I found
an alteration in my heart, and was a certain augure of my new Loves birth.
Piroxonus, who could read my sccret thoughts, know by my change of face, and my
reiterated commendations of that piece, that it had touched me more than
pictures use to do: The Queen on to other side perceived I had a liking to it,
and though she had a purpose to have kept it for her Closet, she bestowed it on
me, and as deer a present I esteemed it, as the life she gave me. I therefore
took it with me, and it soon became the most invaluable part of all my goods. I
could not hide from my deer Piroxenus, the delight I took therein, he was the
witness of my transports, and my exstacies, which often in his presence, with
such meditations, I accompanied.

O worthy inasterpiece of Art, as the great beauty you present, must be of
Nature, can it be possible, that you should have at first, more power upon me,
than so many living wonders, who so long, in vain, have sought to snare my
liberty; and that your sweetness without motion, which but in shadows, and in
lines, is repreented here, can kindle in my soul, so pure, and living flames?
Indeed, I thought, that the divinity, of whom you a^^ the image, did
communicate its power, but unto Love alone, and that he only was allowed, to
take from her fair eyes, the fiery shafts, where with he burns all the World;
and yet I by this table see, a mortal has by force of his imagination, shared
reputation with a god, and burns me with the shafts, which he has drawn, from
the incomparable Orazias charms.

Piroxenus, seeing that in carnest I was taken, did what he could to please my
passion, which, by so great a beauty, was so justly caused, and was the first,
that to deliver me from my continual thoughtfulness, advised that we might
secretly make a journey to Narsinga; and that it was high time, to manifest our
selves in some brave action; and that besides, an universal peace being
throughout the Countries of Alcidaris, we should go some where else, to seek
adventures, both of Love, and Arms. Judge you, fair Princess, if this were
acceptable counsel, yea or no, and whether a greater testimony, of my deer
Cozins friendship could be given me. I must confess if he prevented me, it was
only by his speech: for all my purposes were that way bent, and if I had been
so unhappy, as that he had been of other mind, I must confess before him here,
I should have hazarded to leave him, and that a mere necessity would force my
separation from him, to go join me to the fairest, and most excellent part of
my soul.

After that time, we often used to retire in private, that more freely we might
talk of my new passion, and to consider how to steal away unknown; but we could
not so conceal our entertainments, but the wise Evander, who at all hours came
into my Closet, did surprise us, and had learned something of my Love, but not
of our design; for though in earnestness of talk we might sometimes be loud,
yet held we, at the least noise made, for fear of being discovered. But one
day, looking (I know not how before he entered) through a crany of the door, and
finding ^^our talk some kind of action, he had a mind to hearken to us; but
the thickness of the door, and length of the whole room betwixt us, took away
the sound, except of some few words, and he could collect no more, but that we
spoke of Love, and of a Picture, and of Orazia.

How ever, he was very glad, to see we did begin to rouse our selves a little,
and to find by our discourse, our stony hearts began to mollify. But coming
suddenly upon us, and at an instant hushed, he could not choose but make a
little war upon us, and especially on me. Indeed said he Anaxander, having but
two days been in love, you are a good practitioner, that can reserve your
self, and keep so strict a silence before ^ose, from whom you have not kept
your most concealed thoughts: But if my ears have not deceived me, you should
be rather glad than sorry, that have your Love in your possession, and are
sure, that dainty Picture, will refuse, not one of your embraces.

Verily, Madam, I was never so surpised in all my life, by any accident, as at
his words, and it was great hap, but in the exigent I was, I had from point to
point discovered all our purposes, and conjured him to assist us; but when I
saw he continued on his jesting, and spoke not of our voyage, I guest he had
discovered nothing; so as we were content to keep on sporting with him, without
so much as striving to deny the love whereof he had accused us. However, since
that time, we more reserved our selves: and that at length, we might be free
from those disturbances, our fears, and our continual jealousies had kept us
in, we took a firm, and valiant resolution, to go on with our design, which we
concealed from all the world, except two Gentlemen, that had from youths been
bred with us, and whose entire affections, and fidelity to do us service, we
had known: He whom I took, and who is with me still, is called Almerin, and he
alone wen tout of Campanel with us, because we thought it sit to leave Neander,
(for so was piroxenus Squire called) as a spy, some days at Court, to learn,
what would be said of our departure, and gave him Pala, for a randezvous, which
is some either, or nine days journey off, from Campanel; and for that Town is
in the desert, and near joining to the ountains of Gate, a little from the
apssage to Narsinga, which we went, we thought that few would have imagined we
had gone a way so steep and difficult. We were a thousand times, about to ship
our selves at the Port of Cambaye, but thought the voyage would be overlong by
sea, and happily the King your fathers Court might be an Bisnagar, which would
much shorten our journey, and save us labor to cross over the high Mountains
of Gate, which as we understand, do separate your two Kingdoms; and have such
property, as to divide the Winter, and the Summer so betwixt them, as when it is
could at Bisnagar, it is warm at Narsinga.

We were the more invited to go by land, for the defire we had, to pass
through the Kingdom of Decan, which lay in our way; whereof we had heard great
praises, and that among all the Royal Courts of Asia, there was not any which
exceeded that, whereof the gallantry was a the highest degree that could be
wished, and Ladies courteous as in any part of the World, we therefore resolved
to go that way, in some sort to refresh our selves, as to observe, whether it
were a truth was said of it, that of all parts of India, men were best on
horsoback there, and where all the Rules of fencing (which my Couzin and my
self knew very well) were best observed.

We therefore, Piroxenus and my self, when as the Moon was one night very
favorable to our flight, stole out of Campanel, without more company then
Almerin, for we had left Meander in the City; and when we had advanced some ten
Leagues forward, I found my Cousin had had more foresight than I; for doubting
that we might be followed when 'twas day, being found wanting; he had commanded
a servant of his called Madaron, whose honesty he long time knew, to go two
days before, with a couple of excellent horses, upon one of which, himself was
mounted, and led the other in his hand, and gave him charge to stay for us, at
a little Town called Oby, which is some twenty Leagus from Campanell, upon the
road of Pala, and was Neanders Rendezvous. After the whole nights travel, and
that day began to break, Piroxenus seeing me troubled, for the fear I had left
they might send through all parts after us, he told me of his providence, and
taking provender out of a Sck, which Almerin carried for our horses, gave them
an hours space to breath; and ^id as fast as we could possible, till we had
teached Oby, and commanded Almerin to come but slowly after us, and a far off,
as well because we had no fresh horse for him, as that, if we were followed on
that way, where near he had a house, he might diver^ their course; and when he
should be come where Madaron was at Oby, they should find us in the City
Bialis, which is from thence two little journeys, where we would expect them,
and with earnestness enjoined them, from thence forward, to forget our names,
of Anaxander, and Piroxenus, and to call us Taxilus, and Cleantus. Some two
hours after the sun was up, we ariv'd at Oby, where we left our horses with
Madaron, who had sufficient time, to walk, and refresh them, before Almerin
could come; and after we had eaten somewhat, making great have, and three or
four times resting our horses, and our selves, and feeding them with what we
had, we got to Bialis, withal the speed we could.

Next day, our people, without any accident came to us, and we altogether,
undiscovered, took our way to Pala. We had not long been there, before Neander
came unto us, from whom we learnt, in how great trouble, all the court was, at
our absence; and that indeed, the first two or three days, they were not so
much troubled, because they thought we had been gone about some secret
wantonness: but when the King perceived, no news was to be had of us, his
anger mastred him, and if the Queen had not restrained him, he would have gone
beyond the bounds of Fatherly affection; These are said she, but tricks of
youth, which are to be excused; and me thinks no strange matter that young
Princes, living in continual restraint, run out a little, and a while seek the
freedom which our Court affords them not. It Is altogether contrary, said the
King, for Princes ought not to commit such follies; Their Governors, and good
instructions given them, together with their births, should make them old
before their time, and being enlightened as they are from every where, their
meanest actions should be squared so, as to be good examples for the world; and
me thinks they that cannot rule their passions, are unworthy to have power of
men.

But neither King, nor Queens displeasure, might compare with sage Evanders
discontent. That Grave old man, who loved us only, and who amongst his other
excellent Sciences, had also cunning in the art of divination, which among the
Persians is a common thing, had found among his other Speculations, that
Piroxenus and my self, should at two several times, run hazard of an
extraordinary, and a violent death; and fearing lest effects might follow his
predictions, remembering us so often to retire in private, and to have heard us
speak of Orazia's Picture, he suspected, we might secretly have undertaken a
voyage to Narsinga, and more, he was confirmed in his belief, and apprehension,
when he understood, that, that same night, wherein we had departed, a Ship
having the wind at large, had from the Port of Cambaye, hoysed Sail toward the
Isle of Zeilan; Where the War was hot against the King of Maldives; that either
for renown, we would go serve under one of those two Kings, or else, land i^
some one of the King of Narsingas havens, whose neighbor, and all^^, and
friend the King of Zeiland is. Having a good while thought thereon, he went and
told the King of his opinions, who presently believed we had indeed that way
escaped, and protested, that the Captains life should answer, as he thought,
for carrying us away without his leaves Wherefore a Post was preently
dispatched from Campanel to Cambaye, with directions that he should set forth
with speed, a light Vessel, to seek afer that, which three or four days past
had put to Sea, and for more surety, he dispach'd another Messenger by Land to
Bazaim, to send out another Vessel, to surprise that, which he thought had
wafted us; and that if happily the first might not light on him, the other
should not choose but meet him: however, they were charged to go as far as
zeilan in their chase, and that before he could have doubled the Cape of
Commorin they should have some news of him.

Here, Madam, you may see, what news Neander brought us from the Court, for
which cause having called a Council among us, we resolved to put off our
journey to Narsinga for a while, and spend delightfully some time in the King
of Decans Court, which sometimes is at the City of Bider, and otherwhiles in
the great City of Visaporus; and because those goodly cities, are far in the
Country, we conceived, they would not come, and seek us there, and that after
the time were past, wherein those that were gone in quest of us, had in vain
enquired in Narsinga; we would freely go on our jouruey, under the names which
we had newly taken, of Taxilus, and Cleontus.

Wherefore we departed from Pala, and used such industry, as we arived at
Bider, where we thought to find the King of Decan, as being the chiefest City
of his Kingdom: But we understood, that he was but a little while before,
retired to Visaporus, which, over and above, that it is better fortified with
men, and walls, is likewise seared in an air, more temperate, and pleasing; And
here, Madam, it is fit I tell you something of this poor Prince, who not long
ago was Master of so many Countries, and such mighty wealth, and through his
own default, has caused the ruin of himself, and them. I doubt not but you
know the whole story of his life, and therefore will I say no more of his
behaviors, nor his doings, than to the purpose of my History.

This miserable King, who cared for nothing more, than how in ease, and
quietness to spend his time, and buried in voluptuousnese, being, both lasie
in his nature, and distrustful, even to fear his own Children, whose, names
were, Demonax the one, as he himself was called, and Araxus the other; that at
greater case, he might enjoy his soft contentments, cast the burden of his
State from off himself, and gave the charge of his twelve great Provinces, to
twelve of his freed slaves, upon condition, that each of them should send his
Eldest Son into the City of Visaporus, there to remain as pledges to him,
where, for greater safety, he retired.

He had besides those Sons, a Daughter of exceeding beauty, who, as the
Kingdom, and the City she was born in^ was called Orixa, for in former time,
King Demonax his father and the Queen his wife went thither great with child,
as then she was, to wash her in the River Ganges, which passes through the
Kingdom of Orixa, and has this secret virtue, that it cleanses from all sorts
of sins; and I have understood, the King your father, whose it is, draws a
large tribute from it; for the Pilgrimage is famous through the Indes.

But, for it does not appertain to my discourse, I say no more thereof, to tell
you only in the pursuit of my History, that we went from Bider unto Visaporus,
where we were sure to find the King of Decans Court; and just as we arrived at
the great City, we heard many Trumpets, sounding flourishes, with distinct
pauses betwixt each flourish, and three times renewed, and this within the
great place, where stands the Royal Palace, and after, saw a great man clad in
a rich Coat of Arms, accompanied by four Heralds; and because, after having
gone three or sour times about, at the sound of those Trumpets, and brazen
Drums, they at length stayed about the middle of that place, we drew us near,
to understand what they would say, and heard, that one of them, with louder,
and resounding voice than the rest, uttered these following words.

Be it known unto all Princes, Lords, Knights, Are among the Indians as the
Janissaries among the Turks.
Naires, and their Chiefs, throughout the whole Kingdom of Decan, and Malabares
adjoining, and of whatever Kingdom, or Country else, excepting such as have
been banished, or are enemies unto our Sovereign Lord King Demonax, that the
eighth day from this, being he twentieth of the Moon, in this same place, shall
be a great defiance at arms, amost noble, and magnificent Combat sought with
Darts, and Lances, in their fit caparisons, with Crests, Coats of Arms,
Foot-cloaths, and Targets garnished with sine devices, as bra^ Combatants,
according to the ancient customs of this Kingdom; and as Chiefs; Prince Demonax
defendant on the one side, and Araxus as ass^ilant on the other, all for the
glory of the King, and celebration of the happy day of his nativity, which
falls to be the twentieth of this Moon; And for those causes, know ye moreover,
Princes, Lords, and Knights, and Capains of Naires, as well of this Kingdom, as
whatever Country else, who for the love of honor, shall desire to excrcise
themselves, and for the pleasure of the Ladies; that they must think thereon,
and choose them Godfathers, that their names may be written down before the
Judges of the Combat; of whom they must be taught the rules, and that they
will be more encouraged to glory, when they knew, the Ladies purpose to bestow,
most fair and costly prizes, as well upon the Darts, and Persian Lances, as the
Fencing after the custom of Molabar, which will be exercised the following
days.

As soon as this Proclamation by the Herald was concluded, we withdew our
selves out of the throng that compassed him, extremely pleased, that an
occasion should so soon be offered after our arrival wherein our skill might
be commended; and knowing very well the Language, for the great conformity it
has with ours, having enquired of the first we met, where we ruight be
conveniently lodged, we were conducted by one of them unto a house of his,
which was both great and spacious, where certain other strangers were already
entertained, which flockt from at all parts there, against the great solemnity.

During the time which we were there, before the Combat; because the Herald in
the en dof his Proclamation, had prescribed the manner of the furnitures, and
Crests, Coat^armours. Saddles, Frontstalls, Foot-cloaths, Targets, Darts, and
Spears, we fitted all, and went, and ranked our selves under the Prince Araxus
Standard, who was Chief of the adventurers, and having a good liking to us,
although he took us but for Persian Knights, assigned us Godfathers, and
entertained us with all manner of civility; and because he would not discontent
a great many Lords of note, who had as well as we, disposed themselves under
his colors, he privately passed a most obliging complement unto us,
endeavoring to make us think he held his party much enforced by our helps. But
as you shall perceive, that argument of his friendship, cost us very dear, for
from that time his Brother Demonax grew very jealous of us, and delighted ever
since, to show us public scorns, and sought by all occasion how to hurt us:
But we were comforted, to see, how even to his own Sister Orixa he showed a
very ill affection; because she could never endure his Couzin the Prince
Palandurus love, whom Demonax esteemed, and favored all he could: and this
withdrew him from his Sisters friendship wholly, with a protestation, that at
length she should repent the scorn she had of his dear friend.

To come again to my discourse, after, according to the order, and the ancient
custom of Decan, the defendant, and assaylant, the Judges, and the Heralds, had
made a pompous entrance into the City together, with the Knights, who had
disposed themselves, to eithers Standard, the night before the Eve unto the
Sports, and Combats, the Ladies, by the Queens commands, assembled in the
Palace hall to Dance, of whose pomp, it may be, Madam, if I speak a word, or
two, it may not be unpleasing.

At one end of the room, there was a Theater erected, where the Queens State
was placed; and over it, did sparkle, twelve Candlesticks of Rnbies, and of
Saphirs, mixed together, filled with an infinite number of Waxlights; about it
were three degrees of seats, above each other, where the Princesses, the Ladies
of honor, and the Queens Maids were set; and above all, the Queen her self,
upon a Chair of black Velvet embroydered with Pearl, was raised about the
middle of the most eminent degree, and on her right hand, sat the Princess
Orixa.

All the Ladies that should dance, were clad in a clean other habit, than their
custom, and which they never used, but on such days of ceremony, or of
public feasts.

First, they were dressed in their hair, with a number of little flowers, and
great sprigs of Silver, came out at the middle of their Garlands, made of
Pearl, and Diamonds; their veils were made of cloth of Silver, strewed with
little Pearl, and edged round with great; their Gowns of white Satin,
embrodered with Gold, and Silver, and throughout in works of greater Pearl,
whose hanging sleevers were likewise covered, and their coats about below; the
edges were in scollops, and hemmed about with Pearl, and above all the dressing,
the Gold and Silver embrodery, was so raised, as it seemed to be of Goldsmiths
work. They had all of them a kind of great band, after the Persian manner,
with peakes and big Pearl hanging at them; The shining of the precious stones
which were in their chains, joining with the gliftring of Gold about their
clothes, did diversely multiply the reflections of the light which came from the
twelve Rubie, and Saphir Candelsticks, and of thirty more of Crystal ena^^^
milled with diverse colors, which gave light to all the rest of the Hall,
where, both the Court, and City-Ladies had their places.

Right opposite unto the Queens, was likewise raised a Theater for the King,
who had on either hand, the two Princes, Demonaz, and Araxus; and at their
feet, were all the Knights of note, almost in the same order, that the Ladies
were disposed, as well the Subjects of that Kingdom, as the Strangers, who were
come to honor that feast, all of them richly clad, and glistring, with the
luster of their Pearl, and Diamonds, and Rubies, which they wore in skarffs.
The Master of the ceremonies, by Araxus commands, gave us our places; and
though our habit was not so costly as the rest, because we had not time to
invent them richer, or more brave; for Piroxenus and my self had spent our time
in practicing the Persian manner of dancing; as soon as we began to move they
all rose up to note our action, which was accompanied with a particular good
grace: and the Princess Orixa, after the Country custom coming to take me,
and commanding me to lead her a Dance, I so far pleased her with my fashion,
and my Complements, that from that time, she showed me more of her good will,
than I desired she should; and truly I may say, that fatal enterview, was the
original of hers, and my misfortune.

I will not busy my self, Madam, to describe unto you here, all the figures of
the Combat at that feast, and public joy, although their manner were the
finest of the world, their entries stately, and the form of their field, the
most glorious that I ever saw; becoming such as often exercise such
gallantries, and who were held the most expert of all Asia, and happily of all
the world, as well in horsemanship, as all brave exercises used on foot, to
give delight and recreation unto Ladies.

It suffices me to tell you, that after Piroxenus, and I, had in the combat
of Spears, well acquitted our selves, under araxus Sandard, which Combat was
performed after the Moorish fashion, and the Persian, and wherein I was in my
fathers Court well exercised, I was amazed, when the Dancing began, as on the
former night, the Princess Orixa waied on, by six fair Ladies, and accompanied
by the Judges, and the Heralds, came, and staid her, just before that place of
the Scaffold, where I was, and the King of Arms who went before her breaking
the silence, made me this complement aloud, before them all.

Taxilus, observe thy worth, and glorify thy self before this famous assembly,
seeing a stranger, and unknown among us, as thou art, thou have been judged
worthy of the prize, disputed by the Combat of Spears, which here the
beauteous Princess Orixa, daughter to our great King Demonax comes to preent
thee, waited on, by the impartial'st judges of the World, which show, that
favor is not used in this Country, and that the virtue, rather than the
greatness of the Combatants, all whom thou have exceeded by thy skill, is here
preferred; wherefore receive this prize which our Princess prays thee to
accept, and descend from thence, that as the ancient custom of this Kingdom is,
thou may by her be honored.

I then in haste came down, and the Princess opned the prize, which was a big
Ruby of great value; I bowed my self very low to thank her for the honor which
she did me, and to kiss her hand; but in such ceremony she used to kiss the
conquerours face. In truth I was much taken with the favor, and yet more, when
afterward my name was with a common, and loud voice borrowed from one to
another through the Hall. Then preently the Trumpets sounded (which were Gold,)
to cause the noise to cease, and the Princess commanded me to lead her a
Dance, where she appeared so beautiful, and sweetly graced, as that Piroxenus
most unhappily inclined to wish her well, as she did me; for though indeed his
parts were greater, and more worthy fo her love, than mine, yet being prevented
by a former passion, having seen me first, she was not able to turn her heart,
or thoughts, upon another; and I, who had your living image printed in my
heart, and taken up with a preoccupated will to give my self to you, I could
not fall in admiration of that unhappy Princess: charms; who without lying
might have ravished any save my self.

Next day, with just the like order, as the former, was the Combat performed
with Darts, where, whether I may say my god, or evil fortune would, I know
not, I won again the prize: for being again presented by that fair Princess:
hand; enjoy, said she softly, in kissing it, courage Cavallier, there are other
manner of prizes fitted for you.

Truly Madam, I was at these words extremely stricken; for though I knew, there
were other prizes to be played the days following, and that, it may be, she
might have meaned them, which for my skill I might promise my self; yet that so
great a Princess, should whisper me in my car, as it were, a thing which a
mere effect of Courtesy, might suffer her to speak aloud, I could no^ choose
but take it for an extraordinary testimony of good will, which since, she has
sufficiently declared.

Piroxenus who had still eyes upon her, as the first and only object of his
passion, saw well enough that it was on me, she cast her wisher, and her in my
ear, (for I never concealed any thing from him) then was he troubled to the
purpose, and cried out upon his evil fortune: dear A^^^xander, said he to me,
the gods bear record, that thy interests have alwai^s been more dear to me,
than my own; and that if thou had the least pretension of the world to the
most fair O^ixa, though my love be violent toward her, yet should it give
place to my friendship: but since thou think not on her, and that thy heart
burns of another flame, why have not I the fortune, which thou scornest? and
how extravagant is that Gods humor, who delights to trouble us all three, by
causing in our hearts, affections so unequal? Now, loving him (fair Princess)
as I did, and guessing at his passion by my own, I swear I suffered more than
half his torment; and that in some sort, I might swage his grief, I promised
from that time, to do him all the faithful service that I could.

But it fell out, that in those three days following which were ordained for
Fencing, all the advantage, fell on us: for there being three prizes allotted
for that exercise, which is most frequent among the Indians, sometimes
performed pillmell, sometimes as Duel, one rival against another, by permission
of the Ladies loved. Fortune would have it, that Araxus, Piroxenus and my self,
obtained them all, which much increased Demonax his jealousy, and bettred much
the love, his brother bare to us. When the Princess presented me the priz:
which was again adjudged me, she gave me yet more favor in her looks, than
formerly; but then her eyes eprform'd the office of her heart, and tongue, and
by a sweetly mixed smile, of love and joy, did more than ever make me
invitation to her love. She wondered greatly, that among her many
demonstrations of good will, she could perceive no alteration in my eyes, and
that I still contained my self, and passed not the bounds of common
complements: but as she flattred her self in her passion, she did with case
persuade her self, that it was only fear that made me silent, and imputed all
my back warkness, to the respect I ought her quality. Thus by her foolish
thoughts deceived, she let her motions sway her wholly, and without dread of
that severe, and rigorous Law, which did unpardonably condemn to death, that
daughter of the Royal blood, who should admit the love of any private man; the
violence of her passion, making her more bold, than either her age, or sex, or
her condition did allow of; she resolved what ever happened, to discover to me by
letter, what she thought, she had not, by her eyes, her actions, and her words,
enough declared, and willing to oblige her Nurse (whose help she needed) unto a
secrecy of so great weight, and dangerous importance: when she perceived, how
by her good, and solid reasons she resisted her; No, no, said she to her, my
Nurse, the resolution is already taken, and in this matter, where alone the
preervation of my life depends, I rather crave your help, than ask your
counsel; thou art the creature only, whose assistance, I can dare to ask,
because thy faith, and thy affection are so known unto me; if thou fail'st me
at this need, said she, in tears, some sword, or poison shall not. These very
words, she since told Piroxenus of, who never concealed any thing from me, from
whom I learnt besides, that thus her Nurse did answer her. Will you then Madam
(said she) love a man unknown, against your Country Laws; and more, against the
Laws of honor and civility? having been still, till now, a great example of
virtue among us, will you disgrace your good deeds, by your hasty taking of a
husband, whom you must follow, through strange Countries, without rest, or
honor, and it may be without maintenance? what so disordred appetite, persuades
you to imprint this blot upon your royal house, and ever after to dishonor it?
neither is that the least that may befall you; for if it should be known, you
cannot shun a shameful death; but that the King your father, and the Princes
your brothers, grown your enemies, will cause you to be burnt alive, a
punishment inevitable to those Princesses who from their blood, do derogate by
an unequal choice.

How mother, replied the Princess, think thou, that I, in Taxilus, have
chose a common man, what though with us he be unknown, his words and actions
show he is of royal birth, and though I had no other witness of his blood, than
my own courage, assure thy self, it is too great, to be subjected to a private
man's affection; and that, that heart, whose virtue thou have so admired, did
never give so great a testimony, as when first it burned in so true a love, and
sighed for Taxilus. Help me I pray thee therefore, for whether, after I have in
thy presence, promised to Marry him, it be most fit to keep our passions
secret, or else to follow him through deserts, to avoid the King my fathers
fury, but especially my eldest brothers, who does hate me mortally; I never
will forsake his company, nor reply thou more hereto, except thou wish me dead.

The poor woman knew it would be labor lost to make her more remonstrances;
and seeing, to how dangerous extremity, she was reduced, finding her self
distracted by so several apprehensions; her dear affection to her, and the
pity of her tears, prevailed, at length, more with her, than the fear of her
destruction, and the ruin of her honor; and for that cause furthered her
desires in all she could, and so far forth, as to make choice of Callias, her
own son, to serve, in that so dangerous a secret, which but to me alone, she
would be glad to have communicated, had the modesty of sex, and eminency of her
condition suffered her, to call me to the consummation of our Wedding by her
personal demands, to which how ever she ordained her self, then presently, and
boldly, sent me Callias with a letter to this purpose, with command to bring
her back, my answer.

Orixas letter to Taxilus.
SInce in Loves enterprises, thou art less courageous, than at Arms, and the
respect thou seem to bear my quality, compels me to prevent thee, know, that
I love thee Taxilus; and that however, thou among us, art a stranger, and
unknown; thy noble actions have enough declared thee, to oblige her, who has
scorned so many Princes Loves, Orixa, to choose thee, notwithstanding all the
Kingdoms Laws, and good behavior, for her husband. If thou do only worth my
sex, no doubt but my proceeding will (...) too bolds, but in reflecting on thy
own (...), and parts accomplished. I know, th^^ (...) allow my choice, and like
the freedom (...) thee with, to come this night, where Callins, my Nurses son,
will, with all says, will secrecy conduct thee, by the favor of obserity;
and when in presence of my saithfull Nurse, (who shall be with me, only to
receive thy oath) thou shall have sworn thy self my lawful husband, thou shall
find me in my bed, without more company, than thy beloved Idea, and without
other light than Cupids Torch, whom I already have conjured to rule in chief
our Weddings, which with small ceremony, but great affection I accommodate.


Callias, who was of the Princesses household, and had a mind to quit himself
with reputation of the charge was given him, cunning, and wary as he was, comes
in the morning to my lodging, and having asked to speak with me, from the
Prince Araxus, says thus, softly in my ear, while Piroxenus, and our people
were in presence, I present you, (Sir) with this letter in private, because I
know you cannot read it without some expressions: it contains a secret of
importance, which does promise better fortune than you look for; but, ere you
do receive it, I am charged to crave your answer, which I will come to fetch
within this hour: because, I know, the secret joy it brings you, will require
some time to meditate thereon.

After this complement delivered me, which yet, I could not comprehend, he went
forth of my chamber, and I, retired into my Closet, where calling Piroxenus, I
in his presence opened the Princess letter, which put us both into
astonishment; and truly Madam, Callias was very right, when he told me, I
should not read it without some disorder in my self: for how could I but be
troubled, to perceive, that so great, and virtuous a Princess, so much honored
me in vain, by an election of such grace and favor, and did lose her time,
seeking that heart, which was already none of mine. As for Piroxenus, where the
declaration, which the Princess made me of her passion, should in likelihood
have cooled his, and made it less, it in such sort increased it, and the
incredible sense he had thereof, wrung from him such complaints, and
lamentations, as my heart was touched for him, and I could not choose, but that
my tears would show it: but when I saw, his grief had choked his speech, and
that with dying eyes which seemed to crave my help, he turned toward me, I
confess that tenderness did blind me, Madam, and drew guilt upon me of a
crime, which in your presence I accuse me of; provided it be sin, to knit two
souls by an extraordinary means, which by Loves tyranny were set asunder. Do
not torment thy self, dear Piroxenus, (said I to him,) nor by thy woes, which
slay me, cast us headlong into one destruction, much had I rather, since thy
remedy is in my power, than that thou should be more afflicted, hazard my
honor for thy welfare, which than life, has ever been to me more dear. Seeing
thou can not then command thy passion, nor my self obey that which the
Princess shows, I will choose rather to be false to her, than fail in duties of
that friendship which I vowed thee from my infancy; but wherefore false, for
sure, I think I shall oblige her, if I send thee, to supply my room, and that
she cannot take offense: thou art, as I am, born a Prince, thy qualities
exceed, and, where in me, she thought to have made choice but of a Knight, thou will hereafter make her know, by telling what thou art, that by the gods
allowance, and beyond her thoughts, she shall have met her equal. Courage than
Piroxenus, nothing is to be feared, in thy enterprise, save the beginning; and
since she lets me know, that Callias by the favor of the night must guide me,
and that there shall no other torch enlight her chamber but what Love provides,
thou may without discovery pass in my room, and steal thee our again, before
the day reveal thee. If in this counsel, I offend the gods, I hope they will
forgive me, when they call to thought, that for thy safety and the Princess
life I have contrived it.

Ah my dear Anaxander answered he, half wakened from his swounding, by my
words, how is thy friendship helpful? and the comfort thou administrest, a
dear and real proof, of perfect love: but do not think thy honor is engaged by
the counsel thou do give me, nor that the fair Orixa, taking me for thee, can
be abused, since I am certainly, thy other self; and for like reason, do not
think the fruits which I shall reap under thy name from her embraces, will be
less sweet, or acceptable, than if I were received to her bed, as Piroxenus,
or Cleontus. But, that in every thing, she may not be deceived, since Callias
is to fetch an answer to her letter, let me have leave, to write it for thee,
and that promising to come unto her, I may make it good.

Madam, I granted his desire, and let him write his letter in my Closet, which
he had newly ended, when as Callias came to take it from me, I told him, that
he should not fail to come to me at midnight, and that I would expect him in
the door of my lodging, to be guided by him, where the Princess had appointed,
which secretly he promised me to do. But it is impossible to tell you her excess
of joy, when with a smiling countenance, at his return he yielded her account
of his so fortunate negotiation, but chiesly, when he gave her this deceitful
testimony of my love, which thus was written.

Cleontus letter to the Princess Orixa.
IF I have any cause to wonder at the honor you were pleased to do me, by the
favor of your letter, it is rather through the meanness of my own deserts, than
any way the freedom of your words. But since without accusing your choice, I
cannot condemn the meanness of my merit, I must think, (or else accuse of
error, your opinion of me,) that I am worthier than others are, and that the
favor I received, is not a dream, or an illusion, since I keep its marks. I
will reserve the full expressions of the honor you have done me, until we
meet, if heaven do so much favor me, as that for excess of joy I die not by
your side, and send you these, but to advertise you, I look for Callias with
impatience, and that your faithful Taxilus, with closed eyes, is ready to obey
you.


Thus Piroxenus, and the Princess, passed the rest of that day in sweet
disquiets for their amorous expectation, and when the night was come, Callias,
whom I had promised to find me in my door, and by a certain sign exchanged by
us, took Piroxenus in my stead; who only in his nightgown, followed his
faithful guide until they came unto the foot of a Ladder made of Cords, and
fastened at Orixas Chamber window; and after notice taken by him of the places
he had passed, that he might not, in returning, miss his way, Callias
delivered him the key of the little Garden, and so softly took his leave of
him. This happy Lover, who as yet proceeded in some trouble, for the fear he
had of being known, was more than ever bold, when he perceived the room was
without light, and that he saw a hand out of the window making sign to him to
hasten up; which with incredible diligence he did, and found the Nurse, who did
receive him, in whose presence, he cast himself upon his knees before the
Princess bed; and after having kissed her hand, and thankt her for the extreme
honor she had done him, to elect him for her husband, he protested to her all
the faith and perfect love, that could be thought on, and did tell her, that it
may be she would less repent her, of her choice, when she should know his
birth.

Here Madam you will pardon me if I omit to tell you, of the transports, and
the sweets of their embraces: for besides, that manners may forbid me, how
should I well enough discribe a pleasure, which even he who tasted it, confessed,
he could not worthily enough express. I only think it fit to tell you, how
that Love to be revenged upon them, for the sweet deceit they used toward
him, was often on the point to kill them both with joy.

They spent five or six nights in such contentments, whiles Piroxenus, fearing
to convert Orixa's love (which taking him for me she witnessed to him,) into
hatred, dared not tell her who he was. Mean time, my heart, which did aspire
but to your love, lived in continual pain, and daily must my eyes belie it,
and by stolen embraces, make the Princess think, 'twas really my self, that did
enjoy her as her husband; I never for complacency, used so great art, and
though I should a thousand times expose my life for Piroxenus, he could not ow
me more, than for the part I played in Visaporus, to advance his love, whiles
my soul languisht after you, and with impatience burnt to go my voyage to
Narsingus.

But as impossible it is, that man's prosperity, and pleasures, can last in one
condition long, without disturbances of fortune: it happened, at the end of ten
or twelve days, that our poor Lovers were discovered by a treason very
strange. Callias had used, since this secret employment, often to frequent our
house; he played for much, and was a man of wit enough, but of small judgment,
and less courage. Now it fell out, that being on a time, at dice with Almerin,
and Neander, who are those two Gentlemen that went the voyage with us, they
dissred on a cast, Callias and Almerin, which, as all truth of reason was,
Neander (being third,) judged on his fellows side, at which, Callias who was
arrogant, and of a naughty humor at play, was moved in such sort, as he fell
into insolent, and injurious terms, and though ignoble, and of low descent he
was, he fell into comparisons; Thou poor fellow, said Almerin to him, if thou
were out of my Masters Lodgings, whom I honor, I would both kick thee, and pull
out thy Tongue. My gallant seeing himself so ill handled, went away in great
rage, and made complaint to a certain camrade of his, who was indeed a man of
valor, that such an affront was offered him, and prayed his help to take
revenge by killing his enemy. That young man, who would for nothing of the
world have committed such a baseness, advised him to revenge himself in way of
honor, and offered, that he would call Almerin to meet him with his sword: which
he was fain to accept, but notwithstanding all the power he used on his
cowardly disposition, he never had the heart to meet him at the place
appointed, for which his camrade, who had challenged Almerin, excused himself
extremely to him, and Neander also, who had served as second, protesting whiles
he lived, to have no more to do with such companions.

But Callias, who was stuck; as well the man may be, that loses honor, and good
name, contriving deadly vengance in his thoughts, but wanting boldness to
perform it, thought at last, to use the power, he believed he had with me by
reason of his trust, and that undoubtedly he had my life and honor in his
hands, to make me put off Almerin; for this cause he came to me, and concealing
his quarrel, made me a long discourse, which for troubling you I will not
repeat, but issued from a great and notable subtility of wit, to make me
understand that Almerin betrayed me; that he had discovered my Loves, and that
it was expedient without more inquiry, to put him out or doors; I promised him
to do it, but having learnt the passages betwixt them, I was far from giving
Callias his desire, and was amazed at his baseness. I told not Piroxenus of it,
for the fear I had of angring him, and I confess my folly, not foreseeing what
misfortune might arise. This wicked man, seeing that notwithstanding my promise
to him, I had yet kept Almerin by me, enraged, to see himself dishonored be
those, whose fortune, and whose credit he esteemed himself the author of, was
so much troubled, and his anger so prevailed over him, as he went to Prince
Demonax, whom he knew loved me not very well, and told him he was bound to
reveal a secret to him, which concerned the Crown: In a word, he told him, that
almost every night, I lay as husband, by the Princess Orixa; and that after
the matter was concluded between us, she had made choice of him, for he friend
to rely on, how that he had seemed very willing; but that he could not choose,
but presently come and give him notice of it; that it was very easy to
surprise us in bed together, where he assured him, I came three, or four times
a week, by a Ladder of ropes, fastened at her Chamber window; He moreover, for
securing his mothers life, protested, that she was no way accessory to that
shameful act; He likewise did all he could, to palliate the Princess crime, and
swore most horribly, to make the Prince believe I had suborned her: but could
not for all that, divert the tempest, which that night fell on her. For
Demouax, who, though at the dishonor of his house, was very glad to have that
subject of revenge, against his sister, whom he extremely hated, failed not to
surprise them in bed together, conducted by perfidious Callias, who knocking at
the door of the outward Chamber, where lay the Nurse, he waked her, and having
told her that he had some business of importance to her, the poor woman opened
it unto him, and was amazed, to fee the Prince come in with her son, and eight
or ten men following him. Wonder not mother said the traitor to her, Prince
Demonax is advertised of a disorder which the Princess uses, whereof he knows
you are not guilty: deliver me the key of her Chamber, for he intends to find
her in bed with her minion. The Nurse, more dead, than living, for thus seeing
herself by her own son betrayed, aplying herself to the Prince, Alas Sir said
she, what can your sister Orixa have done? nay, can you have any ill opinion of
her honor? Sweet heart answered Demonax, be not you troubled, I know you are
free: give me but the key, and you shall see you are betrayed as well as we,
and that my sister has dishonored your grave conduct, as well as her own
birth. Piroxenus, whose errant there, was not to sleep, although they spoke
with voices low enough, heard a confused noise of words, and thought at first,
the Nurse was talking to some of the Princess women, who were come it may be to
watch with her in the outward Chamber: but when he perceived they came near the
door, and that the key was put into the Lock. Ah Madam, cried he out, we are
discovered, we are betrayed, and without giving the Princess leave to answer
him, leaving his night Gown behind him, which would but cumber him, besides,
that he had not the leisure to take it with him, he made but two springs from
the bed to the window: and just when as his foot was on the first stop of the
Ladder to save himself, Demonax came in, who seeing the poor Lover flying with
incredible haste: Take him, take the gallant, but take him alive, said he, if
possible, that justice may be done upon him. Presently, three of them went to
go down the Ladder, to obey the command; but Piroxenus who carried his sword in
his hand, had so much reason left him, as in going down, to cut as many of the
rounds of the Ladder, as he could; in so much as those who followed him finding
no footing, fell from the top to the bottom; and had so ill speed, as one of
them burst out his brains, and the other two so crushed their bones, as that our
Lover had good leisure to get to his Lodging.

Meanwhiles, Orixa was in woeful case. That most unhappy Lover, seeing herself
surprised so, and no way able to deny an action, whereof there was such
testimony: being with shame confounded, and possessed with horror, believing that
her Nurse had betrayed her, instead of replying to Demonax abuses, and
endeavoring to dissuade him by entreaties, she furiously beholding him,
snatched at a Daggar by his side, and having taken it, thou cruel Tiger, and
unnatural, whom once I called Brother, I will glut thy rage, said she; and
since the loss, thou think, my honor has sustained, must be accompanied
with my life's catastrophe, I shall at least have thus much comfort, that my own
hands shall be my executioners: which said, she would have stabbed herself, but
was prevented by the Prince, and those of his company, whose power, she was not
able to resist. That night therefore they kept her safe, during which time she
uttered complaints, which might have moved the most inhumane hearts; and I
believe, the Prince himself, whatever hatred he had borne her, or purpose taken
to revenge himself, had sure relented, if he had remaiued in the Chamber: But
he retired, because her tears should not importune him, and in his person would
take order for imprisoning Piroxenus, and left the sorry Lady in the custody of
five or six, who gladly would have hazarded their lives for hers, if so their
duties and their faiths would have permitted them.

The traitor Callias, had no mind to stay among them; he too much feared the
Princess accusations, and his mothers curses: that poor woman seeing her
Mistress in such case, though she were no way made a party in her crime, would
yet accuse her self, and die with her, left being free, and her son author of
the Treason, her sidelity might be suspected. Bind me, said she, to those that
kept her, I am as guilty as Orixa; and might it please the gods, the little
life I have might satisfy for both our crimes: yea cannot spare me without
cruelty, nor think I can outlive her life, who only is the cause I care to
live. No Mother, no, said one of them, Callias has cleared you sufficiently,
and we perceive, what ere you say, proceeds from your affection to the
Princess, and your true feeling of her great misfortune. The Prince has too
great justice to entangle you in her mischance, however you desire to follow
her. But notwithstanding all their reasons, she was so resolved to taint
herself of guilt, by tearing off her hair, and knocking her breast, as the
unfortunate Orixa though so troubled, knew she had no hand in that foul
treachery, and that her son alone was author of it: she therefore in her rage,
had so much wisdom, as not to destroy her, but beheld her with mixed eyes, of
love, and fury. Then as an instant cursing her ill fortune, which had lead her
to the push of losing life, and honor both together, she spoke to those that
watched her, and with wrung hands, and watered eyes, conjured them, that if they
had not heart enough, or rather piety, to kill her, they would at leastwise,
suffer her own hands, to do that last act on her, and prevent thereby the
shamfull death was threatened her. When as she saw she obtained nothing, and
that her begging drew no other issue from them, than their tears: refuse me not
however said she to them this request, to tell me where my husband is, or
what is become of him; that if he be in safety, I may dying have this
consolation, that I leave the sweetest half of life behind me. Whiles she
uttred those complaints, they heard the languishing voices of those who had
been lamed by their falls, and suddenly they ran to see, and found them in the
miserable case I mentioned, and one of them was dead, whom at first sight they
took for Piroxenus: but when they found he had saved himself, they went to
acquaint the Prince thereof, who taking me for the offender, presently besets
my Lodging, where he assured himself I was retired, as in truth Piroxenus,
naked as he was had done; and indeed he much amazed me, when suddenly he brake
my sleep, and told me how his amorous robberies had been discovered; but said
he, because they have not known me, you will be more concerned than I, and I
much fear lest you be here surpised, and may not have the time to justify
your self. Save you then my dear Anaxander, for it is you alone they seek; and
when you shall be safe, I will go tell the King my name, and save the Princess
life, and honor, by presenting him my self, his son.

I well liked his counsel, but also, scarce were my clothes half on to execute
it, when Demonax acompanied with a hundred of the Guard brake open my door; and
without holding at my reasons, bound me and carried me to prison, leaving
Piroxenus free, who kept a tearing, and a raving without being understood. I
was a hundred times about to tell them who I was, and how the matter had been
carried: but I considered, that if they should not give me credit (as no doubt
is, but that a man to save his life will use a hundred slights) that besides
unprofitably I should disgrace my blood, I should embroil my friend for whom I
had been taken; so that because I loved him better than my life, and valued his
preservation above my own, I freely confessed the crime, and was resolved to
die, not knowing how to hinder it.

As soon as it was day, the Princes went to tell the King, of this unhappy
action, and presently the noise of it ran through the City; I will not dwell
here, Madam, on the sorrows, and afflictions of the Queen, when she knew the
lamentable case to which her only daughter was reduced; that daughter, whom so
dearly she had loved, and whose virtue she had had so many former proofs of.
Surely she with exceeding tears lamented the loss of her life, but much more
grieved she for her wounded reputation.

Meanwhile because the crime which was but too certain, might not be long
unpunished, the King, relinquishing all fatherly affection, left his daughter
to the Law, which did condemn her to be burnt alive, with him who was convicted
for enticing her.

The Pile was therefore fitted in the middle of the great place, which made all
the inhabitants of Visaporus tremble with horror; because, though such a Law
had been a long time since established, it never had been executed, but on her
for whom it was first made, which was a sister to one of their Kings, who had
about threescore and ten years past been burnt, for falling in love with one of
her Domestics, whom she married secretly; and this was the first example they
had ever seen; for that the other was so long ago, as that the eldest man among
them scarce remembered it.

Meanwhiles provision was a making for that woeful Tragedy, wherein Orixa and
my self were to be Actors; Piroxenus, who was not accused, and might if he
pleased avoid all difficulties, not enduring I should be exposed to death, for
an offense of Love, whereof himself alone was guilty, Went and cast him down at
the Kings feet, and there accused himself, as he who had seduced the Princess,
and protested, that he was of Royal blood, and that he was both great, and
rich enough to merit her, with multiplied oaths, endeavoring to persuade him
of my innocence. But the Kings trouble, and the rage that ruled him, admitted
not his justifications, nor entreaties. He once knew well enough, that I was he
whom the Princess had made choice of for her husband, and collecting by
Piroxenus discourse, that he had also got into her favors. What, how said he,
that Whore has not been satisfied with one, but given herself over to this
other also, to aswage her lust, there needs no other proof than his confession,
he condemns himself, let him be bound, and all three cast into one fire.

The Prince Arazus, who was near him when be pronounced this sentence, had
still unto that unfortunate day, maintained inviolable his affection to us,
which in several occasions he had testified; and, Madam, I confess that being
in such favor with him, we did very ill, not to make known our selves unto
that gentle Prince, who doubtless had shown favor to my friends desires, and
liked the design of our exchange unto the Princess, who bestowed her love on me
in vain. But Heaven denied it, and Piroxenus still was so respectfull of Orixa,
and so fearful of displeafing her, that notwithstanding I persuaded him, he
dared never to declare himself, expecting always that good office from me, who
was in truth even ready to have done it, when as this mischance surprised us.

Araxus now, who loved us yet, and would have been glad that Piroxenus reasons
were found true, as well for what concerned his Sister, as his love to us,
turned toward the King his eyes, bewraying mercy, and compassion; and when he
would have spoken, not in our excuse, but to attempt at lest to have our
execution deferred, until trial might be made, whether Piroxenus words were
true or no.

How said the King, art thou so simple to believe, that those, who have not
wanted impudence to do me such affronts, do want invention to coin lies? if
this bold man were born a Prince, would he not in ways of honor have sought
for my alliance, and would he have so long remained among us, in a private
quality, without so much as making known himself, to her, whom he confesses so
perfidiously to have dishonored. No, no Araxus, I see thy sister is a
strumpet, and that undoubtedly, those two deceivers, are not the only men that
have had knowledge of her.

But, Sir, replied Araxus, you may please to consider, that this man accuses
himself of the offense as only Author of it, and willingly presents himself to
die to save his friend, whose innocence he offers to make good. O impudent man
said the King, who will defend a fellow taken in the manner; If he comes to
accuse himself, see thou not it is the just permission of the Gods, who
wrought so much his conscience to remorse, and will not have so foul a crime
unpunished. Know Araxus, that the Conscience is a marvelous thing, and that for
want of other witness it often shows it self against our selves. Poor Piroxenus
looking pitifully upon Araxus, would again implore his aid, and make reply to
the great wrong the King had done him; But that he had scarce opened his mouth,
when the King transported with indignation; take the Impostor, said he, from my
presence, and dispatch him with the rest.

Then was he carried to a Prison, till the hour of execution, and more
tormented for my loss than for his own; and when that mournful time was come,
(surely I shake for horror to remember it,) before we parted from the Prison,
they read the sentence of our condemnation, and instantly the Hangman took us,
and all three were bound fast in one Chariot, which was compassed about with
Halberts, and other Officers of Justice, so conducted to the Pile, where, by
that cruel. Element we were to be devoured.

For reconciling of our Consciences, three of the ablest Bramins of the Indes
were allowed us. They did their duty in persuading us to fit for death,
assuring us the mercy of the Gods, and promising a thousand spotless pleasures
after this life ended.

Piroxenus, from the Prison to the place of execution, dared not once to turn
toward us, nor to speak one word, so much cause he found himself of our
destruction: His sorrows had already even as much consumed him, as if he had
endured the flames, so much he grieved, that 'twas not his power, by death to
expiate a crime by him committed, and with his blood, redeem the loss which he
had caused, of those he loved more than all the world.

But surely, Madam, in so great extremity, I could not choose but wonder at
Oriaxes courage, and her resolution, who being still abused with the belief she
had, I was her husband, not able, (being bound,) to cast her arms about my
neck, leaned her head upon my face to give me her last kiss; and seeing that I
showed but little joy at that her testimony of perfect love, which even in
dying she then gave me, and that the apprehension may be of the punishment
might cause forgetfulness of what I ought her: Taxilus, said she, to me, with a
strong voice, and settled countenance, I swear by that same Sun that looks upon
us, and which, we shortly shall behold more near, in Heaven, that I am no way
grieved to die, since thou in death art my companion. One thing there is alone,
that troubles me, and that, to see thee sad, and that thy heart seems not to
hold his wonted seat; can it fall out, that near thy faithful Orixa, thou
should fear death, which ought to be a pleasing passage to a far more happy
life? Let us, my Taxilus, out-brave our evil destiny, and take revenge on
fortune, which does cross our loves, by showing her a courage able to make head
against her, and a resolution brave enough to undergo our evils.

Fair Orixa, made I answer, I invoke even that same Sun, which you have called
as witness of your courage, that my sadness is not for the fear of death, but
from the just affliction I endure, for having as I know abused you: Know you
fair Princess, that in Taxilus you have loved an ungrateful, undeserving, and
perfidious man, who was not worthy of the honor, of so beauteous and so brave
a friendship, and that it is Cleontus who adores you, and whom the Gods have
chosen for your husband: And as for me, behold me not in this small bit of life
that rests us, but to say, I do forgive thee Taxilus, and may the Gods allow
thy soul to rest in peace with us.

The poor Princess, who was praepossest with that strong imagination, that on
me she had bestowed her embraced, marvelously stricken at the change, and that
of love there came not one word from me; Ah Cruel, said she, that in the case
thou art, so near to yield the Gods a reckoning of thy actions, do not
apprehend their justice? thou miserable, do thou then now deny me, because
thou can no longer have me? will thou by scorn revenge thy death, which my
love causes thee? Ah how ill does this wickedness become thy sex, to leave me
in extremity, as if 'twere sin against the Gods, to love a maid that is
unfortunate? Can those be the effects of all thy promises, and of thy faith,
which thou so often have sworn me: thou should, so much have reverenced the
memory of thy faithful Orixa, as to have loved her after death, and have
preserved for ever, her Idea in thy heart; but see, thou giv'st her to another,
when she can be thine no longer, and for a recompense of that incomparable love
which made her hold thee deerer than her honor, or her life, thou will not
suffer her to dye in patience: Thou art not barely pleased, to take the only
comfort from me, which, I dying, had to flatter my self with, of thy pure
constancy, but wilt accuse thy self of treachery, and want of faith, to kill my
constancy, and resolution, that in deep despair I may depart this life.

I would have spoken, to have dispossessed her of that hard belief, and pacify
her thoughts; but that I scarce had uttered the first word, to justify my
self, when with a fiercer, and a more incensed voice, preventing me: No, no,
thou hipocrite, said she, thou double-hearied, thankless, and forsworn Taxilus,
thou art industrious, at the price of innocent Cleontus life, whom, most
injustly thou accusest, to preserve thine own: I call the Gods to witness, that
he never knew me, and that thy self, art only guilty of the crime, for which,
we are all three cond^mned. Thou, may be, think, that those holy men who
hear us, may by thy lies, be drawn to credit thee; and when thou basely bast
turned all the fault upon thy harmless friend, who makes no defense, think
to be free. But though they were so credulous as to believe thy words, and that
it happened, (which the gods forbid) that thou should escape the hangmans hands,
I vow thou should not save thy self from mine; and if before I die I had not
leave to strangle thee, my ghost shall never leave to haunt thee.

More she would have said, but that her sorrow, and her rage, made her
insensible; her eyes and judgment strayed, and her heart and voice, at once
did fall her in the passions of her anger.

Meanwhiles, the Charior which kept always going, was come near the Pile, and
those that guided us, as well the Bramins, as the H^ngmen, were so courteous,
as to leave that miserable Princess in her swounding, being more willing, for
the pity they were touched with, that her grief should kill her, than that
fire, which was already kindled, and moved horror in all those, that did behold
the fear fill spectacle.

But Ladies, for the sequel of this History is yet long, and that the hour is
la^^; may you be pleased, I defer the prosecution till to morrow? the two
Princesses who were equally inflamed to know the rest, seeing the Moon so
favorable to their entertainment: go on, go on, Anaxander said they, and do
not fear our late stay here will cause us scandal; for we sometimes, spend a
good part of the night, as scarless of the air, as our domestics who are
acquinted with the pleasing freedom, of our secret entertainment. No creature
hears us, nor is there entered in the garden, but a little Page, who holds a
Torch, ready to light us at the door, when we return unto our chambers.
Wherefore the Prince, seeing there was no danger in so long communication,
showing all due obedience to the Princesses, proceeded thus in his discourse.

THE INDIAN HISTORY OF ANAXANDER AND OF ORAZIA.
The third BOOK.
THe customary prayers for our souls, before they cast us into the fire, were
begun, when as that Bramin which had served the Princess, and who since her
coming to herself, had leisure to cast, about his sight, looked earnestly into
my face, which formerly he had not done; and being he had spent all the last
year in the King my fathers Court, where he had opportunity enough to note me,
Unfortunate Prince, said he to me, (for doubtless if my eyes deceive me not you
must be Anaxander, son and only heir unto the great Alcidaris King of Guzarat)
what desparation, may have made you hide your name, and birth, and so prefer a
shameful death before a happy Marriage. Born as you are, a Prince, and above
all I know, accomplished; this Kingdom Laws, have no pretension to your life,
since you are he, who have enjoyed the Princess favors. Boldly then show your
self, for it is yet time, and with one word, believe me, you may save her life,
and honor, and your own.

I was exceedingly indeed surpised, for being known; for thought it would have
troubled me enough to die, it would much more have grieved me to live, with
such an infamy, as to have matried a wife, who had been bedded by another, and
who had nere been thought upon by me; the last consideration therefore ruled
me, and thus I answered him.

Good father, you are not the first that have mistaken me for the Prince
Anaxander, a whole City have been deceived as well as you; for coming out of
Persia, whence originally I am, about some twelve, or fifteen months since,
with a purpose to ^ee all the Indes, and especially these parts, where I
imagined not to find such barbarism, I passed through the great City of
Campanol, where King Alcidaris holds his Court, and was amazed t^ see that
every body saluted, and made me great obeisance as I pust the streets. To be
short I found they took me for the Prince, and even the King himself who saw me
was transported at the great resemblance, and detained me there, some while
with him, and sent me afterward away with costly presents.

No, No, said he to me, no halting before Criples, I am no whole City, I have
but two eyes; but you cannot deceive me, for you are even the same I mean, nor
has the apprehension you may have of death, so changed you, but that I know
you Anaxander, and desery the fraud of your disguisement; For howsoever, should
you not be glad, to be esteemed such a one, as if it did not wholly save, it
might at least prolong your life; and see I not, that you deny your self for
nothing else, but through a brute aversion in you to contractia Princess whom
you have abused: but I profess unto you Anaxander, that her life, and honor,
and contentment, are more dear to me than your chimeraes. And therefore
Gentlemen said he, to the Guard, while went by the Chariot, go tell the King,
that for the honor of hi-daughter and his house, it is sit to stop the execution,
and that I have found out a truths which doubtlesly will ravish him with joy.

Then instantly one of the Troop went to adveruse the King hereof, and in the
interim^ some went to a Fountain which was in the great place, for water to
cast into the Princess face, who was scarce come out of her swounding, when a
Captain of the Kings Guard, accompanied with an unknown old man, divided the
throng with an incredible diligence, crying withal their might, to have the
execution stayed, hold, the King commands it.

Immediately a very great noise was moved through the whole assembly, and
followed with great acclamations of joy; for there was not one of all the
company who was not touched at our fortune, and shed not tears for our
distress. And surely all were much amazed at the coming of the Captain of the
Guard for our deliverance, for that the officer who went to advertise the King,
was but then gone, and all men thought he must have had some notice from
elsewhere; which notwithstanding, had not secured our lives, had not the Bramin,
so much observed me, as to know who I was, and sure this last means had arrived
too late, for that there was not any ceremony more, which might retar'd the
execution.

As soon as the Captain (whom they made room for,) was advanced, as far as
where we were, the old man who accompanied him, did all he could to cast his
arms about my neck; but not able to reach me for that the Chariot was somewhat
high. Anaxander said he, my dear Anaxander, my Prince, and Sovereign Lord, what
evil fortune has guided you to this sad place, and you dear Piroxenus, what
have you done to have deserved this cruel usage. My dear children, for so may
I call you, since from your infancy you have had under me your education: is it
a dream, or real act of your ill destiny? which makes me find you in this
lamentable taking; and after such a tract of infinite misfortunes, which have
crossed me since your absence, is it possible, the gods would give me this much
happiness to see you ere I die, and guide me to this Country, at the instant
when you must have otherwise been put to death.

You may imagine (Madam) whether I were surpised, finding it was the wise
Evander who spoke to us, whom the King my father had ordained our Governor, and
unto whom, I bare as great repect as if he had been my father. Wherefore,
howsoever much I was afflicted, and notwithstanding any resolution I had taken
to conceal my self, I could not choose but show him tokens of my friendship, and
answer with my tears, that tenderness of his: so that none doubted but I was
the man, for whom indeed the Bramin took me.

Piroxenus who till then, had neither wept nor said one word, because the
greatness of his grief had drowned his senses, and shut up the powers of his
soul; waking as from a most deep sleep, by the found of Evanders words, and
seeing they were like to be delivered from that danger hich he thought
inevitable, or that at least, their death^should be deferred, he somewhat
recollected his spirits, and exchanging tears and kind embraces with the old
man, he did for him, what for Orixa, he could not.

The Princess only, remained silent, as of all most surprised, and amazed, and
through wonderful displeasure she conceived at my denying her, had her whole
mind astonish d; and though she were recovered from her swounding, yet the
freedom of her actions was so hindered, as she could, nor comprehend, nor relish
any testimony which was given before her, of our births.

The Captain of the Guard, whom the King had sent us, was not in less
amazement, than our selves, to see a thing so strange, and extraordinary. He
had till then, given such way unto Evanders passion, as he had not dared to
hinder his embraces, or his tears; but when he saw us silent, and in admiration
of our misfortunes looking one upon another, he came, and with this complement
saluted me.

Great Prince, said he, for such we now acknowledge you, and soon enough the
Gods have by this sage old man's arivall cleared the truth of your extraction.
The King my Master has in his behalf commanded me to wait on you, and tell
you, that enough, he cannot wonder, why you should choose death, rather than
his alliance, which so many Princes have made suit for. That to excuse the
usage you have had, he thinks not fit; seeing by concealing your names, and
blood, and having knowledge of the Kingdom; Laws, you have your selves
occasioned the trouble you leave had, and may accuse no other. And besides, he
hopes, you will acknowledge what degree he holds among the Asian M^narchs, and
that if for his daughters love you will not, at lest for love of him, and
honor to his quality, you will repair the fault committed by a lawful
marriage. Mean while he has commanded me, to guide you and your friend to
certain lodgings in his Palace.

I would not trouble my self to give him any answer, because it could avail me
nothing, I only followed him where he conducted me, and we parted from Orixa,
both Piroxenus, and my self; not daring to say ought unto her, for fear of
grieving her a new, or waking of her anger: This most unhappy Princess in
despair, for that her crime was known to all the world, and for affronts so
publicly received; but more again for my pretended infidelity, which she could
not possibly forget, would not be carried to her Chamber, and her extreme
affliction reduced her to such pass, as that a thousand times she grieved for
leaving the fire behind her as the only comfort left her, and solt remedy to
end her miseries.

I was impatient to entertain Evander, that I might as well learn from him,
who, so happily had thither guided him, as to be told some news from Guzarat;
and the good man who had the same desires, to be at freedom with us, as soon as
we reposed a little, and had rested in the lodgings were allowed us, to
satisfy my curiosity, began in this sort his discourse:

My deer Children, (for so, although ye be my Lords, and Masters, I from hence
conjure ye to allow my age, and deer affection, to call ye) many sad tears,
and sighs your absence has drawn from me, and little rest, and comfort have I
had, since that unhappy day ye stole so inconsiderately from the King of
Cambaya's Court, where ye were adored of all, how are the Gods most just, in
sending ye the troubles ye have had, to punish ye in some sort, for afflicting
those, who brought ye into the world, and with such tender care have bred ye up.

Know then my Children, that as soon as your departure was discovered in
Campanel, the King aff^cted both with grief and anger, having been told, how
that same night wherein ye had departed, a Ship had gone out of the Port of
Cambaye, and made her course toward the Coast of Zeilan, he doubted, (by
reason of hot Wars late made in that Country against the King of Maldives,)
that ye might have thither gone, to seek occasions, whereunto your Courage
called ye: for this cause he immediately sent after that great Vessel two
light Sailors, from two diverse Ports, and sent as well to seek ye, over land.
But long they were not without news from her which they thought had carried
you away; for she was scarce gone out of the Gulf of Cambaye, to enter into the
great Arabique Sea, when threatened by a tempest, and finding her self near the
Heaven of Bazaim, which is one of the securest of that shore, the Pilots
thought it fit to cast Anchor there, and shelter themselves so long, as till
the storm were over. This stay gave opportunity to that Post, who had been sent
from Campanel to Bazaim, to send out a Ship, to meet that same which had put
all the Court in trouble: But when it was known, that you were not therein;
rage in the King, increast so much, and the Levity of your flight, touched him
so to the quick, as all the love he bare ye, he turned to hate and indignation.
I went about to tell him how I had from certain pieces of your discourse with
one another in your privacies, collected, that ye, had purposed a voyage to
Narsinga, and told him 'twould be very good to send there after you; and that
in case you were not met upon the rodes, it would be very fit to dispatch an
Embassader to the King of Narsinga, that at least ye might not pass as unknown
people, but be received like Princes. No, no, Evander (said he to me) they have
shown themselves unworthy of m^ care or trouble, and I am ashamed, for having
so much already grieved my self for them; let them even pass for inch as they
will, There declare my self from henceforth not to own them: Come, go with me
into the Queens closet, and you shall see that Anaxander has played more the
fool than he is ware of; The Gos be thanked I have another Child; and Heaven is
just in robbing me of him whom I alone did love, and upon whom I built all my
delight and hope.

As soon as we were come into the Queens Cabinet, the King caused Pirobus to
come unto him, who had negotiated his last marriage with that fair Princess,
who brought you into the world, and who had always served him so faithfully;
And sure I was exceedingly amazed, when turning to the Queen, he made her in
our presence this discourse.

Madam, (said he to her,) I know the sorrow you conceive for your Sons Levity
is so great, as that to understand he were no more alive, would no more grieve
you, than his slight: wherefore, because it cannot add a jot unto your present
forrow, I intend to tell you of a thing which does exceedingly concern me, and
which these twenty years I have concealed from all the world, and most
especially from you.

You may remember, Madam, when first I sent you Pirobus in Embassage, to seek
you for my wife, you, after having courteously received him, gave him an answer
somewhat cold, by framing an excuse touching your brothers death, (Spimantus,)
who because he had been dead two years before, finding that reason insufficient
to oppose my just demand, he was desirous to instruct him better in your truer
meanings, and understood by one of your chief Statesmen, that the sole
consideration which you stuck on, was, that by the Queen Berenisa, my first
wife, I had a Son; and that my heir already born, you would not suffer that
your Children, should be second in affection, or degree to any: This being
returned me by my faithful Pirobus, I seemed to take no notice of it: but
after some time was past, we both agreed together, that if I meant to compass
my desire in that suit, where-on depended all my happiness, I must needs send
away, my Son, and spread a noise that he was dead. And judge you, Madam, to
what extremity I loved you, being compelled to take so contrary a resolution to
the laws of nature. For this cause, I commanded a Coffin to be laid (with
Royal pomp) into the earth, and suffered none, in forty days to see me, that
I might better act the part of a lost Father. Mean while I gave my Son in
charge to Pirobus, whose name was like mine own, Alcidaris, not to be sent so
far away, but that I might, when I desired, hear often of him. He had
acquaintance with an Arabian Merchant, and an honest man, named Eurimedes, who
was most frequent in the City of Deu, one of the best havens of my Kingdom, and
teaded to Cambaye, where at that time he was. To him he went, and gave that
pledge into his custody, which for your love I had abandoned; He told the
Merchant, how he had received that child from a woman of great quality,
commended him to his best cate, and that he might be bred among his own, and
told him, one day it m ight happen, that a worthy recompense might grow unto
him; In the inferior, because he might be known again, and for he had no mark
about him, Pirobus made one upon his arm, where he imprinted the Arms of
Cambaye with a needles point, and the joyce of a certain herb which never wears
away; which done, he does again commend him to the Merchant, whom, that he
might the better love the child, and be more careful of him, he enjoined to
beslow his own name of Eurimedes upon him; In so much, as very often I have
heard of him, and also known the Merchants care, as well for the great p^y^
cause him every year to receive, as for the love he bears to Pirobus, to whom
he thinks he is obliged for that favor.

But Madam, (said the King moreover,) the Gods can bear me witness, I had taken
your deer Anaxander into so great affection, as I forgot the love I ought his
Brother; and if he had well behaved himself, I think, his humor, which beyond
all others that I know, delighted me, together with my wonderful affection to
your self, had so much won upon me, as I had made him heir to all my three
Crowns: but seeing he has shown himself so giddy-headed, and so ill advised,
as to leave me, to pursue his foolish fantasies, as well as his Cousin, whom so
deerly I had loved, having no other prop to rest on, left me; Think not a miss,
Madam, that I send Pirobus to Diu, to seek me out Alcidaris, it is now no longer
fit, he should be hid, nor that on my part, I should more conceal the love I
bear my proper Son.

These, my deer children, said Evander, are the very words the King himself
delivered, who, without alteration at the Queens complaints, and tears,
dispatched Pirobus immediately. Being ariv'd at Diu, he wonderfully amazed the
Merchant, when he told him that ye child whom he so long had bred, was heir
unto the King; The noise hereof was spread incontinently through the City, and
all the inhabitants came in throngs to kiss their Princes hands. Pirobus who
had not seen him, since his first delivery into the Merchants hands, could know
him only by the mark he graved on his arm. The young man more than any other
grew in admiration at the honors which were done him: For he believed, he was
that Merchants son, and looked for nothing less, than to be honored as a
Prince.

He was by Pirobus conducted to the City of Campanel, and carried both the
Merchant and his children with him, on whom he afterward caused goodly Offices
to be conferred. As soon as his arrival was but known, the greatest of the
Court went forth to meet him, and the King with testimonies of exceeding joy
received him, but this did not long endure: For that young Prince was so ill
bred, and had among those people of inferior quality who had kept him, gotten
such evil habits, as that his presence served but to make you more lamented;
but above all, the Queen could not endure, that in your stead, a beast should
have such worship, who by his filthy carriage, had made himself contemptible to
all the world.

The King commanded me to take him to my Government: But finding in him no
appearance of common sense, and seeing him too old to form his mind to any
good; I did despair ever to make of him a civil man; and you may think my dear
children, whether I finding in that poor Prince spirit, nothing but thorns and
briers, instead of goodly seeds of virtue, which I found in you, I had great
cause to be delighted with my charge.

The King, who in that ill made Picture, could not know himself, made Pirobus a
thousand times to swear he was the same which he had from him. As for my self,
seeing I lost my labor, and my time in teaching him, besides the final d
fire, or none at all I had thereto, being afflicted as I was for loss of you,
and dreaming nothing ^^sse than ere again to see you: I a^th, last, resolved to
go and seek ye out in what part of the World soever ye might be. And that which
more old god me thereto was, that knowing all the sec^e^s of Astrology, and
having by that Art foreseen, that at two several times ye should run hazard of
a violent death, I would make trial if by my diligent and careful seeking
after you, I might divert the mischiefs which the S^^rs had threatened ye^
withal. Besides my own affection thereunto, I was incited by the general
complaints of all the better sort of people in the Kingdom, who could not
without sorrow yield obedience to a Prince of so ill making, and so evil
doings, and who already did begin to apprehend his future domination. Therefore
as soon I had known, no news was to be h^d of you at sea, and that as many as
had gone after you, were come again no wiser than they went; remembering I had
in secret heard your meditations on the Princess Oriz^a's Picture, and that I
had often heard ye, though in and out, to name the word Narsinga, I imagined
you might be gone disguised thither, and have passed over land, that you might
cross through that unhappy Kingdom of Decan, whereof I remembered to have heard
you mention so many wonders of their gallantry: But unfortunate as ye are, by
what I see, ye have met nofavored me, by my arrival here at Visaporus, just
when you were about to die a shameful death, that I might turn from off you,
one of those blows, your evil destinies had threatened you withal.

See Madam, what discourse Evander entertained us with, which set my thoughts
into as great confusion, as they were but two hours before; for I believed I
was Alcidaris his only son, and much it angered me, a fool should be my elder
brother: However I cheered up my self; in hope or one day having the fair
Kingdom of Dulcinda, which could not be taken from me. And however, I despaired
not of gaining others, which my courage, and my sword did promise me.

But as on our parts we were recounting our adventures to the wise Evander, who
much blamed us (after having told him of Orixas loves, and the change we used
toward her) for not revealing our selves to the Prince Araxus; a Page came to
advertise us, the King was coming to see us in our Chamber: I was a little
surprised at it, because I foresaw already what would be the issue of that
visit: However Piroxenus and I composing our selves as well as we could, we
went forth to meet him; and after mutual salutations, he began, and thus said
to me.

I much admire, Sir, that being born as you are, and for our neighborhood,
knowing my greatness, and my Lordship of the famous Potts of Chaul, and Goa,
which adjoyn to yours, you would choose rather death, than my alliance, when you
had first abused my daughter, who had been always till your coming hither,
the pattern, both of honor, and of virtue.

I finding his discourse grew to be long, and that he went on reproaching me,
and excusing himself for the violence had been shown us, suddenly interrupted
him, to tell him every circumstance that passed; I told him of the passionate
affection Piroxenus bare the Princess his daughter; how that he was my Conzin
germain, and the only heir unto the Kingdom of Citor; how he had borne so great
respect unto her, as not to dare declare himself her husband, though never any
save hithself had known her; how when he saw things grown to such extremity as
they were, and me condemned for his fault, he went and cast himself at his
Majesty's feet, who would not hear him: At length, I so far persuaded him, as
having appeared his spirit, and freed him from the trouble which his former
rage had put him in, he relished my reasons, which he found most just and
likely; and taking us by the hand, that he might suddenly finish Piroxenus
Marriage, he lead us to the Princess Chamber, who was very sick a bed, and by
her, sat the Queen in tears.

Although amid so many accident^, and misfortunes, her soul were laden with
profound and fearful thoughts, the spite she had conceived against me; had not
gained so much over her, but that her wasting body, was still battered with
love; whose heat joining to that of her Feavor, kindled so great and violent a
five within her, as Physicians did despair already, ever to be able to quench
it.

Seeing me come into her Chamber, and the King her father leading me by the
hand, believing he was come to confirm our Marriage, and that it had been done
more through compassion of her friends, than of my own good will; the tears ran
in her eyes, and to conceal the passion which surprised her, she turned her
head the other side.

My daughter, said King Demonax unto her, behold your husband whom I bring you;
and would it had so pleased the Immortal gods that I had had but patience
enough, to have understood the truth of a History, which will no less amaz:
your self, than me; we should not then have had the labor to oppose our Laws
against you, nor threaten with a shameful punishment your life, and honors,
which at once I now do warrant you. Know, if as yet you do not know, that those
two Knights who have been condemned with you, are sons to the most puissant
Kings of India: this same said he, pointing at Piroxenus, has the Kingdom of
Citor already in possession, and is Ceuzin germain to this other, who lives in
hope after the death of Alcidaris to reign over the Empire of Guzarat. They
have not only changed their names, but their hearts also; and he who you, as
you believed chose for husband, was never yours, more than for manners sake, or
for civility, but has in that good fortune given his Cousin place, who only,
for his mavelous affection to you, merits your possession: Turn your self
toward me, think no more of what is past, for which I am more sorry than your
self, and hence forth studying but to please your self, receive with courtesy
your real husband, whom I here present you.

Here at the Princess turned her face toward the King, and seeing it it was
Piroxenus he presented her; How Sir, said she to him, that impostor then is
constant in denying me, after renouncing of himself to quite undo me; and you
believe him? and I shall be so miserable, as that you will put off your common
knowledge to be overtaken by his lies? she would have prosecuted her
reproaches, when Piroxenus, who till then had not dared speak a word,
emboldning him by presence of the King, who favored his love, took liberty to
interrupt her, and casting himself down at her feet, he framed her this
discourse.

Madam, said he, though you should heap your scorns upon me, and all my life I
should repent me of my rashness, yet I find fit I should no longer hide it
from you, but make known the error, you till now have been in. Know fair
Orixa, that I have never loved any, save your self, and that the mere
consideration of my love, and of your beauty, has compelled me to keep
Anaxander so long in this Country; we have between us both, but one desire, and
one affection: wherefore I having learnt by him, that your unhappy Inclination
carried you to bear him love, who was already gaged in affection to another, I
conjured his help, and favor to my suit; he had compassion on me, and admitted
me instead of him, and that which by good forune I was not able to deserve, I
got by subtility. Love, (fair Orixa) made me bold to deceive you, blame
therefore him, not me, who weak against so strong a Master, was compelled to
yield, and follow him. It Was I whom Callias under favor of the darkness guided,
where you looked for Anaxander; and in short, it was I, who in your Nurses
presence, swear to be your lawful husband, and who made you a thousand
protestations of unalterable Love, which since I Am sure I never violated; the
fear of death has not been able to do it, nor shall your scorns of me prevail
at all; no, though you should be more cruel to me than the destinies, who have
so threatened me with punishments, and though by taking all hope from me of your
favor, you should condemn me unto death; I vow I will preserve your love even
in my grave, Orixa, and in the second life I look for, make it all my souls
contentment,

The Princess heard him with attention, and although the dolors of her Feavor
were of power enough to take away the liberty of talk, she notwithstanding,
would have forced herself to answer him, when by the coming of a Post she was
prevented, who after boldly knocking at the door demanded entrance, and
admittance to the King for reasons of a high importance, the King commanded him
to be brought to him; and truly at first entrance he affrighted the whole
company, and ere he spoke his countenance bewrai'd, that all things went not as
they should. Sir, said he to the King, all is lost, even your own subjects have
betrayed you. Those wicked slaves to whom you gave in charge the Government of
your Countries, have made a great Assembly of people in the City of Danaget,
for to revolt against you, and break off the yoke of your Royal authority,
without so much as caring for their children which you have as Hostages. They
are all met in one desire to betray you, and divide your provinces: but two
among the rest have shown themselves more wicked than their fellows, to wit,
Rozalcan, and Zabain, one of whom you made Governor of Bider, and the other of
Danaget: For, being Brothers, and always of a plentiful intelligence, when
they saw those other, their sworn fellows, in a Town whereof they had the
Sovereign power, because themselves would reign alone, cut all their throats;
and having reassembled all their Forces, and won the greater part of your
Subjects, either by presents, or fair words, they are coming with a mighty
Army against your person, and purpose to besiege you in your City of Vsaporus,
that they may absolutely be Masters of your Countries, and without hinderance
command the Empire, which the gods have given to you.

You may imagine, fair Princess, whether such an humor as I have described the
Kings to be, were surprised with such news. He could not hide his apprehension
from us, a deadly paleness disfigured his face; and not finding himself able
enough to resist a misfortune which so nearly threatened him, he could not speak
a word, when as Araxus, who knew his very heart, ashamed we were witnesses of
so much poverty, withdrew him from thence, and told him, it was his way to call
his Council together, and suddenly provide against the present necessities.
In the meanwhile, he left us in the Chamber with the Queen, in whose presence
the gods permitted, after Piroxenus had recounted to the Princess all the
passages of their secret Loves, and that he had by his unfeigned tears given
testimony of his innocent affection which rased out the crime he had committed,
she was somewhat appeased. Wherefore once more they pledged their marriage
faith to one the other in our presence, they joined hands, and kissed, and from
that day, Orixa did begin to love me as a Brother, not a Lover.

Although my known innocence had eased her spirits of a heavy burden, which in
her thoughts of my disdain she under went, her body was bu^ little sensible
thereof, and no abatement of her Feavor was observed. But contrary, she was so
troubled for the evil next of imminent danger threatened to the King her
fathers Countries, newly then arrived, together with the cruel blows of former
miseries, so over come, as more than ever all the Physicians grew into despair
of ever seeing her recovery

Meanwhiles this sickness lasted, Rozalcan, and Zabain came still onward, and
their Army made such haste, as it had almost compassed the City before they had
so much as time to furnish a tenth part of what was necessary to sustain a
fiege, or that they had enclosed works without, or fortified the approaches.
Demonax had under hand, Arms for some thirty thousand men, and Coin enough; but
wanted Soldiers, for his Subject were his enemies; and was so suddenly
surpised, as that he had not time, to crave assistance from his neighbors,
who were besides but ill affected to him. The King of Maldives only, and of
Palandurus his brother in law, could have succor'd him in time, but that ill
luck would have it, he but late before had been himself defeated, and his Army
cut in pieces by the King of Zeylan, who being assisted by the valor, and wise
conduct, of courageous Lisimantus, ahd made himself Lord of all his Islands,
except but three or four of Palandurus where he was retired, without other hope
of refuge.

A midst the trouble which this miserable King was in, he called us into his
counsel of War, and craved our help; but we represented to him the
impossibility thereof, and that there remaining unto him no other retreait but
that only City, from whence he was ready to be driven by those, who sought but
for his life, to reign without contradiction, we should not be able to bring
any succors, though they lay but six days journey off, and though we found
them ready for the march. And what then, said he to us, must I lose all my
hope, and that my children and my self be brought to so cruel a necessity, as
to die, or live for ever under the power of base scoundrels? By and by he cast
out diverse blasphemies against the gods, and instantly, caused all the
childrens throats to be cut, which he received as Hostages from those slaves.

Verily, Madam, we saw not how to give him great comfort, because we found his
matters in a desparate condition; However we made a virtue of necessity, and
joined the Princes, his children, and we, together with as many Naires, as
there were in the Kings Guard, all the inhabitants of Visaporus which were of
age to bear Arms, to try if we could raise a power, able enough to do some
damage to our enemies; but they consisted of so great a number, as we judged
it more rashness than valor, to assault them: we forbear not at the beginning
to Skirmish sometimes with them, when, there came many of theirs too short; but
as from an Hydra's head, their seemed always quadruple the number to increase;
so that perceiving our affairs in so ill case to attempt the freedom of the
City, Piroxenus, and my self, sent to defy Kozalcan, and Zabain to fight with
us; but though, as indeed they were, hardy, and valiant, they were not disposed
to venture any thing in the condition they were in, and, had they willed to do
any thing in single Combat, they would have had to do with the two heirs of
that Kingdom.

Meanwhile they laid their Batteries against the City, and it was threatened by
a quick assault, when the King fearing to fall under^he power of the besiegers,
resolved at any rate to save himself; and without knowing what would become of
him, or where to turn, and without telling any body of his flight, except one
of his servants which waited in his Chamber, called Panaris, whom he chose to
accompany him, he stole away by night upon a good horse out as a Postern door
of the Palace, and carried with him the richest Jewels of his Crown. This
persidious Panaris, seeing no way of safety for himself, or Master, being to
cross the Camps, mischievpusly conceived in his heart, to kill the King, and
take his Jewels, which doubtless would remain as reward to him, when he should
carry his head to his enemies. This purpose was no sooner resolved on, but put
in execution, for when that poor Prince thought of nothing less than Treason
from his servant, he was thrown to ground by a thrust made through and through
his body, and having cut off his head, he carried it to Rozalcan, who was
encamped toward the River. Notwithstanding he was a barbarous man, and sought
nothing but the death of the King, and his children, yet could not that action
choose but fright him: however he put not the traitor to death, but after having
taken his riches from him, was only pleased to forbid him his presence, and no
more. He presently advertised his brother Zabain of what had passed, and they
thought good to advertise the besieged by a Trumpet, of the Kings death, that
they might be the more disheartened, promising them, that if the Soldiers would
render themselves, they should depart with bag and baggage, without any hurt
done them, and as for the inhabitants of the City, they should quoitly enjoy
their lands and houses, on this condition always, that they should deliver up
the Princes, Araxus, and Demonax, into their hands.

The people of that poor distressed City, were so moved at the news of the
Kings death, who had so long a time maintained them in peace, as without
considering what became of themselves, seeing they yet demanded the Princes of
them, to put them cruelly to the sword likewise, fell so furiously upon the
Trumpeter, as in an instant they had crushed him, and their rage was so great,
as they dismembered him with their teeth, and every one would have a plece. On
the other side, the Queen, who^ the apprehension of an approaching ruin had
already very much afflicted, having been told of the murder done upon the King
her husband, and what was threatened to her children, sound so great a load of
sorrow grown upon her, as being not able longer to endure it, she was compelld
to submit unto its violence, and soon the gods gave leave that wound should
pierce her heart, and took away that life which was but grievous to her.

Meanwhile the Princess Orixa, knew not any thing of these misfortunes, and had
already these two days lost all manner of understanding, and so great was the
strength of her disease, as taking from her all appearances of life, she who
attended her came to advertise us how she had followed her mother. Orazia
exceedingly moved at this conclusion, which she looked should not be so
Tragical, Ah, said she to the Prince, interrupting him, the poor Orixa then is
dead; truly she should not have dyed, after having past so many troubles. Hear
the sequel of the story, Madam, replied Anaxander, we are not at the end of our
misfortunes yet.

As soon as Piroxenus was advertised of this fad accident, he hastily ran to
her, and finding neither Pulse nor motion, in that body which more than his
life he loved, he forgot his resolution, and his constancy; and that great
courage, which all the injuries of Fortune, and threats of death it self, could
not so much as shake, was by that woeful spectacle constain'd to yield to his
affliction, and his sorrow; he did at first, all that a man in desperation
could devise to do in such extremities; he tore himself, he cursed heaven, fell
out with those that would but comfort him, and when that fury was past over,
casting himself upon his knee^ to worship those precious relics of his love,
and with a flood of tears bathing the liveless face of the fair Orixa, Unhappy
Princess, said he, is it possible, that after so much trouble to obtain thee, I
must all the remnant of my life hereafter lose thee, and have the Gods
ordained, I shall not freely have thee in possession till after death? O my
fair mouth, which pale and changed, or how ever cold your kisses are do
notwithstanding charm me, I must love them yet: Alan, Had I but come before thy
last sigh given, I might have closed my lips to yours, that that fair soul,
which I lament, mightnot have had so free a leave to take her flight. Give me,
orixa, leave to follow her, that without mine she may not go: if thou have any
feeling yet of worldly things, stay for thy miserable husband; thou can not
yet be far, direct me quickly which way thou art fled, that I may come unto
thee.

Much more he would have said, and the extravagance he had already shown, began
afresh, when being called to comfort him, I with such language interrupted him:
What pleasure, said I, deer Piroxenus, can you take in giving testimony of your
weakness, and appear quite loft in presence even of those who ravished with
your noble actions past, accounted you a demi God, and without humane frailty:
recall, quickly dear friend, recall thy reason, that in our presence, it may
disavow, what ever in its absence thou have done. Thou know not why thou
moanest, and art so unhappy, as to give thy self up to despair, when thou
should rather thank the Gods for so great favor, as to take her from thee,
who was ready to be taken by the hands of mere barbarians. Imagine she had
lived; falling into the power of such notorious revolted slaves, who seek but
to exterminate the race of Demonax, and where she must have been a prey unto
her enemies, what would become of her? ought thou not rather to be glad that
she is with the Gods, who loved her too well, to let her see her last Town
pillaged, her Fathers Murder, and, her Mothers sudden death, with loss of all
he friends in general?

Besides these reasons, I administered so many other, as I somewhat settled his
mind, but not being able longer to remain in that sad place, which had been a
theater unto us of so many mischiefs, grief and affliction which had ruled his
heart, gave wrath, and vengeance, at one instant full possession: Lets forth,
lets forth Anaxander, said he, out of this unfortunate City, which even
affrights me; stay we not till the enemies do force it, and be taken among
those who must give up themselves unto the mercy of barbarians; let us revenge
the Royal blood of Decan, and with the choice of all the brave, and valiant
men among us, power upon those Traitors, and if we cannot escape their hands,
lets at dear rates sell our lives, and gloriously expire; my blood already
boyles with anger in me, and I persuade my self, that rascal rout cannot
resist my sury.

I had already made the same overture to the Princes, and told them 'twas the
only way which they could try to save themselves, seeing how true it was, they
sought but for their lives, and therefore found it no hard matter, to persuade
their resolutions thereunto. We therefore purposed to assemble only two or
three thousand of the best and ablest men of the City, to make a fully by night
upon the enemies out at the Port of Goa, where they wre with least strength
entrenched; But when the Visaporians knew their Princes went in person, they
would all go, and left to guard their walls, women, and children only, and old
men, among the which was sage Evander, to whom, what ever good or evil might
become of us, we bid farewell, desiring him that if he could get out from
thence, he would return to Cambaye; and that he would endeavor to regain
Alcidaris his favor to us, whom we assured him we would see as soon as we had
seen a little of Narsinga, in case the Gods preserved us in the hazard we were
falling into; he therefore with all possible regret embraced us, because he did
believe, he never more should see us, and much ado we had, to change his
wilful purpose to accompany us in that sally.

The Princes had designed to follow us, and go the voyage to Narsinga with us,
if we could escape out of the multitude, and for that cause we took for
rendezvous, an old decayed Temple, which lies upon the ^ode to Goa, a league
out of the City, but, otherwise the Gods had ordered: for in that memorable
issue which we made upon the enemy, both brothers after great and worthy
actions of their valor by them done, were slain at our fees. As for our selves
Madam, we hewed our way through those that followed us, and slew what ever from
that side opposed us. The Moon was lightsome, and heaven so much favored us,
that Pirox nus and I sound our selves near to one another, and but lightly
hurt, poor Neander was wounded with a dart in his thigh, and was carried back
into the City, ready to die, that we must go without him, and Almerin who lost
not sight of us, pursued us, when we had given Neande charge, and some other of
our Soldiers, to spread a moyse, that we were slain with the twoi Princes,
lest we might draw a blame upon us, for forsaking the besieged. We therefore
secretly withdrew our selves else where, not willing to be witnesses of that
poor Cities misfortunes, which could not long hold our, and which by the loss
of those two Princes, who beyond all other reasons had oblieg'd us to that
service, had lost her final hope. Three things, before we went, we recommended
to Neander: the first was, that he should not fail to cause the bodies of
Demonax, and Araxus, to be buried in their Fathers grave, and that he likewise
should be careful of interring the Princess Orixa their Sister. The second
was, that notwithstanding he was hurt, he should not leave the poor besieged
people, who did already want provision, and that he should assist them to make
as honorable composition as he could; a thing which we indeed held far unfit
for us, and which to farther, the great service they had newly done, would much
import. And thirdly, that he should help all he could, the good Evander to
return unto Cambaye, and assure him of our safeties; that as for him, as soon
as he were whole, he should not fail to come unto us, and that he should hear
of us in the King of Narsinga's Court, under the names of Ariomant, and
Calistenus, for fear we might be known by those of Taxilus, and Cleontus, and
we had given the same directions to the good Evander, before we parted from him.

Thus, Madam, left we that unfortunate City, and I must confess the willingness
wherewith Piroxenus followed me, without despair, is not the smallest argument
of that extreme affection which he bears me. The Image of that unhappy Princess
presented it self evermore before his eyes, he had no other pleasure than to
afflict himself, with the remembrance of her death. That was the sole
meditation of his days, the only dream of his nights, and the continual
trouble of his soul; and yet among so many peircing griefs, and bloody
discontentments, he compelled himself to live to bear me company. We then, put
off our Arms, and Almerin, who knew full well the Country, made us go that
night on foot as then we were, and brought us to a little City named Foya, some
four Leagues off from Visaporus, upon the rode to Bisnagar, because he knew
that none of Rosalcans Troops lay on that quarter. We found there the
inhabitants quite lost, and vexed with fear, not knowing of which side to be,
not where to rank themselves; however, after having taught them, that they must
give place to force, that all their Princes were dead, and that their great
City was threatened with approaching ruin, we, after we were furnished with
horses, and what else we wanted, for our money, left them resolved to send
toward the two usurpers. The wounds we had received, did not hinder us from
proceeding onward, and therefore we went right to Bisnagar, well provided both
of Money and Jewels, to rub through such extremities as might befall us. I will
not spend my time (Madam) in relating you all the adventures which we met on the
way, for fear of abusing your patience, I will only mention that which gave me
the honor of your acquaintance, and which was the reason, why at first we were
received happily into the King your fathers Palace.

When we were come within two Leapues of that great City of Bisnagar, where we
had learned the King made then his six months residence, passing along by a
Forest of Palm Trees, in the middle of the rode, which leads strait to the
City, we spied a hunter of a goodly countenance, and richly clad, who being
mounted on a horse, as swift as was the beast he followed, had left his fellow
hunters far behind him. Scarce had he passed us an hundred paces, rushing again
into the thick, without more train, than one page only, who never left him, but
that a dozen Robbers who had lain in ambush in a thicket by the which he
passed, cast themselves suddenly upon him, and held his reigns to stop his
passage, ere he scarce perceived them; As soon as he had found himself infested
with this rascal rout, nimble and active as he was, he flung himself out of
his saddle, to the ground, and drawing out his sword, cleaved his head who
first aborded him; but seeing that hismatch was too hardly made, and that he
must at length be overcome, he was resolved to sell his life full dear. By good
luck, as he passed, we were turned about toward him, and his rich furniture,
caused that curiosity in us, and was the means, that even about the very
instant we perceived him in this trouble, we ran unto him hastily, and found
the Page thrown to the ground by a hurt in his thigh, and the hunter, sorely
wounded, yet having set his back against a tree, did most courageously defend
himself. The aid we lent him, redoubled his courage, and by good luck for us,
it chanced that in less than half an hour, Piroxenus, Almerin and my self, set
him at liberty, and slew all those Rogues, excepting two, that had assaulted
him; which two, hurt as they were, were bound and carried to the City: 'twas
not without sore hurts that we performed that task, and if the Page had not
remembered to wind his horn, to call the hunters to that place, who were behind,
we had run all of us an hazard to have lost our lives by reason of the blood
which streamed in abundance from our wounds. As soon as the brave hunter found
himself delivered from that danger, which he never thought to escape: Ye
Knights, said he, what ever ye may be, that have so happily come hither, know,
it is the Prince Arontkus whom ye have saved from the ambush of those thieves,
and is your debtor for his life, and therefore, whether ye be subjects to the
King my Father, or else strangers to this Country, I promise ye, this real
service shall not be unacknowledged, neither shall ye ask me any thing to be
denied. I presently made answer in the Arabique tongue, that we were Persian
Knights, and had resolved to travel through all India, that we had unknowing
him, done him that small service, but as honor, and reason both obliged us; But
seeing now he had declared his name, however grievous our wounds were, we held
our selves most highly honored to receive them for his sake, and would not
waill our lives, were we at point of losing them, since for his preservation
they were spent. He hereat used his best strength to embrace us, (for he
understood the Arabique tongue as well as we did his) and protesting he would
never be unthankful for so great a benefit, urged us to make him some request,
which whatsoever it were, within the King of Narsinga's power, he would grant
us. But that which most won on his heart, and doubled his affection to us, was
the answer which we made him; that we already held our selves too highly
recompensed, in as much as our weak help was so acceptable unto him; but that
we might not take from him, the pleasure of showing his brave heart toward us,
all the favor we desired, was, that he would cause us to be well accepted in
the King his fathers Court, which from far off, we came to see, as most
renowned in all Asia, not only for the courage and the freedom of the Knights
thereof, but also for the courtesy and beauty of its Ladies. Truly said he, I
do assure your welcome as mine own, and if the gods allow that among us, there
any pleasure be, that may detain ye, and that any place, or charge about the
King there be that may become ye, ye shall know the love Aronthus bears ye.

Whilst we were on these Complements, the Huntsmen, and the Prince your
brothers Gentlemen came where the horn had called them, they were in great
amazement to see their Master in such case, and altogether confounded with
shame, dared not come near him, fearing le^t the blame of that had happened to
him, he might lay upon the little care they had to follow him: But on the
contrary, the generous Aronthus, whose apprehensions evermore inclined to
sweetness, and never seen to be in angry, spoke to them without any trouble,
and presently commanded them to have a care of us, and him. Relieve said he, my
friends, succor those charitable and generous Knights, who have now newly
saved my life, and are in danger of their own. The Chirurgian, and the rest
fell instantly about their business, and finding, that the Prince was more hurt
than we, dressed him first, though he forbad him, and though they found about him
seven, or eight cruel wounds, yet neither of them mortal, no more than ours;
They made the best use they could in that necessity of any thing to case us,
and fit litters for us, and whiles we were conveighing into the City, we
understood from those Rascals which were escaped alive, to pay the debt they
ought to Justice, that those thieves which had set upon the Prince, were
companions to one Tamurchand, the most famous robber of the Indes, who with
those graceless rakehels, retired himself into the most fearful solitude of
the Mountains of Gate; and because three or four days before he had suffied
and was hanged and quartred in the great place of Bisnagar, those raskcals had
projected to revenge their Caprains death, upon the Princes person, or the King
himself, whom they would entrape amid their chase a hunting; and sure they had
not made ill bargain with Arontus, if so the gods had not been pleased, to send
us early to his succor.

I cry you mercy, Madam, if in the heat of my discourse, I repeat you things
that you have seen, and know as well as I, I couldnot forget the occasion, that
gave me the honor of seeing you, and making me acceptable in your sight, and as
often as you shall please to give me the freedom of discoursing to you, I think
I shall still enterlace it with this story. Ever since that happy day, wherein
the Prince Arontus, held us worthy to be lodged in his side of the Kings
Palace, you have been witness of whatever has befallen us, and of the honors
we have received, under the borrowed names, of Ariomant and Calistenus, among
which, your visits have held the best, and most glorious room. Surely, Madam,
when by the Prince your brother, you were entreated to come and see us, as his
Ramsomers, and that I saw before me the living original of that precious
Picture, which inanimate, and dead as it was, had ravished me at Gouzarate, and
whose Idea I had always so dearly preserved in my heart, I had much to do to
hinder that I died not for joy; my wounds opened at my surprizall by that
pleasure unexpected, and the sudden weakness which I felt at the loss of my
blood; If you remember, Madam, I amazed all the company, but more your self
than any, be it, you felt your self as guilty of my souls disorders, or whether
you already would account your self concerned in my passions. From that instant
I perceived, that you rejected not the offers which my eyes made you of my
service, and if my quality had been but known unto you, I believe you would
have been more bold, to give me from that present, proofs of your affection,
and good will unto me. I forbear not, for all I was unknown, as soon as I felt
my self well cured of my wounds, to venture so far as to let you know those of
my heart, which I believed would not be so quickly healed; I flattered my self
with this belief, that you despised not my complements, and love in such sort
blinded me, as I persuaded me, you would not scorn my Letters, if I took so
much freedom as to write unto you. I doubt me, Madam, whether it be true that
Almerin told me, that you received that which I sent by him, with I know not
what kind of obliging neglect, which made him know you disapproved my
rashness, but condemned it not; that you counterfeited much anger with me, and
him also, who had brought you the news of my Love; but that you forbear not
however to read my Letter, which with a feigned action of disdaign, you opened,
and presently gave him back again, without saying ought else to him, than, Go
tell thy Master, that his too great boldness does not please me, and bid him
call to mind I am the daughter of a King: But Sir, said Almerin, at the
recital which he made of that adventure; Assure your self the fair Orazia
loves you, she could not hide from me the least thought of her heart, her eyes
revealed her most secret purposes, and though they had been shut up too, as was
her mouth, I should have found that love was mixed with that blood, which came
so often up into her cheeks.

The Princess very well remembering, with what innocence that action had passed,
when she had counterfeited anger against Almerin, and that, with indeed a
feigned anger she had opened that letter, which she had a mind to see, because
to say truth she even at that time burnt for love of Anaxauder, she could not
choose but laugh, and blush at once; and the Prince Anaxander being by that
natural shamefastness sufficiently assured of the truth thereof, proceeded thus
in his discourse.

You have known all Madam, said he, whatsoever has since passed in that Court,
and that as well, which does concern my love, as that which touches Piroxenus
melancholy, who would be hardly seen in any company, and clothed in a long and
mourning habit, which yet more his heart put on, did plant a grief and sorrow
in the minds of all that saw him. You saw, how notwithstanding the most strong
commands given by the King your father against single Combats, whereunto those
of this Kingdom more than all I know, are most addicted, and which, but
yesterday with so much earnestness was reinforced, I slew that proud Lerian,
who, through his jealousy of the extraordinary favors I received from the
generous Aronthus, challenged me, who thought, I had diverted from him, those
affections he pretended to deserve: and how after that Combat I had enough to
do, to save me from the rigor of the Law, if the Prince your brother had not
engaged himself, in my affairs, and urged the service I had done him. You have
I say, seen all these things Madam, and diverse others, which I cannot but
unnecessarily repeat; and therefore mean to tell you only what you do not know.

A little before that news came to the King your father, that those two
revolted slaves, the perfidious Rozalcan and his brother, not contented to have
made themselves Kings, and absolute Lords of the whole Kingdom of Decan, grown
proud in their successes, would yet more advance their Victories, even to
assault the King your fathers, power, from whom they newly had usurped, and
most unjustly taken the Country of Canara, with those three goodly Cities,
Onor, Mangalor, and Baticalus, which bordered on their neighborhood, and lay
convenient for them; a little I say, before this ill news arrived at Court, we
were in a maze to see coming toward us, Neander, whom we were forced to leave
by reason of his wound, in the besieged City, who assured us, that the
Princess Orixa, whom we mourned for, was well alive, and more than ever,
beautiful.

I will not dwell in telling you, after what fashion sorrowful Piroxenus did
receive this happy news, which at a sudden overcomming him, thought by excess
of that unhop'd for joy to work the same effects upon his heart, that sorrow
did; and truly Madam, I apprehended it my self with such contentment, for his
sake, that I was like to fall into a Feavor by the extraordinary motion of my
spirits. But because we both made show, to doubt the truth of what he told us
so contentfull, though related by a servant of as perfect credit, as fidelity;
Neander for our better satisfaction made us a discourse (as I remember thus,)
of all had past at Visaporus since we left it.

Know Sirs, said he, that as soon as they had carried me into the besieged
City, and that I had caused the bodies of the two Princes Araxus, and Demonax,
to be carried with me to have them buried (according to the order you gave) in
their fathers burying place; Desiring to acquit my self of such other commands
as ye had given me, as soon as I was laid in my bed, and that my wound was
dressed, I sent to entreat the wise Evander, and the Princess Nurse, to come
unto me, to declare them your intentions, which I in person could not execute.

Although the old man were exceedingly pleased to understand of your safe
escape out of the danger of that sally, which ye undertook, yet was he
extremely afflicted that he was enfore'd to lead his life so far off from ye.
As for the Nurse, I cannot choose but wonder that she had not died a thousand
times of grief, since first she thought her dear, and beauteous Mistress lost:
but when she went into her Chamber to perform toward her, her last offices,
with grave Evandes only in her company, she fell to admiration, that when
clasping her within her arms, and with her tears bedewing all her face, she
found a kind of respiration, and that she mixed a sigh with heart. Immediately
she clapped her hand upon her heart, where she perceived the warmth was all
retired, and holding of her arm, she felt her pulse began again to beat.
Evander, cried she out, in great amazement^ come and draw nearer, I believe the
Princess is not dead, and if I am not deceived in my belief, since your
knowledge has a great extension, lend her readily your aid.

The good old man, at first imagined the Nurse had somewhat lost her
understanding, and than her passion for Orixa, made her ^hink that real which
was only strong in her desires, because it was now fourteen hours that she had
lain as dead, without either pulse or heat, or motion: But coming near, he
found the same appearances of life, the Nurse had noted; then cast he presently
cold water in her face, and made her fumes, and practiced all the means which
in the like extremities are held requisite, because indeed, the Princess whom
they took for dead, was only fallen into the last great conflict betwixt Nature,
and her grief, a deadly swouning, which the Greeks (...) L^thargy, which as
Evander tells us, is only a forgetfulness, not barely for that, in that
mi^^^able condition a man forgets every thing, but also that nature forgets her
self, and quits her ^unctions.

The Princess senses then, by Evanders remedies being well come to e^^e^^sh^
opened first her eyes, and was agreat while d^zled, not knowing whence she
came, or where she was, and no^ of power to speak a word: but when she came to
full remembrance, she inquired, what was become of Piroxenus, and shortly after
she demanded how the state of the b^sieged City stood, and how her friends all
did; But Evander keeping from her the misfortunes bapned in her ho^^e: Madam,
said he, take courage, for if you preserve your self all will go well, and
^assure you, Piroxenus florisheth in life, and glory.

At two or three days end, he found a great amendment in her, and thought it
fit not to make known to any body that she was revived, but when she wondered,
that the King nor Queen, her brothers, nor your selves had come to visit her,
after a number of excuses, and disguisements, Evander was at length enfore'd to
^ell her even the naked truth, of that lamentable History, in which she found
yet cause of comforting her self, for that her husband lived, and that her self
remained only heir unto the Kingdom of Decan, the gods undoubtedly would guard
her, since they had had such a particular care of her life, untillthat time. I
will not repeat you the complaints she made; unfeignedly, they were extreme,
and if any thing obliged her to outlive her Parents, and without desperation
to endure their loss, it was the comfort only they had given her, in
assurance, that her Husband lived in his escape; who taking it for granted she
was dead, as all we did, he had resolved to follow her, but that his friend had
hindered him, and by constraint enforced him to live for love of him; though, in
such case, as by affliction he was cast into, death had been sweeter to him far
than life; and that no longer able to endure that City, which had heaped so
many miseries upon him, he undertook that sally which succeeded to them, and
had been so fatal to the brother Princes, who could not with more glory have
expired. At length, Madam, said Evander to her, where ever Piroxenus be, I can
assure you he is living, if a continual tract of torments may be called life,
and even as soon as Neanders would is whole, he shall go tell him how you do,
and well I know, those Princes will use all their power to settle you again
within your fathers, Throne. Meanwhile, I pray, have patience, Madam, and take
comfort from the gods: but because all the world thinks you are dead, and that
the noise thereof is spread into the enemies Camp; I think it is best to let it
run so still, and even that all the inhabitants of Visaporus may believe it
likewise, that when the enemies shall become Masters of the City, which in a
day or two will be, when I have capitulated with them, they may not satisfy
their cruelty on you, who would undoubtedly aswage their tyranny. Meanwhilke
you should conceal your self, and taking on you another name, and parentage,
should pass as a kinswoman to your Nurse, who shall take you into her house
which she has in the City, where we desire we may to morrow, conveigh you
secretly,

The Princess who expected aid and Comfort no where else except from us, did
all she could to pacify her sorrow in obedience to the Counsel we had given
her, and, when she was in place of safety, Evander called the chiefest of the
City to my Lodging, who being battered with their losses and misfortunes, were
of our opinion, that it was expedient, they should send to tell the two
usurpers, that the Magistrates were ready to give up themselves unto them, as
their Lords, and Matters, on condition they should use them favorably.

Rozalcon, and Zabain, whose great fury died with those, whose lawful
possession of the Crown stood as an obstacle to their ambitious desires,
received acceptably such just terms as we proposed to them, and having granted
all we asked, we opend them the gates. As soon as they had taken possession of
the Royal Palace, and strong places, they sent their Army, being well paid,
into small Towns, and Cities, bordering about them, into Garrison: and took the
dead King Demonax his Na^res under their command, and used the inhabitants of
that unhappy City, as their Subjects, not their enemies. As for my part, they
offered me very good conditions, if I would have served them, and having learnt
who Evander was, they gave him goodly presents, for Alcida^is King of Cambayes
sake, to whom he did belong, and whose good will they passionately desird, and
sent him to his Master.

He took his leave of me with tears in his eyes, and gaveme a great charge of
you at parting: Haste thee Neander, said he, to be well, and go find out our
Masters, with as much good speed as may be, and tell them from me, they no
longer please themselves to go unknown; for I foresee more miseries do threaten
them, under the names of Ariomant and Calistenus, and bid them not forget the
hazards they have run, whiles they were known as Taxilus and Cleontus. As for
me, said the good old man, as soon as I have received the Princess commands, I
purpose to make all the haste my age will give me leave, to carry news of them
unto their parents, if so the gods allow me strength enough to do my journey.

Orixa meanwhile, under the name of Asteria, which she had taken on her, lived
in private manner, in her Nurses house, and hopeful that she should again
behold her husband, and recover by his courage, and his might, what was usurped
from her, once her fathers just possession, she by some and some, forgot her
past misfortunes, and resolved to think upon her self again.

As for my self (Sirs) because I had a bone which was exceedingly hurt, I was
almost three months in cure, during which time the feigned Asteria had
recovered all her beauty, and strength, and having understood (which we were
glad for,) that Rozalcan, and Zabain, making ill use of their prosperity, were
gone to Conquer the Country of Canara, under the King of Narsinga; Cheer up
Neander, said the Princess to me, the gods undoubtedly are weary of ^m^^hing,
more those Tyrants, seeing their arogance has carried them to set upon the
mightiest Monarch of the Indes, who wellknows how to pay their rashness; and
seeing thy Master, and his dear friend are at present with that King, whose
rage our enemies have now provoked; Go, go with speed, Neander, to them, tell
them I am yer alive, and that amidst a thousand crosses, and misfortunes, the
gods have kept me to delight my faithful husband, from whom, for my past
negligences, I crave humble pardon; tell them, they hasten to my succor, and
use all their power with the King of Narsinga, whom the gods for punishment of
our common Usurpers, have interrested to revengeme. I have told you now
whatever has fallen out in V^saporus since your leaving it, which I have used
much diligence to come and do.

Surely, Madam, this relation of Neanders did so mollify Piroxenus heart, that
at one time he shed both tears of joy, and of compassion; from that instant, he
considered nothing, but which way to re-establish the deposed Princess, and
revenge her wrongs upon her enemi^s; and Madam, as you know there fell ou^
happily a means, for but a little ere Neanders arrival, intelligence was
brought the King your Father, how that perfidious Rozalcan, and his brother,
had by force taken Onor, Mangalos, and Baticalus, three of the chiefest Cities
of Canara; and was reported, that they purposed a farther Conquest, and at your
loss to augment yet more their own possessions; which so incensed the King,
and animated so exceedingly the poor Aronthus to revenge, as he had need of no
more spurs, than from his own resentments: However Piroxenus and I, feigning at
first, that we were not therein concerned, compassed to kindle such a fire
within his heart, boiling already with high rage, that whatsoever terms the
two Usurpers offered him, could never work their peace, though nere so much to
his advantage; then did he gladly receive the offers which we made him of our
persons to attend him in that War. But, for it was so easy a matter, to regain
the Country of Canara, where the Enemy had sent bu^ a part of their Army, and
kept the other with them near about Visaporus, we persuaded the Prince, that
there was much more honor to be gotten, to go and take those two Monsters,
whiles Lisimantus, whose courage, and conduct the King of Zeylan h^d tried, and
whom he had sent to the King our Father to assist him in those stirs, should go
and lay his siege, to those three Cities newly taken from him.

This Counsel was accepted by Aronthus, who put it presently in execution.
Lisimantus was sent into the Country of Canara, and had the honor to divide
the leading of the Army with the Prince your Brother, who led on his Troops, in
great journeys toward Visaporus, where abode our common enemies; During our
March, the love he bare us was augmented by one half, in so much, as on a day
being in discourse of sundry matters, he fell I know not how on our adventurs,
which he had somewhat heard of, and asked us, if we knew not what was become of
the two Princes of Cambaye and Cytor, who had of late been in danger to lose
their lives in Visaporus, disguising their names with Taxilus, and Gleontus,
and whether indeed, they died not there, with the two Princes of Decan. He knew
of that Sally, where he believed we had all come short, he likewise did believe
Orixaes death, which he had heard from common noise, and was not ignorant, how
that was the strongest consideration, which had made us sally with such fury on
our enemies, and leave the beleaguered Town, which was so many ways most
horrible to Piroxenus; but had not since that time heard speak of us; and
finding that he was inclinable to take us for those same, for whom he did
enquire, against the opinion that sundry others were of who had possessed him of
our deaths, we thought, that we should injure him, if longer we did hide our
selves. And therefore, Madam, we freely told him who we were, together as I
have done you, the first occasion of our journey, and all that happened since our
leaving Gouzarate, unto the entertainment of my love which I had made you. We
told him moreover, that the fair Orixa was still living, and how we had
understood it. I will not busy my self to tell you of the joy he did conceive,
and the excuses which he made us, and his dear imbra^^^ of us: It is
sufficient, Madam, that you have known the goodn^ss of his nature, to imagine
he omitted nothing, which civility, and honor, might enable him to our
advantage; he vowed to me, that although the King my Father disinherited me,
which he could ot but unjustly do, you should as soon be mine, as if I had the
world in my possession, and that at worst, Narsinga we should share betwixt us.
He witnessed no less desire to favor Piroxenus his pretensions, and swore he
would restore his spouse unto her Fathers Throne, or die in that behalf. Alas,
Madam, unwittingly he by those words did prophecy his own misfortune; for as
you know he perished in that glorious design, which with his life he did
accomplish.

He had in short space, put all those Cities of Decan, which were near to
Visaporus, under the King your Fathers subjection; and having known that the
enemy kept the field, and that they dared not to immure themselves, he resolved
to give them Battle, where we observed such acts of his, as are not equalled
by any History: among other exploits worthy of memory, he killed Zabain with
his own hand, and had from Rozalcan, his mortal wound, which quickly after we
revenged; for when I saw him hurt, who never parted one step from him, I rushed
with fury on the guard about our enemy, and seconded by the incensed courage of
Piroxenus, I found no Arms defenceable againstmy hewing blade; I in one instant
overthrew that rabble rout, and took their leader Prisoner: in short, we won
the Battle, whose whole glory does belong unto the generous Aronthus; we had
him carried, sorely hurt, into his Tent, but when we knew his wounds were
mortal, and that he had not above two hours more to live, we bare with more
impatience far, the loss of him, than we had done the victory, if we had lost
it.

At this cruel remembrance, Anaxanders eye^ grew full of tears, and were soon,
by the Princess, seconded, she loved so dearly that same Brother, as the the
sorrow she conceived for his death, surmounted far the secret joy which she
might take at her inheritance: she had so excellent a nature, and was so full
of true and eminent virtues, as that her real sorrow kept her from any sense
of Glory, for her future elevation to Narsinga's Regal Throne, which would
have shaken any mind, and reason save her own, and overthrown undoubtedly
whatever heart had not been well composed.

I must make an end, Madam, continued the Prince Anaxander, though not without
renewing, both as well my own, as your displeasures: The poor Aronthus seeing
we despaired of his life, did all he could to make us willing of his death; and
his great courage prompted him to utter, though in dying, a number of exceeding
brave things, which by his people were taken for as many marks of his admired
generosity; He charged them all to give obedience to Piroxenus, and my self, to
finish what had been so well begun, and that without declaring to them who we
were, because we had entreated him he would not; He only told them, they should
follow us to Visaporus, which he believed could not hold out long against us,
seeing the Rebels chief^ were overthrown, and all their purposes destroyed by
the Battles loss.

When he at large had uttered his full intentions, he worthily rewarded all his
servants, and gave fair gifts to those who had well served him in that war; and
having with all fervency, and zeal, commended his soul unto the Gods, not
willing to trust his Secretary, he called one of his Squires, even him, who two
days since, I followed, where I had the honor of access unto you, Madam, and
bid him get him Pen, and Ink, for that he found himself yet strong enough to
leave his last Will for his dear Sister under his own hand: before he had made
an end of it, feeling his heart to fail him, he charged Saradyn his Squire, who
is now yours, to seal it with his Seal, and give it to no hand but yours; death
came so fast upon him, as he was constrained to leave it imperfect, but he had
so much reason, as to see it Sealed in his presence ere he died, I believe,
Madam, by that I have collected from your words since my return, his care did
only tend to give you knowledge of our births, and that to mitigate your sorrow
for his death, he would be first, should tell you of his quality, whose heart
was vowed to you, and whose services you had not scorned. Then Orazia drew the
Letter from her Pocket, whereupon they wept again; and after Anaxander had
wiped off his tears, he thus went on to end his Story.

Madam, said he, as soon as brave Aronthus soul had taken flight among the
Gods, we caused his body to be pretiously embalmed, which though so inanimate,
we accounted worthy of a Triumph, if so the King thought good to grant that
honor to his memory, which could not be sufficiently performed toward so
great a Prince; we therefore sent a Post unto the King your Father, to
advertise him, of what misfortune had befaln his only Son, and that with common
consent all the Army meant as soon as Visaporus should be taken, to conduct
the Corpse to Baticalus, where we had understood the King, with all his Court,
was gone, since Lisimantus by his valor had regained it from the enemy, and
that we meant, if he so pleased, to accompany the pomp of his Funerals, with
that of his Triumph, which he approved of.

Some few days after, Saradin departed with the dead Princes Letter; and we,
Madam, drew right to Visaporus, which was not three Leagues distant from us:
but first we summoned them to yield themselves, as we did also, unto those of
Goa, Ballagate, Chaul, Bider, and Danaget, which were the Capital Cities of
Decan, and which we would reduce under obedience to Orixa, there was not one
that made so much as show of holding out against us; but having lost their
lawful Lords, and of themselves not able to maintain themselves, they
voluntarily submitted to the King your Father, whose Authority they hoped was
much more pleasing, and more honorable, than the rule of two revolved slaves,
which only force, had made them subject to.

Madam, I fear to hold you over long, if I should punctually relate you all
that happened us in Visaporus, where soon the Gates were opened to us, and, if I
should tell you all the joy, and pleasures Piroxenus felt, when he saw, his
dear and saithfull. Orixa in a private house, where she, unknown to any other
save her Nurse, had lived under the name of Asteria: know only, Madam, that
there never was so great equality of transports, or reciprocal embracements,
as they two exchanged, where I forbear not too, to take my part, as by the duty
of my friendship I was bound, without impediment to theirs.

Piroxenus began presently to talk of re-establishing his Spouse, without
expecting the King your fathers approbation, with whose Forces only we had
compassed our designs; but seeing that the heat of his passion moved him so
forward, I restrained him; and far was that advised Princess, to whom we had
already told all our adventures, and pretensions, from pressing us thereto: she
would not give consent to be so much as known alive, till we were known unto
the King. I mean, said she, to pass still for Asteria, whiles my faithful
husband goes for Calistenus, and that Anaxander wears the name of Ariomant: the
gods forbid, that ever I delight to reign alone, or that I reckon the Decanians
my Subjects till Piroxenus do receive the Oath of their Alegiance. Go then,
said she, present your selves unto the King of Narsinga, like Princes as your
are, and you, my faithful husband, do your best, that solemnly our Marriage
may again be shortly witnessed, when Anaxanders, and Orazias Weddings are
solemnized.

We did as she commanded, Madam, and leaving her in a mean quality as she
desired, when we had left as Governor an old servant of Aronthus in the Castle
of Visaporus, we took our leaves of her, and went to fetch the body where we
left it, which in the pomp you saw, we followed to this City.

There Anaxander finished his History, and his dear Orazia who for Orixas
satisfaction, as her own, died almost, in her longing desire that they should
show themselves unto the King for such as really they were, prayed them to be
there again next evening, to resolve, how to contrive a matter of so great
importance: Meanwhile, without more stay, our faithful Lovers interchang'd
their Marriage faith, which they confirmed with mutual kisses in the presence
both of Piroxenus and of Lifimena too. And being late, they were compelled to
part until next night, although their hearts and inds were not at all divided.

THE INDIAN HISTORY OF AN AXANDER AND OF ORAZIA.
The fourth BOOK.
HAd the Princess been able to foresee the mischief which by Lisimantus Page
(the little Aquilant,) his treason was ordained them, they would not have
permitted his so free accesses to the Garden with them as they did. I have
already said, he was a spy for Lisimantus, who had gained him by flattery, and
gifts, and having seen through certain rails, the two Princes enter at a secret
door into the Arbor, without understanding either their discourse, or
complements, imagining they had as much to say to Lisimena, as to her companion
Orazia, he faild not on next morning early to advertise Lisimantus of it.

The Cavallier was yet in bed, where, notwithstanding, his amorous thoughts had
not allowd him any rest, when that unfaithful Messenger came to disturb his
mind, more cruelly by that unhappy news, than it had ever been. Immediately, as
it is the common custom of men in love, to think that only their Mistresses are
looked upon, so great a power has jealousy over the highest spirits, he made
himself believe that Ariomant (for he knew not Anaxander but under that
borrowed name) was loved of Lisimena; and since that a great courage endures
nothing more impatiently than scorn, seeing another was admitted to his
prejudice in private, and imagining, that that was the sole obstaele that
hindered him from being loved of Lisimena, he resolves him instantly to take
revenge of both, and to comprize as well Orazia as an accessory unto that
Treason, which they used toward him in that common loss.

But his generousness not suffering his choler in such sort to blind him, or
to be led unto so base a revenge, after a tedious consultation with himself, at
length, his anger wholly bent to Anaxander, and although himself had but three
days before, assisted to renew that bloody edict against Duels, not able
resolve to expel his imaginary enemy, but by honorable ways, without more
ado, because his jealous fury would admit of no delay, he purposed to watch
him, from that very evening when he should return unto his amorous appointment,
that he might assign an other, and provoke him to sight with him. He had
understood from Aquilant by what way he had accustomed to enter the Garden of
Fountains, and because he had also learnt that he came always accompanied with
his friend, without farther enquiry, and dissembling what he thought, before
Aquilant, he went to one Zenobus, whom he had made Governor of Baticalus, and
of whose courage he had great assurance, having seen in several occasions his
performance, and drawing him aside, discoursed thus to him.

Brave Zenobus, thou know the love I bear thee, and after what manner I have
ever trusted my important secrets to thy judgment, and courage: wherefore, I
intend no longer preamble to tell thee that I need thy sword to aid me, in the
demanding of reason for an affront I have received; It troubles me to take thee
from that place so soon, so proper for thee, and which thou ought longer to
enjoy, because, undoubtedly the rigor of the late Edict, will force thy
absence; But I would swear, (so well am I assored of thy bravery,) that better
fortunes could not hinder thee from running hazards with me.

A man that had not been very generous, would have been much amazed at this
discourse, for one of these he must resolve, either to quit the Land, or else
expose himself to an exemplary punishment to appease the Kings anger: But
Zenobus, whose hears was good, and who besides his obligations to Lisimantus,
found himself engagd to serve him for his honor sake, answered him freely, that
he held it for great honor, that he would elect him for that occasion; how that
it was one of the greatest proofs he ever had received of his esteem, and
friendship, and that he should not so much as mention the Government of
Baticalus, for that he never did account thereof, but as he had received it of
him, and that he should gain more by following him than by a constant residence
in one place, where he, after could not be eyewitness of his fair exploits.
Lisimantus very much pleased at that freedom, named him the man, with whom he
was to do, and having a near guess at Anaxander, and Piroxenus his swords, they
fitted two of equal length. But Zenobus who was not so blinded with passion as
Lisimantus, whiles the hour that should be favorable to his friends revenge
approached, had the care to make provision for his surety, and his own: and
forasmuch as they had purposed to fight by the light of the Moon, upon the Sea
shore, he caused a Bark to be ready to transport them into Zeylan, a sure
sanctuary for them, when they should have slain their enemies, over whom they
hoped for a sudden victory. Lisimantus approved of that design, because, if
after that Duel, he should fall into the King of Narsinga his hands, a most
severe observer, and beyond imagination, of his Edicts, he must run a great
hazard (although a stranger as he was,) to serve, as an example, and his
services done the Crown might not (it may be) have assured him. The heat of the
day was over, and night by its sweet humidity, began to invite all the world to
rest, except our Lovers, whom for several respects it doubly disquieted: For
Anaxander who on the one side came accompanied with his friend, to bid fare
well unto his Princess, seared to be too late at his amorous randezvous, and on
the other side Lisimantus feared his too late arrival; whose impatience scarce
permitted any longer to defer his taking revenge.

He kept himself concealed in a by corner of the street, every minute
complaining to his faith-full Zenobus, that his adversary was too long a
coming, when he spied him appear with his dear Piroxenus walking a little
before, going as twere the round, surveighing every quarter thereabout, to see
if he could discover any body. Lisimantus, and his second, instantly retired
themselves, to give them leave to come nearer the Princesses Garden door, which
stood betwixt shut, and open, to receive them: And when they were near enough,
stay Ariomant, cried Lisimantus, who therewithal stepped forth, stay thou
persidious man, thou have too long enjoyed a happiness which I have better
than thy self deserved, and is refused me, by ungrateful Fortune; I have
prepared thee other Cates, than those thou go to, in the Garden: let us but
draw aside a little, that we may not be interrupted, and I shall tell thee my
resentments.

Anaxander who distrusted nothing, was much astonished to see himself
discovered; and believed, that treason had been contrived for him, by some one
of the Princesses domestiques, but when by the brightness of the Moon, which
was by this time well advanced he discovered Lisimantus, he was more than
formerly, surpised; for he knew he was in love with Lisimena, and thought his
jealousy deceived him, however, finding himself offended at the injurious
words, which inconsiderately he spoke, that he had greater merit than himself,
instead of more courteous saluting him, which undoubtedly he had done, if he
had come with mildness to him: Lisimantus said he to him, had not thy choler
too much at first transported thee, I would have plaintly shown thee thy
mistake: but seeing thy presumption renders thee unworthy of excuse, I mean to
show the presently, that in ill time thou have delighted to offend a man, of
greater justice than thy self. Lets talk no more, replied Lismantus, and that
as sew may see us as we can, lets fight upon the strand which is not above two
hundred paces hence, thou have no reason to defer it till another time, because
the Moon is bright, and I have brought a man to entertain your friend. Lets go
said Anaxander, I am not so good at words, as actions.

Meanwhile that this was doing, the Princesses who heard confusedly the murmr
of their voices, though ignorant of the cause, for fear of scandal, shut the
door which was but little open: and when they found, that Anaxander came not,
they imagined a part of the misfortune which had happened, and thought that some
one had watched the two Princes, and pricked onward with some just sense, had
sought for reason, and that undoubtedly, that was the cause from which the
noise they heard, proceeded.

Immediately the fair Orazia caused Saradin to be called to her, and with her
eyes, laden with tears, conjured him to run to Anaxanders lodging, and that if
there he found him not, he should seek every where, and try if he could
discover no body on the strand, because she was assiu'd she heard some quarrel
at the Garden door. Saradin made all the haste he could to find our
combatants, but he had too late notice of it; for the business was dispatched
ere he found them, whose deplorable conclusion, filled him with compassion and
confusion; and had much more wrought upon his heart, if he had known but
Lisimantus his story. But because there was never seen, so furious a Combat
sought, as between those four, it will not be impertinent, to give you the
description in a few words.

As soon as they were come, where Lisimantus had a mind to lead them on the
strand, having cast off their Dublets, and unsheathed their swords, and that
their seconds had separated themselves about an hundred paces from them, that
they might not hinder them, they witnessed all bus one resentment, and who had
seen them could not have discerned the seconds from the Principals, so eqaully
were they incensed to revenge.

Anaxander, and Lisimantus, began first, whiles their friends were going off,
and made an infinite number of thrusts in the beginning, to see if they could
dazzle one the other, or set each other out of guard: but being guided by an
equal courage to assault, and seconded by as much dex^erity to ward the blows,
they fought a quarter of an hour without being able mortally to hurt each
other; they passed twenty times with equal nimblenesse on one another, because
they had agreed not to close; and seeing that they could not that way compass
their intents, they used a thousand faints, and all the subtilties of Fencing,
to undo their lives, so cruelly were they bent to one another: Their blows were
so thick, that notwithstanding all their cunning in desence, they could not
avoid an infinite number of hurts: so as at every step they made, the earth was
stained with their blood, and who had seen their all-discoloured faces, would
have said they had already lost a great abundance: but because they both had
mighty hearts, they felt not weakness, but through the greatness of their
courage, seeble as they were, they yet subsisted.

On the other side, Piroxenus having to do with a valiant enemy, had a hard
task to overcome him; at first they made five or six thrusts at one another,
without hurt, and Zouobus trusting in his exceeding force, the second pass let
fall his sword, to close, and grasp Piroxenus, whom he constrained to quit his
likewise, that he might the better struggle with him: They long disputed after
this manner, at length they came to ground, and Piroxenus no less strong than
dexterous, had the good hap to fall upon his enemy, whom he might have
strangled if he would, for that the fall was very soul. Zenobus finding himself
in so ill case; Sir Knight, cried he out, if we end not our Combat after
another manner than this, it will not be in haste that we shall help our
friends; it was not I that began said Piroxenus, thou would fain prevail by
thy might, and the gods have ordered that thy subtilty has served to thy
prejudice: However, though thou art already overcome, to let thee know I can
tell how to conquer every way, I give thee leave to take thy sword again, to
defend thy self against mine, which is able to lay thee once more levill with
the ground: and therewithal he rose and returned toward Zenobus with his sword
in his hand, who being much broken by the greatness of his fall, fought not
again with so much nimblenesse as formerly, although his courage were
continually the same, he was therefore fain to recoil at those gallant onsets
Piroxenues gave him at the first, and in retiring had the ill fortune to light
upon a stone, over which he fell backward, when instantly Piroxenus lept upon
him, and having made him yield his sword, he ran withal his might to succor
Anaxander, whom he found fallen on one side, not able any longer to help
himself, for the loss of blood which ran every where, out of his wounds, and
Lisimantus on the other in the same condition.

They both yet breathed, when Piroxenus came near them, but with very little
sign of life. By and by, without staying to bemoan his friend, who had more
need of ready help, than useless tears, he drew out of his pocket a precious
Balm, with which he presently anointed all his wounds and toar his shirt in
diverse places to bin them up a well as he could. But as soon as he gave them
air, he perceived him by little and little to vanish in his arms, turning
sweetly his eyes toward him, without being able to speak one word.

Poor Piroxenus believing that his friend was dead, who was but in a swound,
felt in his own heart deadly touches; and moreover fearing lest some Officer of
justice might surpriz: the body in that unhappy state, and exercise the rigor
of the new Edict on him, as an example, was in a grievous straight, and a
thousand times tempted to despair, and open with his own hand a way through
which he might follow his dear Anaxander.

Zenobus having on another side, found his friend weak, and at the point of
death, ran hastily toward the bark which he had caused to be ready near the
shore, not far from the Haven, and brought the Surgeon which he had provided
there, with the three Sailors, and having found that Lisimantus had yet some
small motion of his pulse, they carried him upon a Coverlet into the Vessel,
that they might preserve at least his body, and immediately hoyst sail, to
leave the Coasts of Zeylan. Scarce were they unmoared, when Saradin arrived,
with Almerin, and Neander the faithful servants of our two Princes, because for
satisfaction of what the Princess had told him, he had run first to Anaxanders
lodgings, and not finding him there, knowing how great considence his Cousin
and himself had of Almerin, and Neander, had lead them with him, that he might
not fail of what he went about, which had been hard for him to do alone. But O
ye gods, how sad and woeful spectacle at once beheld they: At first they found
one of their Masters stretched out in his blood upon the sands, having nor heat
nor motion, and then the other desperate, weeping, and cursing heaven, that had
preserved his life: none of them knew in that extremity what to resolve; for if
on the one side, they lamented for Anaxanders death, they feared on the other
left two or three fishermen who had seen the Combat might reveal it, and not
daring to carry back the body into the Town, they neither of them knew what
place of surety to dispose it in. In this confusion Saradin was dispatched, in
behalf of them all, toward the Princess, to advertise her of this accident,
that she on her side might try to remedy it, and prevent that he whom she had
chosen for her husband might not again be unfortunate after his death.

The poor Orazia in the deadly apprehension of that disafter, which she had
foreseen, had caused all her women to retire, and shut her self into her
Chamber to entertain her melancholy alone; when Saradin, in truth a little too
inconsiderately, in searful manner brought her the woeful news of her Lovers
death.

The word wounded her heart, as soon as her ear, and as a sharp dart, peirced
it on every side; she strove to resist the unhappiness which surprised her; but
she was taken at an instant, in so much, as staggering in Saradins arms who
held her up, he was at length constrained to let her fall upon the Velvet floar
clean lost; he was ready to call her women to her aid, but, considering the
accident required but sew witnesses, and finding in her Closet, some cold
water, he cast thereof upon her face, and caused her eyes to half open: Madam,
cried he suddenly to her, come to your self, despair not before time, happily
Anaxander may not be dead: and that which makes me think he is not, is because
you were your self even now, just in his plight, and I perceive you breath
again; then presently he unlaced her bodies, and when she had more liberty, she
opened broad her eyes, which suddenly were drowned in a multitude of tears:
and when she would have unclos'd her mouth, to have seconded the with her
complaints, and griefs, she could not uster more than two or three sight, which
she drow from the bottom of her heart, and were as many witnesses of her most
deadly sorrow. Saradin conceived by that action that she was not yet perfectly
come to her self, and though her fair eyes were exceedingly troubled, he saw as
clearly as in her heart, the second seebleness that threatened her, and cast
water again upon her face and wrung her hands, and cried in her car, and used
such means, as that at length, he got her perfectly out of her swoundings.

When she was ready to begin her complaints, one of her women took the
boldness to enter her Chamber, to give notice, that a Gentleman desiring to
speak with Saradin, about matters of great importance, expected him at the
door. Saradin imagining it to be one of those whom he had left with Anaxander
went forth with leave of the Princess, and found it to be Almerin, who was
come hastily to tell them that his Mastet lived yet, and that some order or
other must be speedily taken to perserve him, for that there ran already
through the City a whisper of that Duel; Saradin entreated his patience a
little, and ran into the Closet, to repair the evil, which his first
intelligence had caused; The Princess, commanded that Almerin should he let
enter, who recounted to her his Masters adventure, whom they had lamented dead,
how God be praised he was come again to himself, how they had brought him out
of the way, and upon their cloaks carried him unto a green bed, where he was
much better than upon the strand: but where the moistness of the night might
however do him great harm, in case he were not suddenly succored. Hereof they
all three consulted, and Saradin having proposed to have him conveyed unto a
Castle which he had some ten leagues off, upon the road to Bisnagar, the
Princess held it fit, without considering, in the trouble she was in, as well
as the rest, that that Castle, was the first lodging the King meant to take,
who within two days intended to depart from Bacicalus to return for Bisnagar;
and having made choice of a very excellent Surgeon, and the Princess
furnishe the Litter, they went to take Anaxander, and together with Piroxonus,
and Neander, convaighed him all the night as far as the Castle, where Saradin
at first concealed him in a Chamber very private, for fear the King in passing
might discover him.

As soon as he had sitted him with what was necessary, he left him in the
company of his dear Piroxenus, and his two Gentlemen, and returned upon the
gallop, to Baticalus, which was already full of that Duel. And to prevent a
search, the Princess thought good to spread a noise, that Anaxander was slain,
for that Lisimantus was seen fly, and that the fishermen who had reported it,
had seen Anaxander stretched out in his own blood, without any appearance of
life, lamented of his people, and be wailed of his friends, which gave an easy
credit of his death. It was the absence only of those valiant Cavalliers, and
of their friends, which gave suspicion they had fought: for not withstanding
the noise of their Duel, which had run through the City, had they returned
safe, there being no man to accuse them, they had run no hazard, nor fallen
into any kinds of trouble.

But, when the King found them all four away, and that he knew, that those from
whom he expected greatest supports, in the maintenance of his Edict, had been
the first infringers: he raged, and swearing deeply, that he would be revenged
even upon the dead, commanded, that Ariomants body should be sought for, to
expose it, to the shame of punishment. I perceive said he, my authority is very
openly scorned, and I were very worthy to be laughed at by my neighbors, if I
endured the violation of an Edict, made but three days since, for whose
execution I have so solemnly sworn upon the Altars. I vow again, even by my
Fathers Soul, that Lisimantus, though a stranger as he is, shall repent him of
it, and, that he shall not so close keep himself in Zeylan, but I will one day
sinde him our to be revenged on him: As for Ariomant, who has been as it were
naturalized among us, and who has lived under my pay, I will, that he endure
our justice, and that his body, dead as it is, be dismembered by the ministers
of justice; and I proclaim him, an enemy to my State, and Crown, whoever shall
conceal, or assist to the close keeping of Galistenus: in continuance of this
protestation, he promised the Government (which Zenobus had) of Baticalus, to
whomsoever should bring him any one of those four, either alive, or dead;
immediately every man sets himself upon the quest: but there was too faith-full
a care had of Anaxanders surety, whose wounds however great, being found not
deadly, Piroxenus, and he, made but sport of that adventure; they promised
themselves, to spend the time merrily one day with the King of Narsinga, when
they should return to Gonzarat in Princes equipage, having sent their
Ambassadors before them.

In the mean while, for fear lest the noise of that Duel, and the pretended
death of Anaxander, spread through all parts, might not cause Orixa, whom they
had left unknown in Visaporus, to suspect some disaster, they dispatched
Neander toward her, for her satisfaction, and to tell her, the cause of their
delay, assuring her, that as soon as Anaxander should be recovered, they would
travel for Gouzarat, and return with all expedition, in the quality they had
promised her, taking with them only faithful Almerin, to serve them, as
occasion offered it self.

On the other side, the King causing so exact a search to be made for Ariomant,
sent every moment to Oyazias soul, most deadly fears, who doubting that her
Ariomant was not enough concealed, was a thousand times tempted to discover his
name, and birth unto her Father, for at voiding such inconveniences as might
happen: she was thereto more pressed, by the persuasions of Lisimena, who
seeing the Kings rage each hour increase, for want of news, was of opinion,
that by telling him the true extraction of those two Princes, (it was best to
hold him no longer in error) who were not Subject to his jurisdiction, nor the
observation of his Laws: But whatever great appearances obliged her to this
discovery, Orazia feared to be worse than that word she had given the two
Princes, not to make them known, until they were returned to Gouzarat, and
therefore she entreated Lisimena to continue the secret, and not reveal it till
the time were come.

So our two Heroes remained concealed in Saradins Castle, until Anaxander were
recovered, and being both assured of their mistress savours, burnt with one
equal impatience of returning to their own Provinces, where they expected
earnestly, that the good Evander (who should have been long since returned)
should have regained for them, Alcidaris good will; but this sage old man was
taken, and held sick, some six, or seven days journey from Visaporus, which
hindered the performance of his commission, so soon as he ought, and that he
could not come time enough, to divert an Embassage, which tended to the ruin of
Anezanders contentment, as you shall understand by what does follow.

Alcidaris the great, had by the common noise, learnt all that had befaln his
son Anaxander, and his nephew Piroxenus, in the Kingdom of Decan, which gave
him wonderful discontentments: And because in that great sally, they had made,
where the two Princes, Araxus, and Demonax were slain upon the place, some of
those, who sled from the confusion (as well as they themselves) had spread the
news of their deaths, as in truth, sew men knew what was become of them; the
King of Cambaya believing them out of the world, notwithstanding all their
youthful parts, and follies past, was hardly able to be comforted: especially,
when he reflected on their amiable presence, and the good education which they
had gotten in his house, and that which added to his affliction, was to see,
that that child, which remained to him by his former wife, was so unhappy born,
as not be acceptable to one subject he had; the most complacent, and foulest
flatteners of his Court, wanted boldness to applaud his ridiculous actions, or
commend him, be never did any thing but out of season, if he had a mind to
oblige, he did the contrary, and dullness was as natural, as vice unto him:
however, this unhappy father, who believed that he had no other child alive,
finding himself obliged to marry him, not, for any good inclinations he had for
him, but for the proper interest of his greatness, and to perperuate his name,
and memory, having known of the death of Arontus sole son unto the King of
Narsinga, who had remaining, but one only daughter, heir to all his Estates,
thought good, together with his Counsel, to seek her in Marriage for his son:
for this purpose he dispatched Pirobus (who had worthily served him in diverse
other occasions) in an Embassage toward the King of Narsing a, as well to
condole with him, the loss of his son, as to desire his daughter; of which,
the young Alcidaris had no sooner understood, but he burst out a weeping as if
he had lost all his friends. For he had fallen in love with a mean towns-mans
daughter, whom by all means he would marry, and for her sake despised the love
of the greatest Ladies, and the rarest beauties of the Court. This faithful
Pirobus, whose age, and abilities made him very venerable, soon after departed
from Campanel, and having learned on the way, shat the King, to whom he was
sent, remained yet at Baticalus, made so good journeys, as he arrived there,
the very next day after that Duel had been fought.

The King received him magnificently; and dissembling the displeasure he took
at that so late fought Combat, he resolved to give him Audience, before he
would depart for Bisnagar, that the grave oid man might have less labor, and
journey to return. He knew not the cvill conditions of the Prince of Gouzarat,
nor any thing but of the greatness of his race, and his possessions, for that
indeed, there was not in all India a more mighty Monarch than the King his
father; He stood not long deliberating, whether or not, he should satisfy
Pirobus, and prefer the alliance offered by him, before all other that might be
hereafter. And a special motive which so much rather made him give him his
desire, was, the assurance given in the King his Masters behalf, that be had
but that child only hopeful to inherit four Kingdoms: And thus you see, how the
King of Narsinga sent back Pirobus, with great embraces, and fair presents, and
fully pleased every way with his so happy employment.

Before he departed, he was by the Kings leave to kiss the hand of his future
Princess, who having nothing dearer in the world, than that name of Cambaye, to
whose lovely Prince, she had already vowed her self, received him with a
smiling countenance, and dessembling the knowledge of his evil parts, for whom
he sought her, said to Pirobus, that the gods had favored her too much, that
had designed her for the most perfect and accomplished Prince of Gouzarat She
was even on the point of opening her self wholly to the grave Ambassador;
because she knew he was the man that had treated the match for Anaxanders
mother, and that she happily might do him an exceeding favor, to declare him
his adventures, and to tell him where, with Piroxenus he was concealed, for
having been one of that Combat which he heard so much noise of in Baticalus:
but she thought best to say nothing, for fear of disobliging Anaxander, who
would not be known in Narsing a but with a Royal train, and worthy of the love
he made to Orazia.

However, because she had a perfect knowledge of her Lovers story, and because
she had learnt it from his own mouth, that after the taking of Visaporus, the
good Evander his old Governor returned to Gouzarat, where he was to declare
unto Alcidaris, the adventures of his son, and nephew, she very much wondered
that Pirobus assured the King her father and her self likewise, that the Prince
in whose behalf he was sent, was the only son of his Master; among other
questione which she made him of the Kingdom of Cambaya, she asked him what was
become of the wise Evander, of whose abilities, she had heard so much
discourse. Madam answered the Ambassador, we know not what fortune he has run
since he stole from our Court to pursue the two Prince, whose loss we have
felt so sensibly, as we shall never come again to our selves: and for mine own
part, Madam, I should be the unthankfollest man alive, if I did not weep for
their loss as long as I lived. The Princess imagined by this disoourse that
some accident had befallen Evander on the way, for that his arrival must (...)
have pleased them, and rather have obliged the King of Cambaya to Aispatch
Pirabus in Anaxanders behalf, than on the part of young Alcidaris, whose
unfortunate birth a thousand times a day he cursed.

But, continuing her discourse, she asked him what assurance there was of the
two Princes death which he lamented. Madam answered Pirabus, the common report
has instructed us in that unfortunate adventure, they had in Visaporus, where
they so beastlike were condemned to death: I know of each particular said
Orazia, but certainly they died not there. It Is true, Madam, replied Pirobus
that they died not in that conflict; but when Visaporus was besirged, where the
fair Orixa died of her Feavor a little after the King of Decan her father was
murdered in his flight, by a serving-man, and, that that cruel end which was
not yet come to her knowledge, had caused that of the Queen her mother, who
sunk under the burden of her sorrow, you have understood, how the two Princes,
Araxus, and Demonax, finding themselves put hardly to it, and fearing the two
staves who desired but their lives, caused Anaxander, and Piroxenus our
Maslers, to think fit to hazard a sally upon the enemy, it being the only way
they could attempt to avoid the funy of Rozinloan, and Zabain, who would reign
without impediment. Now, we are told, Madam, of all those who escaped living
from that fatal sally, that our Masters were there slain, together with the two
Princes of Decan; had it not been so, we should undoubtedly have since heard of
them, but their deaths have been confirmed to us by so many, that 'twere too
great mincredulicy to doubt thereof.

The beautiful Orazia seeing that this supposed death of Anaxander, and
Piroxenus, wrought so real a sorrow in Pirobus, did think it charity to tell
him the truth: however, not willing to do any thing without Anaxanders consent,
and seeing that the King her father had yet three days to remain in Baticalus,
where the Embassidour had stayed him, she dispatched Saradin, whom she could
only trust, and gave him charge to hasten to her Lover, with this
advertisement, and to come back ere Pirobus (who was to do part the day
following) should return for Gouzarat. Meanwhile, when the Ambassador taking
his leave kissed her hand, she could not forbear saying to him, that she
believed those he sorrowed son, were alive.

Saradin immediately mounted on an excellent Courser, galloped with all speed
to his own home, and finding the two Princes together, for that Piroxenus since
Anaxanders hurts, had not stirred out of his sight, he related to them the
coming of Pirobus, the subject of his Embassage, and the discourse he
entertained the Princess with, which much astonished them, and made them
believe, that poor Evander was dead on the way. They deliberated sufficiently
what to do hereupon, and whether it were not best to discover themselves upon
that occasion, seeing that if they endured the Prince Alcidaris his suit, it
might be feared, that the King of Cambaya, resolute upon that match, might in
very few days hasten the accomplishment. On the other side, Anaxander held it
no way safe to declare himself so soon after that Combat, which had so much
displeased the King, and did most wisely foresee, that they might be blamed by
an imputation, that being by reason of the greatness of their by ths assured
from the punish neut, they had most rashly broken am Edict, which themselves
ought to have preserved inviolable, within the Dominions of a King, whom they
loved, and to whom they sought to be allied: ^t length, after full
consideration, knowing hat Pirobus was the next day to depart from Baticalus,
they resolved that Piroxenus should go all that night to way-lay him at his
first days lodging, and make himself privately known to him and trust with his
discretion, the truth of all their adventures. Saradin took leave of them in
this resolution, and very glad that Anaxander did so well of his hurts, there
being hope that three weeks time would make him well, returned to him
Mistress, who on her side rejoiced infinitely, as well for the recovery of her
Love, as for the purpose Piroxenus had taken.

As soon than, as the Ambassador had received the Kings commands, and the two
Princesses of Narsinga, and Zeylan, and that he was departed for Baticalus, he
was amazed to find at his first journeys end, the King his Masters Nephew, the
generous Prince of Citor expecting him: he at first took it for an illusion
which deceived his eyes, but, when by his face, and action, and speech he knew
him to be Piroxenus, he cast himself up ^n one knee, and weeping for joy,
strove to have kissed his hand. But Piroxenus raising him up, venerable
Pirobus, said he, my Cousin Anaxander, and my self have understood the cause of
your journey by a Gentleman, whom the Princess Orazia sent unto us, and because
the request you have made the King of Narsinga, is utterly opposite to the
contentment, of your young Prince, who contrary to the belief you have had, is
still alive, I am as well in my own as his behalf, come hither to salute you,
and to acquaint you, with the reasons obliging us to remain yet unknown in this
Kingdom. And here Piroxenus made him an ample rehearsal of all their
adventures, and whatever good or evil had befallen them since their sally out
of Visaporus, where so many men thought they had both come short.

The good Pirobus felt so great astonishment at this recital, and so great a
joy, as with much difficulty could he make him answer; at length, having
recollected his senses, and the liberty of his tongue. Sir said he, is it
possible that two great Princes as ye are would for mere pastime endure so many
troubles, and crosses? Ah, how the gods have been favorable to us contrary to
all expectation in restoring us the true props of our Crown, and disengaging
our spirits from the just fear we had to yield in subjection all our lives unto
a vicious Prince. And than he would have told him of the evil nature of
Alcidaris, but that Piroxenus let him know that they had understood the whole
story. Well than (Sir) said Pirohus what please you that I do, will you have me
go back, and change my errant to Anaxanders behalf? I think the King his father
will never disavow it, and the King of Narsinga, who has been a witness of
his valor, will be glad to conclude the match without drawing breath, and
specially, when I shall let him know, his daughter whom he loves so dearly
shall be desirous of it. No, father (said Piroxenus) seeing is has so fallen
out, that sage Evander, to whom we declared our intensions, and whom we have
desired to regain the Kings good graces for us, has met with some misfortune,
go you with speed and supply his room, and obtain that the acts of our youth
may be forgotten; thanks to the gods we have committed nothing worthy to be
disavowed for rude, or evil natures, and I think truly we shall seem excusable
it being considered, that if we have been faulty, it is but for having too much
loved, and when it shall be seen, that we have not been so foolish, nor so
stupi'd but by our industry, we have obtained each of us a Kingdom. Gothen
Pirobus, and the gods favor you, we will shortly follow as soon as Anaxander
is recovered of his hurts: in the interim, do not for get to tell the King, and
Queen, all that has befallen us, they will undoubtedly be much pleased at it,
and especially, when they shall know, that my Orixa lives, and that her
Kingdom, which we have helped to recoven from the two slaves, Usurpers, will be
hers without dispute, when the King of Narsinga shall, as you do know the
strange History of her life.

Pirobus would fain have seen Anaxander before his return, but seeing that
Piroxenus thought is not best, he went right to the port of God, to pursue his
way to Gouzarat, and there to embark himself for saving much travel, and with
tears in his eyes departed from Piroxenus, who returned to his Cousin with all
speed at Saradins Cafile, where we will leave him recovering his hurts, to tell
you, what passed in the Kingdom of Cambaya.

About eight or ten days after Pircbus departure from Cumpanel, (the ordinary
abode of Alcidaris,) in his Embassage to the King of Narsinga; the good
Evander, who long since went from Visaporus, and had been hardly used on the
way by a great sickness, from which he had much a do to recover, being at
length by the gods permission, restored, arrived happily at the Capital City
of Gouzarat: had there been nothing considerable, but his person, which was
dear to the whole Kingdom, all the Court had received an exceeding contentment
at his coming; but when from him in was known, that the two Princes were
living, and that from the time they were supposed to be dead, they had
performed a thousand; goodly actions, Bonefires were kindled through the City,
and there was not one, from the greatest to the least, who did not witness one
equal impatience for their return, upon which they already established all the
hope and safety which the rudeness of young Alcidaris had even ravished from
them.

But that public joy, however great, was nothing in comparison of the Kings
and Queen Anazarettes, who weary of the impertenencies of that Prince, ill
affected by every body, which they had still before their eyes, and having
forgotten all their anger, and resentments caused by the idle absence of
Anaxander, and Piroxenus, whom indeed they had believed dead, sailed not from
that instant to make vows, and prayers for their preservation, and return. They
caused their adventures to be told them a thousand times over, wherein, they
could not enough admire the goodness of the gods, which had preserved them:
their greatest wonder was, that Orixa yet lived, and had they heard it from
others mouth then Evander, who had been witness of her resurrection, they
might had cause to doubt it; for Alcidaris had understood by report, that her
pretended death had been one of the principal causes, that had obliged our two
young Princes to make that great sally, wherein it was believed they were
slain: but when they knew by Evander, how, contrary to all hope she was
recovered out of that deadly swound, and that she was alive, and well, in a
private quality under the name of Asteria, in the City of Visaporus, which had
been yield to the two slaves, and in which capitulation, he had assisted, they
wondered more than ever; for they had known all that had past since that Siege
(during Evanders sickness in Decan; they had learnt how Rozalcan, and Zahain,
having in pursuit of their tyrannical victory, usurped the Province of Canara
from the King of Narsinga, had been castised by the Prince Arontus: in short,
they were not ignorant that that Prince aided by two valliant Persian
Cavalliers, whom they had heard named Ariomant, and Calistenus, had regained
whatsoever was unjustly usurped by the slaves, which were in Battle defeated,
the gain whereof, had cost the generous Prince Arontus life. Sir said Evander,
interrupting him, he who has done so many wonders under the name of Ariomant,
is no other than your son Anaxander, and that Calistenus is his Cousin, who
has given no less testimony of himself by his arms. That word so much
redoubled the joy of the Kings heart, as it showed plainly in his countenance,
and the good Evander, ravished to see their Majesty's so attentive to his
discourse, continued it as follows.

When they purposed to disguise themselves under those two names, because they
had been too well known by those of Taxilus, and Cleontus, which besides had
been so satal to them; they acquainted but their Gentlemen Almerin, and
Neander, and my self, with that secret, and caused Neander, (who was carried
sorely hurt into the besieged City) to entreat me, that I would hasten to you
obtain your favor for them, which they believed lost: but my misfortune stayed
me on the way, in a remote place from all commerce, where 'twas impossible to
let you know what was become of me, or of the Princes. Undoubtedly they are yet
with the King of Narsinga, unknown to any save the fair Orazia, to whom your
dear Anaxander, before he went from hence did vow himself. He afterward told
them, whatsoever he knew of the History of the Loves of those two generous
Princes, which was likely to have made Alcidaris to send another Ambassador
instantly to the King of Narsinga, but Evander diverted it: for seeing the War
was ended, he assured the King, that they would return, at soon as Arontus
Funerals were solemnized, for which they had under stood so many sad
preparation were making, in the City of Baticalus.

The King and Queen, then ezpect Pirobus his return, who could not be long ere
he came, intending to send him instantly back again in case they learnt that
some new obstacle stayed those two Hero's in Narsinga. And to express the
great contentment which they had received from Evanders news, and the other
great services he had done them, they gave him the Government of Bazain, which
had of late been vacant, and as soon as the good old man had a little reposed
himself at Campanel, he departed by the King and Queens leave, to take
possession of it, promising to be with them again by that time Pirobus should
be returned, to resolve with their Majesty's of what were best to be done for
Anaxanders contentment: for they were already resolved fully, to give Orazia to
him, in case that Pirobus had obtained the promise of her, and thought the
change would not be unacceptable to the King of Narsingas, who had been witness
of the fair deeds of their young Prince.

Not above three days after, the good Evanders arrival at Bazain, about the
evening, out of the Port guard came to tell him, that there was arrived a
foreign Vessel weather beaten, and seemed to be rather forced in by contrary
winder, than come voluntary, wherein were two Cavalliers of good countenance,
who craved leave to refresh themselves in the Town, the most eminent of them
was in ill case, being hurt in diverse places of his body. Now by reason that
place was of great importance to the King of Cambaya, they accustomed to keep a
good guard, and to suffer none to enter, whose name, and quality and business
thither was not known, and because those two Gentlemen who arrived then newly
in that Vessel, being ignorant of the custom, had refused to name themselves,
advertisement was given the Governor, and his farther pleasure demanded.
Evander imagining, that it might happily be the two young Princes, his Pupels,
who it may be, would not discover themselves, till they came to Court, and
surpriz: all people, he went himself unto the Haven, and borded the Bark,
wherein he found a young Knight lain all his length upon a Matteresse, who
althuogh he seemed greatly suffering by his hurts, which the tempest, had
augmented, showed notwithstanding, a certain majesty in his eyes and face,
which made him reverenced of all that saw him. Evander knew well enough, that
it was some personage of note; and as he was extremely full of charity, and
hospitable, seeing the Gentleman who accompanied him, would not tell his name,
he thought however that the laws of civility did command and oblige his
succor, and to offer them not only the Town, but his Castle also, for their
better accommodation. The strangers accepted his offer, and so much care was had
of him, that was hurt; as that in eight, or ten days, he gave undoubted signs
of an approaching health. Now, as he was very generous, and infinitely sensible
of the good entertainment, and usage shown him by Evander, her thought he could
not do less in gratitude, than discover himself unto him, that he might know
he had obliged Lisimantus; that vallorous Lisimantus, who had got so great a
fame, and whose glorious name was renowned through all Asia. Poor Lisimantus,
how much had it been better, that thou had not discovered thy self, than to
have paid so dearly for the honor given thy excellent virtues, at thy first
coming, at lest should thou have been contented to have told thy name,
without particulars of thy quarrel, which will set thee into the strangest
confusion, thou yet ever saw.

Evander, knowing that this stranger was the valiant Lisimantus, who had so
worthily served the King of Zeylar, and who so lately had performed so brave
exploits in the Kingdom of Narsinga, had a double cause of being glad not only,
for that he had it in his power to oblige a man of that condition, but that the
assured himself, he should learn news of Anaxander, and Piroxenus under the
borrowed names of Ariomant, and Calistenus: but before he enquired, seeing that
the Cavallier disposed himself to recount unto him his adventure, and how after
being so grievously hurt he came to the Port of Bazain: being very glad to be
informed, willingly gave his attension, and Lisimantus innocently began his
discoarse, without considering what manner of man he was to speak unto, or what
kind of people he was to have to do with.

Know (said he) most reverend father, that alter my triumph over the King of
Maldives, and if I had set all the Island of Zeylan at quiet, and been very
helpful to the King of Narsingas peace, I quitted the Wars; and finding again
in Baticalus the only object of my passion, that adorable Lisimena, who had
always paid my love with ingratitude, and but whose name, I well perceive I
shall alone possess, my flames renewed, and I felt my self so to the quick
solicited by my amorous desires, as I used all manner of subtilties, and
invention to be in private with her: but she ungrateful, who never sufficiently
acknowledge the services which I have done her Crown, augmenting her disdains,
as my pains grew, instead of enduring me near her, as my fidelity alone obliged
her enough, rebuking and repelling whosoever spoke to my advantage, she at
length committed the most notable Treason against me, that was ever contrived
against a miserable Lover.

There was in the King of Narsinga Court, a young Knight of Persia, very
accomplished indeed and worthy of great praise, who having by much industry the
honor to be known by her, was notwithstanding, preferred before my long and
faithful services. I understood by a little Page of the Princessers that every
night, he was brought secretly into her company, and spent six hours together
with her, and how that ungrateful Princess breathed naught but love for him: I
will not deny, but that hereat, so jealous a madness in such sort transported
me, as not able to endure the happiness of that Rival I waited for him on an
evening, where he used to pass toward his amorous randezvous, and not able
for my anger to understand his reasons, I called him instantly to fight with
me. Evander who with impatience looked that he should name that young Knight,
and finding that he was too long about it, interrupting him, demanded it. His
name was Ariomant, (said Lisimantus;) and well said Evander, full of fear, what
is become of him, I slew him, said Lisimantus; and truly I have since lamented
it, for a more valiant Knight I never met.

He was about to continue on his discourse, and tell them how after the death
of Ariontant, whom he verily believed was slain, (because Zenobus had assured
him, that he saw him stretched out in his blood without warmth, or motion)
being in but little better case himself, he was carried to a Bark, which
attended him, and how thinking to avoid the coast of Zeylan, to shun the King
of Narfinga his anger, whose Edict they had broken, a contrary wind arising,
which begot a furious tempest, had cast them on the Coast of Cambaya, near the
Haven of Bazain. He was (I say) about to have recounted all these particulars,
but that he was prevented by an accident which did surprise him, and which no
less a mazed all that were about him, that himself; for at the recital of
Ariomants death, Evander fell into a swound, on Lisimantus bed. They all
ignorant of the reason of this sudden change, threw water in his face, and
when he was come to himself, which a deep sigh, cried out my friends, we have
embraced the murderer of your and my Master, and uttering these words, he gave
plain evidence of a second weakness which grew on him; but being prevented by
the ready help administered. Unhappy, and most cruel hospitallity (said he) we
show kindness, and are civil unto one, who vaunts, that he has cut our
Princes throat, and who unjustly stirred his courage, and without cause
provoked it; Let the wicked man be set safe (added he) and seize upon his
second in the quarrel; and as they are, let them be instantly conveyed toward
the King, that even himself may order what he please concerning them.

Immediately the guard that was with Evander bound the poor Lisimantus, as he
lay in bed so weak, but half recovered of his hurts, and seaz'd on Zenobus as
well, whom with his friend they put into a Chariot, to carry them without delay
to the City of Catupanel, where the King of Cambaya was. The people of Bazain
when they knew that those two prisoners which passed in the Chariot, had slain
their Prince Anaxander, for the acceptable news of whose safety, they had
lately made Bonefires, were so provoked, as had it not been for Evanders
authority which restrained them, I verily believe they had stoned to death
those two unhappy ones or else dismembered them alive.

On the other part, the generous Lisimantus having from the first, known for
what cause he had been used so rigorously, by a man from whom be had received
so much countess, ^epented him, but too late, for having named him whom he
abought he had separated from the world, and whom till that time he had taken
but for an ordinary Knight: but seeing that after the Laws of hospitality, so
sweetly observed in favor of him, so great inhumanity was used toward him, his
great courage could no longer commin, and addressing himself to Evander, who
accompanied him on horseback, compassed about with Halberts: What means all
this (my father said he) must I be like those ancient sacrifices which were
wont to be crowned with flowers before their being slain? do you believe that
all those praises you have given me, and flowers of Rhetoric which you have
prodigally wasted in my behalf, do make your cruelty the sweeter? what cursed
custom is it you practice, to make such fair appearance to those, you do design
for punishment, like those Sea Monsters, who seeming amiable, charm the
passengers with their pleasing voice, for no other end but to destroy them?
Is It after that sort you are hospitable to strangers? Is It so you use the
afflicted, who seek their shelter in your arms, when they are under persecution
of their evil fortune? Evander withdrew himself behinds the Chariot for fear
he might be forry; his heart was in such manner wounded, as he considered but
his own grief, and in that sense of his Lords death, was nothing moved by
Lisimantus reproaches, or complaints.

But in the mean time, that the false news of Anaxanders death, shall with him
be carried to the King of Cambaya, at Campanel, lets make a turn into Narsinga,
to see how he does of his wounds; and the Kings departure from Baticalus, to
return for Bisnagar.

As soon as that magnanimous Prince had answered Pirobus his demand, and that
he had sent him back, laden with presents, and honors, and having no more to do
in the Province of Canara, and finding that notwithstanding the strict search
of the Combatants, no news was to be had; after having placed a new Governor
over Baticalus, in Zenobus his stead, he departed with his whole Court, but
carried with him, his resentment, and wrath against those, who with so much
impudence had violated his Edict, and resolved where ever they were found, to
punish them with rigor.

The fair Orazia, who saw him wilful in that bloody resolution, was much
disquieted, and her heart troubled, with diverse, and sundry motions, when she
perceived the Court drew near to Saradins Castle, wherein was hid, the richest
treasure of her soul: if on the one side, her fear of his discovery did trouble
her, the pleasure of her hope to see him, was so acceptable, as both compared,
her joy was greater than her sorrow, and her hope prevailed above her fear. At
worst, she thought the danger of his being found in that place, would not be
great, because it would be easy for her to prove his birth, as well by Arintus
declaration, whose letter she kept, as by Lisimena's testimony, who had heard
all the adventures of his life. However, though she found much safety in all
these proofs, show was not with out fear, when the King whom she saw so severe
entered the Castle, she at first imagined, that some of Saradins people who had
seen the two Princes coming, might for hope of recompense betray them: but she
was soon assured by the Master of the house, who answered for the truth of
those that guarded them, and who promised she should see them, if she might
trust one off her women, for they were lodged over her Chamber.

He had forbidden the way to that retired part of the house, making the
harbengers believe, that they were Storehouses, where he had set certain
Household Stuff, and reserved it for himself alone, and those who had care of
the princes, and the way to go unto them when he pleased. In so much, as when
night came, the Princesses, who would lie together they often did, feigning to
be weary of their journey, retired betimes, and would not suffer any of their
women to lie that night in their Chamber; they only called for a watch light,
for Orazia seemed, as if she would read in her bed. When they were laid, they
sent away their women, not daring to trust any one of them, and when every body
was asleep, they rose softly, and clothed one the other, to go to Saradin, who
expected them at the door, and was to conduct them, where the two Princes were;
Orazia would never endure that any other should have knowledge of that
important secret, which she would have conccaled even from her dear Lisimena,
however well she was assured of her faith fullness, had not her company been
then so necessary to her.

This fair stranger Princess, had never been at ease since Lisimantus combat;
for as I have already said, she Iov'd him secretly in her heart, although her
glorious courage never suffered her to show it; and for she had understood
nothing of him, she feared somewhat worse had besaln him, than had to
Anaxander, and what was grievous to her, was, that she dared not openly enquire
after him, besides, that very few were able to say what had become of him: But
Orazia promised her, to enquire of Piroxenus, who better than any other, could
tell whiter he were alive or not, being he, who had advanced himself to purt
them, and who had found them in the lamentable case, which I have told you.
Each then cast a robe about her, and fitted their hair as well as they could,
and their natural graces surpassing all, that art could add unto them, they
thus went, to the sick Princes Lodgings, where Saradin conducted them.

As soon as Anaxander saw appear before his eyes, the only beauty of the world
which he adored, accompanied with her dear, and faithful Lisimena: My Ladies
(cried he out) is it possible that you have done me this honor, and take so
much pains for a subject of so mean importance? Recover your self once brave
Anaxander, answered Orazia, and you shall see of what importance your health is
to my contentment. But I conjure you to conceal your self as much as you can,
whiles you are in our Countries; for the King my Father, to whom you will not
yet discover your self, thunders, extremely against you; and my self, as well
for diversion of his wrath, as that you might surprise him wholly at your
return, have sown the news of your death through all the Court. Were it true
indeed, replied Anaxander, your only presence, and words, coming from so fair
a mouth in my favor, were sufficient to restore me again to life. But, Madam,
do not think that I can conceal my self, however careful I may be to do it,
nor, do you think, that my wounds are secret, no more than those which your
fair eyes have caused in the bottom of my heart; since you are privy to my
evils, I believe all the world is full of them, wherein you only are to me
considerable. But, said he, smiling, and flriving to take the Princess hand to
kiss it, I believe, Madam, you are come hither of purpose, to tell me of the
good fortune, which the marriage of my Brother Alcidaris promises you, to whose
merit you are dedicated; and that you do me the honor to visit me, as your
Brother in Law, rather than as your servant; the Princess who could not endure
jesting upon that subject, I do not think, said she, with a cone more serious,
that you have misunderstood the answer I gave Pirobus, and which I by and by
communicated to you by Saradin; to wit, that I accounted my self too happy, in
that heaven had ordained the most perfect and accomplished Prince of Gouzarat
to be my husband; for you know better than I, that that praise can belong to
man save your self, and that having made me know the wants of Alcidaris, I
should separate my self as far from his suit, as you are from his ill behavior.

Anaxander could not forbear laughing, to see her justify her self so
seriously, in thing, which she had said to his advantage, and finding, that she
was a little moved: How, Madam, said he, would you have so ill an opinion of
me, as to be persuaded, that I should think you guilty of loving a sot? I pray
believe, I have too good a one of my self, and that I have too many testimonies
of your love, to imagine you were pleased with Alcidaris suit; but I thought,
that in talking of so ridiculous a man, a little sport had not been out of
season; and to say the truth, although he be my Brother, I cannot think on the
description made me of him, without bursting with laughter.

During their entertainment with such like discourse, the Princess of Zeylan
entertained Piroxenus, and without seeming to have any interest in Lisimantus
safety, making him tell her every particular of the combat, she understood,
that he had been carried (very much hurt) aboard his bark, but that he thought
him not in worse plight than Anaxander, and that where ever he was, he thought
him still living. This assurance gave great cause of comfort to Lisimena, who
in truth, feared nothing more in the world, than the death of that accomplished
Knight, who had performed as many brave actions, for the love of her, as of
himself; besides, that she knew that last encounter grew, but from the extreme
affection he bare her, which was grown to such a pass, as in his very despair
he could endure norivals.

They were all four, more than two hours together, having no other witness of
their contentment but Saradin: but when there was a word of parting, sorrow
trod short upon the heels of joy. And what ever means Orazia used to dissemble
her displeasure, it was so plain to see in her fair eyes, bedewed with tears,
as Anaxander could not restrain himself from seconding them with his, in that
tender motion which did seize him, and a thousand times kissing that adorable
Princess hands, he made her as many protestations of eternal constancy; then,
in presence of three witnesses, they renewed with extreme, and reciprocal
affection, their promises of marriage, which they had formerly made in
Baticalus, desiring the Gods to exterminate the first of them, that should
break faith.

They being thus fortified by that mutual assurance, finished their adieus,
wherein, Anaxander promised his Princess, that believing himself to be able in
a short space to depart from thence for Gouzarat, he would return sooner than
she thought, for the accomplishment of both their wishes. The night being well
spent, the two fair Princesses returned to their Chamber, where they
entertained themselves until day, which no sooner appeared, but the King, who
was already clothed, caused them to be advertised that they should make
themselves ready to depart, if they desired to avoid the heat of the day, which
the beginning threatened; they shut not their eyes all that night, and yet
Orazia, desiring nothing more in the world than that the King her father were
departed from that Castle, where she had never been in quiet; she suddenly
made her self ready, and having again sent a new complement by Saradin to
Prince Anaxander, she ascended (with Lisimena) her Chariot, and so following
the Kings, she little and little, lost sight of the Castle, which as long as
she was able she kept within her eye.

The amorous Prince, whom she had left behind her, paid full dearly for the
pleasure of her visit; for he was so much moved by excess of joy, which his
Mistress presence caused him, as he fell into a violent Feavor, which accident
very much retarded his recovery: but let us leave him to amendment by a long
rest, until a perfect health grow on him: Lots likewise leave the King of
Narsinga arrived at Bisnagar, where he did a thousand honors to the Princess
Lisimena, who would not permit him to accompany her, any farther; and let us
suffer that fair Princess to depart, who although she returned to the King her
father, and to an Island, which the Arabians In their tongue call the land of
delights, and the Indians, the Paradise of the earth; and that over and above
those considerations, she hoped to see her Love again there, could not choose
but be extremely afflicted, ^^en departing from Orazia, she lost the sweetest
conversation she had in the world. Let us I say, leave all these matters as
they are, and return to Cambaya, and see that unfortunate Knight, whom Evander
conducted to the great ALcidaris, arrive as Campanel, and who had unawares
accused himself of Anaxanders death.

As soon as the King was told of that sad news, it was as much as he could do
to live for torrow. Unfortunate Anaxander (said he,) must I lose thee again the
second time, and be deceived so soon of the hope was given me, that I should
see thee yet alive? Ah, Evander, how unacceptably have thou vifited me? my rage
was over, and I had dried my tears, caused by the imaginary loss of my son,
and thou have let me know his being alive, and his brave actions, but to
increase my sorrow for his death indeed.

Great was his grief, but the Queens extreme; That fair Princess, who was but
newly come from giving the Gods thanks, for the recovery of her only son whom
she had so lamented, touched to the quick by the sense of that irreparable
loss, and for that time losing all patience, and accustomed modesty, could not
for bear accusing heaven, and injuring its powers. Ye unjust gods (said she)
whom too in vain I have invoked, with so great fervency, and zeal for my sons
safety, I see plainly ye are deaf, that have not heard me: he that burns
insense on your Altars foully deceives himself, your power is but opinion; or
have you any, it serves but to offend those, that distressed, make their vows
to you. Alas I had regained my dear child, but for invoking you, and you even
since my vows, and prayers, have snatched him from me. I perceive, my dear
Anaxander, that I have lost thee for ever, I shall no more see thee in this
world, and yet where ere thou art I am resolved to seek thee, and die for
sorrow, if no other remedy: But ere that be, I mean to satisfy thy good Angel,
and since thy murderer is fallen into our hands, I promise thee to be revenged
on him.

These sorrows served but to augment the Kings displeasure, who was stricken to
the heart, as well may be a father who has lost the honor of his house, and
hope of his Kingdom: However, he was infinitely just, and generous, seeing it
was that brave Lisimantus whom Evander had brought, whose known valor was
renowned every where, he thought it would be too great an act of basnesse, and
inhumanity, to revenge his sons death on him, who had slain him like a gallant
man in Duel, and unknown, but by a borrowed name, which he had taken; and
thought it an action of a great King, to send him to the King of Zeylan without
punishment, and seeing too, that Anaxander could not live by the other death.

But however absolute he was in his Kingdom, he could not then be Master, his
Subjects too much loved the memory of their Prince, to suffer his murderer to
escape unpunished whom they had in their custody: And seeing that the great
Alcidaris inclined to mercy, all the Judges assembled themselves suddenly, and
seconding the Queens angry purposes, they hastened Lisimantus judgment, and
that very day condemned him to die. As for Zenobus, they judged him to a
perpetual imprisonment, who had not escaped so cheap, but that he averred
himself overcome by Piroxenus, whom he assured them, he left alive, and weeping
by his dead friend.

When the sentence of Lisimantus condemnation was read unto him, that great and
invincible courage, which had scorned death in all the shapes and forms it ever
had appeared to him in, was shaken by that so severe and terrible judgment. He
fiercely looked upon the bringer of those cruel tidings, and his rage
prevailing, in his sense of that cruelty shown on him: Thou wicked man (said
he,) who serv'st the fury of the most barbarous people of the world, have thou
impudence enough to come and outrage me in the miscrable condition I am in, and
publish with a ceremony, the injury prepared for my innocence? My name, which
has made so many Nations to tremble, and is so regarded through the Indes;
shall it be so much scorned by you, as you will dare condemn me for an
honorable action? Will ye be so unworthy, as to stain the memory of your
Princes death, who did so valiantly defend himself, and make me bear so many
marks of his courage? Can I believe I do converse with men, where reigns so
great in humanity. Where is that generous Alcidaris, whose praises are so
ignorantly sung throughout all Asia? He suffers me to be a prey unto his
Subjects fury, and endures that, after having led a life full of honor, I be
put to a shameful death under his own eyes?

The Officer, who was in truth a generous and compassionate man, and touched at
the misery of that famous Knight, replied thus to him. I come with sorrow,
brave Lisimantus, to execute the sad commission given me against you: but
consider, that my charge requires it of me, and that I must, whatever justice
bids me. Were it, your safety did depend on me, you should be soon made free; I
have admired long your virtue, and however far from your profession, I cannot
but do reverence to men like you. But what, in this disability wherein I am,
can I tender you but vows unprofitable, and pray the gods to give you
resolution enough to bear your evil fortune patiently? Do not accuse
Alcidaris, he wishes you at liberty, and believe me, his subjects have hastened
your condemnation, but since they saw his nature willing to remit you; He is
not this day master of his peoples wills, who are doubly animated against you,
as well by the strong motions of the Queen, as by their own resentments.

What manner of Country must it be, replied Lisimantus, where the King is
governed by his Subjects; he that forbids not evil, does command it; and
truly, though divine and humane Laws, did not condemn Alcidaris cruelty, yet
she honor he professes should persuade him to defend me. He, to whom all power
is given, should show it less than others, and you will g rant me, that your
Prince uses too insolently his authority, and makes too poor a use of my
calamity; Well, well, Death will deliver me from his tyranny, but he shall not
be freed from his neighbors blame. I will let him see, I can tell how to die,
and that the crosses of my fortune, are not able to shake my Resolution, nor
deject my Courage; It Is true, it is hard to part with life at so young an age:
but 'twould be more intolerable if I feared Death; I know I live to dye, and
that the very day of my Birth, nature sets limits to my days; and besides an
unworthiness of heart, it were a folly in me, to fear what I cannot avoid; I
have so often beheld Death, as my eyes are acquainted with him, and I call the
gods to witness, nothing aftonishes me, but the manner of my dying. I pass the
headsmans hands? ah, who soere thou art that look with pity on me, and are
touched with my misfortune, if thou have any credit with the King, or those
that seek my life, obtain of them, that either a Dagger, or poison, satisfy
their cruelty? Excuse me from the shame prepared for me, and permit not, that I
outrage nature so much, as to deliver my self out of their hands, which
doubtless I should rather do, than to expect their punishment.

This compassionate Officer was so touched, that the tears came in his eyes, at
those last words, and curseda thousand times, that day, wherein for his
preferment, he was taken from his ordinary commerce with men, to be a Judge of
their lives: he then drew near Lisimantus to comfort him, and to offer him all
the aid was in his power; and however dark the Prison might at first entrance
seem, yet, by a little stay and accustoming the fight thereto, it was casie
enough for one man to know an other by his face; and therefore Lisimantus who
thought he knew the sound of that voice which spoke unto him, but could not
possibly call him to mind, seeing him so near, knew him perfectly, not having
seen him in twelve or thirteen years before; and crying out, My Father, said
he, casting his arms about his neck, is it possible that you are that good, and
virtuous Eurimedes, who brought me into the world, and whose name I once bare?
If my eyes do not deceive me, say, what occasion brought you hither, and what
strange fortune made you leave the Trade you drove at Diu, to wear the gown,
that you might condemn your own Son to death?

The good Eurimedes, (for he it was indeed) was so astonished at these words, as
remaining a good space without speaking; O ye immortal Gods, said he, what do
I hear, what see I, what miracle is this? Which Lisimantus hearing,
sufficiently confirmed in what he believed: Oh my Father (said he) I know you
without doubt, and see, the Gods for punishment of my forsaking your house, and
raising my self beyond my duty, in foreign parts, and shaming my birth, which I
have till this time conceald from all the world, will have me once appear
before you, for my more Confusion, and to have my Condemnation from your mouth;
O how justly fortune deals thus with me, and how reasonably may she repent her
of her favors so prodigally bestowed on me? I have treated in Equality with
Kings, I have pratled with the fairest Princesses of Asia, I have commanded
armies, I have every day laid new foundations for vanity, and conceived new
hopes of greatness, I have reckoned of the goods of fortune as mine own; and
now, she takes them, not only all, at once from me, but Entrenches on the honor
I have gotten with my sword, and does not spare my life, whereof she formerly
has seemed to be so tender; This (my Father) makes me see, that the world is
but vanity, that its greatness after which so many ambitious spirits run, is
but vapor and smoke, which slips out of ones hand, when fastest seeming to be
held, and that the whole stock of her prosperities, are frayl, and mutable.

Eurimedes, who by this time doubted no more that it was the very child which
he had lost, and precious pledge which Pirobus had made him formerly responsable
for; and for his better satisfaction prayed him to let him see his right arm
naked, where finding the Arms of Gouzarat imprinted, and his conscience
troubled for what he was compelled long ago to do: he cast himself upon his
knees before Lisimantus, and acknowledging him for his lawful Lord; Great
Prince, (said he to him) if you have been elevated by your courage, and
ambition, if you have treated equally with Princes, and if you have commanded
Armies, you have done nothing unanswerable to your birth, or unworthy of your
illustrious parents. Know my Lord, that you are son unto the great Alcidaris,
and only to avoid the blame, which I had had, for not producing you, being
required of me, when you fled from my house, I was fain to imprint the Royal
arms of Cambaya in my child's arm, which was set on yours, to know you by, when
you should be taken out of my hands; That child my Lord, whom I dare not own,
is he, who unjustly at this day, holds your room, and for whom, all the Court
and the King himself have so little good opinion: I make you this comession
with shame, and I, who am his father, ask your pardon, if necessity enforcing
me, I have so ill supplied your place. Lisimantus surpised with wonder, and
astonishment, caused Eurimedes to rise, and prayed him to tell him what he knew
of the truth of his History; which he did from the beginning to the end, and
recounted to him, how Alcidaris got him on the Queen Bernica his first wife;
and forced by his passionate love unto QUeen Anaxarete, who resisted his suit,
because he had a son, he was constrained to suffer his fatherly affection, to
give place to the violence of his love: in conclusion, he recited to him, from
point to point, how Pirobus had trusted him to his education, that he changed
his name Alcidaris, into his own Eurimedes, lest in progress of time, he might
be known for the Kings, and that he might be bred among his children, and pass
for one of them, until he should be called to Court, and used as himself, the
heir of the Crown. But my Lord added he, when you had stolen from me, because
Pirobus had exceedingly recommended you to my wife, and self, and that we
received a great pay yearly for you, we could not doubt but that you were of
great extraction; in so much, as for the fear of being punished if you were
found wanting, as for the loss of a great Pension which we received; I thought
it best, together with my wife (having seen after what manner, the Arms of
Cambaya had been printed on your arm) to do the like to one of our children,
who was very near your age, and shape, and colored hair, and is the same who
at this day, draws all the Court after him, and thinks, he is the only heir of
all those Kingdoms which expect you. Indeed, had he been of a better
inclination, and of other breeding than he is, my fortune had been greater; But
the King taking him for his son, and believing that he got with me those evil
customs and habits, which he has by nature only; he thought it sufficient to
take me from my trassique, and give me an Office, which was then vacant in the
Criminal Chamber of Justice, in Campanel, wherein I am Commissary general, of
all Crimes against the Crown. In truth, the Office was but too good for me, and
I accounted it still honorable, until this fatal day of your condemnation,
wherein, I have dishonored both it, and my self, by adhering to the
beastliness of the Campanelens, who covet to glory in the death of one of
their Princes, by the ignominious loss of the other: but by the gods
assistance I intend to prevent it, I will go instantly and declare my knowledge
to the King, and though it be a sad intelligence to know you were your only
brothers homicide, not knowing him, he must in sinte be comforted, that you are
living, and his lawful race not quite extinct. In uttering these words without
giving leisure to the Prince to reply, he left him in his prison, with new
disquiets for having slain a brother of so generous, and good a nature; and
presently went to King Alcidaris, at whose feet he cast himself, and made him
this discourse.

Eurimedes his Speech to King Aleidaris.
SEeing your Clemency is infinite, most great and generous Monarch, I hope it
may extend on me although unmeasurably guilty, and unworthy of a pardon for my
fault. I am here cast at your Majesty's feet, to accuse my self, for having
given you, my own, instead of your son, and caused you, so great displeasures
for his ill behaviors, accounting him your lawful heir. But I am hopeful of
your favor, having more offended through necessity, than malice, and for fear
of angring you, than willing to offend you. Let your Majesty know, (great
King,) that young Alcidaris, whom Pirobus did long since trust me with, in his
Cradle, did in my house receive a handsome education, as he should have done in
your Palace, and that his inclinations were so great, to goodness, from his
infancy, that I do verily believe it had been hard for him, to have done ill:
But, though I seemed his father, and that he had no other privilege above my
children in my house, ( as Pirobus directed me,) he could not choose, but feel
certain stings of glory, and elevate himself to enterprises, worthy of his
Grandsires generosity; Scarce had he accomplished ten years of age, when he
stole from me, and as from his own mouth I have learned, he has since done
actions never to be forgotten, and which I shall declare to your Majesty, when
I have finished this. As soon as I know of young Erimedes his flight, (for it
was thought fit to name him after me,) I sent every way after him and
despairing of his news, fearing he was of great birth, because of the strict
charge was given with him, that he should be one day called for, (as since has
fallen out,) being very sure, that those who hadicommitted him to me, could not
know him, but by the mark of your Arms, which they had printed on his right
arm, I made use of that secret, learnt of Pirobus, to give the same character
to one of my children, who was of his age, shape and hair. It Is he (Sir,) who at
this day, holds his quality in your Court unjustly, who governs himself so
unhandsomly among your Subjects, and whose presence, has hither to caused but
greater sorrow for the loss of Anaxander. No man (Sir) but I, could reveal
this important secret to you, and were I without conscience, and a faithless
man, I might have left things as they are, and have preferred the greatness of
my own son, before your lawful interests; it may be any man but my self, would
have done injury to truth, for love of reign, and have forgot the fear of God,
to be terrible himself: but were at that I loved not justice nor reason, as I
do, I loved your Majesty too well, to suffer it to be profaned longer, by a
man of petty birth, who^e innocent ambition, as well as my conjeraint, makes me
crave humble pardon of your Majesty.

Alcidaris, who was one of the best Princes of the world, exceedingly
astonished at th^^^ ^^ty of this story, asked him, how long since he had found
his son within this hour, answered Eurimedes, and by so strange an accident, as
I know not whether your Majesty will receive more pleasure, or coffeehouse
in it. Since, said the King, thou have revealed the secret as soon as thou have
known it, it is like thou had no malice in thy action; rise, I forgive thee, on
condition thou bring me my son, and hide no part of his adventures from me.

Alas (Sir) replied Eurimedes, that brave Lisimantus, who has been the terror
of the Indes, and who is at this present contrary to your will, kept in your
prisons, and a criminal condemned to death, is he of whom I speak, and who has
had the honor to be born from you. Ah ye gods, (cried the King) is it
possible? can I be so happy as to be father of so generous a child? but what
say I happy, should I be so unscrable, as to have begotten him, who has
murdered his own brother, and for a cursed point of honor has for ever
ravished my dear Anaxander from me, the very hope of my old days? Unhappy
father that I am, shall I be always so ill used of Fortune, as to be reduced
to complain even of her favors? and shall I never receive one benefit from her
hands, which is not followed by a thousand mischiefs? I thought I had but one
son, good man, and I have twice bewailed his death, and he, whom contrary to my
expectation I have found again, seems to appear, but to torment me more, and
grieve me for the others loss.

Ah (Sir) said Eurimedes, inter rupting his complaintt, while I am speaking,
the poor Prince is in despair, for knowing that Anaxander was his brother; and
I am consident, he would as willingly have died himself, and would be glad to
buy him again with his own life. Without more ado, (said the King,) let his
Iront be struck off, and be he no longer injured; which way soever the gods
have sent him me, I am obliged to receive him, considering his innocence of his
brothers death; and that he has such reason to share with me in the
affliction, which without purpose he has caused me. Then instantly not willing
to publish this news, he secretly commanded the Captain of his guard, to take
him out of prison, and bring him to him, at his Palace.

This Prince accomplished, whom till that time, the King would not see, was yet
very pale, as well by reason of the wounds whereof he was scarce healed, as for
the hard usage he had shown him in the prison; yet was that want so supplied,
by the gracefulness of his behavior, as though he came into the Kings Chamber
with a sorrowful countenance, it hindered not, that all the Court admired him.
As soon as he entered the room, he kneeled on the ground, and witnessed so much
sorrow to the King his father, for the misfortune befallen him, as that his
Majesty was more afflicted for his grief that for his own. Son said he,
embracing him, those are the ordinary shock; of fortune, you are not the first
that has unwitingly destroyed his own blood, the stages are daily full of like
examples, and not to seek so far, we have at home, and with our neighbors,
others like them. Be comforted, my child, heaven cannot be angry for your
innocent offense, it self is more than you guilty, which knowing your design,
did not divert it; Believe at worst, the gods will pardon you because I do, and
for your presence, paies me for all losses, and afflictions past.

Ah, (Sir) replied Lisimantus, can you behold a wretch? which has so highly
outrag'd Nature? a murderer of his own blood, an abominable monster, which
cannot with a thousand deaths, expiate the crime he has committed? He had
enlarged his complaints, had not the King interrupted him, and by his redoubled
embraces, and his solid reasons overcome his earnestness in condemning himself;
and then settling a little his spirits, and by degrees changing discourse,
after he had made him fit down by him, caused him insensibly to fall upon the
story of his life, and strange adventures, which he passionately desired to be
told, from point to point, and how he had arrived to such high honhours, after
having secretly stolen from Eurimedes the Merchants house, whom he took for
his father. Which Lisimantus perceiving, to satisfy his desire, and curiosity,
thus presently began his discourse.

THE INDIAN HISTORY OF ANAXANDER AND OF ORAZIA.
The fifth BOOK.
I Confess (great Monarch,) I have heretofore been proud of some things I have
done; because I thought them high, considering my mean extraction, as I thought
mine own to be: but, at this present, knowing certainly, the honor I have to
be, issued from your loins, I grow ashamed for having done so little, and that
I am no more worthy of the glory you afford me, in acknowledging me your son.
However, to satisfy the dence you have, to know how I obtained honor, and
advantages abroad, I will tell you in a few words; that though I thought my
self Eurimedes his son, and kept in equal breed and habit with his own in the
City of Diu, I forbear not, in those tender years to aspire to nobler, and more
generous exercises than he caused us to be taught. If I saw a goodly horse, I
longed to be upon him; I delighted always more to see a sword than a feather;
and Eurimedes here present, can assure you, they found me oftener at the Manage,
and the Fencing school, than at my Grammar. Besides all this, I had so strong a
passion to be gone out of that little City, where I was shut up, to see strange
parts, which I had heard of, as being one day walking a good way off the City,
on the Sea shore, a private ship, having there landed, I was not at all
astonished when they took me, because they used me kindly, and after having
much praised my prettynesse and beauty, they promised, they would give me to
their King, who was one of the most generous Princes of the world.

In part they kept their words with me, for indeed they carried me into Zeilan,
which was the place of their birth: but instead of making a present of me, as
they had promised, they sold me, to one of the greatest Lords, of that fair
Island. They persuaded him, I was a poor Child, whom they had found, and bred
up for Charity, because seeing me so pretty, and spritely, they might hope to
make somewhat of me, and made me believe, that if I would gain my self a
fortune, and be bred among the great one, should say as they did. This Lord,
who was called Arbiran, found me so pleasing, for my words, and actions, which
(he said) were more than of a Child, and seeming as it were somewhat noble,
that at the end of three Weeks, or a Month, that he had had me, having put me
into very good Clothes, commanded me to wait on him to the Palace: and asked
me, whether I would talk as well before the King, as I had done to him. I had
at that time a great liberty of the Arabic tongue, which is the Mother
Language of my reputed father, and which passes with estimation through all
India, in so much, as Iassuring him, that I would do yet better, and that he
should discern as much difference, as between the King, and himself, he was so
touched with the grace I uttered those words, as he acquainted the Queen
therewith, who desired to see me, which having done, she would have me
presently from him, to place me with the Princess Lisimena, her only
daughter, who at that time was not above six years of age.

Although I were unknown to all men, (because I rather chused to confirm what
the Pirates had said of me, than confess I was a Merchants Son) my face, and
the gentleness of my actions, together with my discourse, begot me much honor
from all people, and to such a degree, as they held me fit to wear the Princes
livery, wherein I was the first, and only Page a pretty while. And because I
had according to the Pirates, assured them, that my Parents were as unknown
unto me, as my name, the Queen named me Euribaldus, which in that Country
language significs a found Child.

The Princess, who at that innocent age had found the secret of making her
self feared, appeared the most beautiful thing that was ever seen, and already
ravished all eyes, with admiration of so many graces, and perfections, as
nature had bestowed upon her. She commanded me to be ever near her, and to
follow her always, as well because she saw every body loved me, as for I was
the first Creature, over whom she had an absolute power. But alas, she in time
knew, that she had got much more than she desired: I found my self so ready for
her commandt, and took so great contentment in her service, as although I had
known at that time my extraction, I should have held my self very happy in the
quality of her Slave, I was as ready to obey her, as she graceful in
commanding me; and though, that age did not allow me knowledge, of the force of
Love; I could not but perceive, my cares, and my affections passed common
duties. She had perceived it, as well as I, when on a day that she had praised
me for somewhat I had done to her mind: Euribaldus (said she to me) well done,
but I fear this passion will not last (Madam said I) I purpose it shall not end
but with my life; And were my happiness such, as to be the greatest Monarch of
the world, I would desire to be ever at your feet, nor should any consideration
loose me from your service; Truly, said she, your services are not like those I
expect from Prince^ That Is my grief (Madam) answered I, with tears in my eyes,
that I find not my self worthy to come near you, and that I cannot by important
services, recommend my self unto you. But how, said she, smiling, by what
services would th^n make thy self more commendable unto me? by such replied
I, as proceed from my own inclinations, and my free will; when I do that which
you command me, I do but what I ought, and what a threat of punishment, may
force me to: But, if the gods, had made me of so free, and elevated a
condition, as that I could of my self, have given you my self, and put me in
such case, as you might like my services, that I might free lydie for you, and,
where there might be quedion of obeying you; I should find but few things
impossible.

Although she were: but full ten years of age, her spirit forward, and her
judgment formed, which supplied the want of years, made her sufficiently to
apprehend my words; I observed, that when she would reply, she stuck twice or
thrice upon the utterance, an assured note that she had understood me. I
believe her first purpost was, to answer me sharply, to teach me more respect
afterward, and not to aspire to things out of my reach: but that thought was
soon sweetened by a feigned ignorance, that she understood my discourse
proceeded from the true affection I already bare her. Thus you see how I took
boldness betimes, to discover a thing unto her, which I did not understand:
For how, at thirteen years of age could I apprehend the mysteries of one of the
most powerful Gods? In truth, I knew not yet, what Love was: but I knew that
Lisimena was the sweetest object of mine eyes, and the sole thing in the world,
which could please me. I knew well enough, that I ought not to love her, and
that my inclination was extravagant, and rash: but when I thought to divert my
self from it, a certain power recalled me, which I could not choose but yield to.

Growing in age, I increased in affection, and my respect augmented in such
sort, as I dared not steadfastly behold Lisimena, because the Love, which day by
day, did kindle in my eyes, had without doubt discovered the passion, which my
mind formed; and I feared to undo my self, by laying it open to her, as well
by the loss of my fortune, as contentment, which had been quite taken from me,
if I had been separated from her service. However, I could not so well conceal
my self, nor keep in my inclination, but that somewhat at length appeared in my
face; I lost by little and little, that gayety, which was so natural unto me,
I became melancholic and grave: in short, I daily gave visible signs, of a
growing affection, and respectful, which I one day took the boldness to let her
see, that cans'd it, in such manner as I mean to tell you.

I was retired all alone, into the Wardrope, where, having discovered by a
chink of the door, that the Princess came to observe what I did, feigning not
to see her, I cast my self upon a bed, and drew a Handkerchief out of my pocket
to wipe my eyes, bedewed with tears; a fegining, which became the innocence of
my age, and uttered these Words, so, as to be understood.

O divine Lisimena, why am not I permitted to adore you? and why has Nature
given me the courage to love you, not giving me conditions worthy to deserve a
like of affection? But I, what am I, that presume to sigh for you? poor, and
miserable Creature, a despicable, found Child, the refuse of the world, and
Fortunes Shittlecock. Truly, it is a handsome thing, that should suffer my
desires, to carry me so high, to make my fall the more shameful; it becomes me
well, to look amorously on her, whom the greatest Princes behold with respect,
and who, by the force of her beauty is able to bring down the greatest courages
of Asia Die ye incon siderate thoughts, ye are so faulty, as but for letting
ye take place in my soul, I do confess I have deserved death. When I had
ended those words, with a deep sigh, drawn from the bottom of my hear, I heard
a noise at the door, and instantly rising, I perceived it was that divine
Princess, who having been on her knees, to consider me the better, and when
she found her self surpised by any discourse, meaning to steal softly away,
she could not do it so quietly, but that her knee in rising knock against the
door: that noise made her double her pace, and she fled as fast as she could
into her Closet, for fear, left I should take notice of the curiosity she had
had, to see and hear my discourse.

That flight of hers, put me at first into a great fear; for I thought she had
gone to declare my childish passion to the Queen, and make sport of it, through
the Corut: however, she said nothing, and in truth, her discreet concealing it,
is the only note that I think I ever had of her good will to me, which never
the less, proceeded but from her perfect judgment.

Since that time, she has been more grave to me, and has not talked so often
with me, as she was wont, but I have loved her still; and flattered, by I know
not what hope, because she had not disocvered me, I would not see my
condemnation in her silence. I therefore persisted, and to make my self worthy
of the high resolution I had taken, I began to be touched with honor, and to
look upon the deeds of those who were of greatest credit in Court, that I might
get reputation by their example.

The thing which facilitated my means of arriving to the glory I pretended,
was, that after the Queens death, who loved me, and was my only support,
finding my self used with less favor by the chief of her household than I had
been while she lived, and my little courage obliging me to put my self forward,
by how much more I found they neglected me; A certain young Gentleman, one of
the Princesses Governesses sons, who had a mind to anger me, and used to s^off
at me, could not upon a day endure the high answers I gave his flouts. After I
had a good while suffered, at last I lost my patience, in so much as I could
not choose but answer him sharply, whereat he growing very angry, Thou art too
saucy (said he) in a tone more grave, and serious, and I will teach thee to
know thy duty, not to make comparisons; thou mistakest thy self too much, and
so as thou have forgot thy own name: For thou should call to mind
(Euribeldus) that thou art but a found child; It Is tr^^ replied I briskly to
him, but whatso cre I am, remember thou, that I am able to lose thee; and so
wholly, as never more to be found alive: And with these words, I drew my sword,
and made him do the like; he came courageously toward me; but though he had
two years advantage more than I, I had so good fortune, as to reverge the
injury he did me by his death. As soon as saw him fallen, I put all my surety
in my heels, and saved my self in my first Master Arbirans house, who with open
arms received me.

This valiant Knight, and the greatest of the whole Kingdom, had still kept the
good will he bare me even from my infancy: in so much, as when he had heard my
reasons which he found just, he kept me a while private, until he had justified
me to the King, of whom, in spite of the mother, and friends of the dead, which
were of quality, he obtained my pardon. In acknowledgment of this good turn, I
ever after was so observant of him, and showed so great a zeal, and affection
to his service, as I can truly say, he loved me before any of his kindred, and
made me so considerable in the Court, by the honor of that friendship, which
all people took notice of, that I was respected of both sexes; for Arbiran, was
no less loved of the Ladies for his extreme civility, than by men honored for
his ex^eeding valor. But truly all these honors were indifferent to me, in the
only consideration I had to be acceptable unto Lisimena: That fair Princess
nourished still within me the servant desires which consumed me, and by so much
the more entertained me in my amorous disquier, by how much my respect deprived
me of the means of seeing her, for fear of offering an unwellcome and sad
object to her Governesse eyes, who could not forget the death of her son: if
sometimes I met her in the Palace, I saluted her a far off with certain
gestures, which equally witnessed my passion to serve her, and my fear to
discontent her, and that beauty, who had still the signs of my foolish passion
fresh in her memory, looked over from me, whether out of scorn or judgment I
cannot tell.

Forgive me (Sir) if I busy my self in telling you a thousand needless
circumstances, but most pleasing to my remembrance, which are nothing to our
matter, but contrary, do set me off from the design, I had to tell you the fust
and principal cause which so absolutely go^me the King of Zeylans favor.

That Prince, who is exceeding pious, and always delighted in serving the
gods, according to the custom of his Country, and devotion of his fathers,
having understood that that new sect of Mathometans, was lately slid into his
Island, which is the fairest and fruidfullest of all the Inde, desirous to
banish that strange religion, which was able to undo his Subjects, and to
disunite them from their lawful obedience unto him; he made an Edict, by which
he proclaimed guilty of high Treason to his, and the Divine Majesty, all those
that should be convicted of adhering to those new opinions, and as such, he
ordained, that their goods should be consiscate, and banished within a months
space out of his Country.

There were a number of those Infidels dwelling in the Port Tanadarus, who as
soon as they heard a breath of this Ordinance, seiz^d on the Castle, which is
one of the best in the Kingdom, and expecting that they should be ass^ulted,
deputed three or four of them, to go speedily to the King of the Maldives, to
seek his aid, seeing he was of their Law, and had embraced the sam: unhappy
belief which they had done.

This King of the Maldives, who was Lord but of several pieces of land,
separated by arms of the Sea, and envious of the King of Z^ylans prosperity,
was very glad of so fair an occasion offered, to enter upon his Countries, so
convenient for him; And that he might not want pretext, not be unprovided to
answer the blame, which his n^^ghbours might lay on him, he dispatched an
Embassidor to the King of Zeylan, by whom be prayed him, to use his Subjects
with more faver, and to permit them the liberty of their religion in his
Island; if otherwise, he should be obliged to protect them, as his brethren,
united with him in belief, toward the god he worshipped, according to the Divine
Laws of Mahomor, his great Prophet.

The King of Zeyland, gave a generous answer to that Ambassador; that he very
much wondered at his Masters extravagancy and rashness, who Impertinently
thrust himself into the knowledge of his Subjects affairs; that, if his threat
did stir him unto any thing, it should be, to a greater rigor toward those,
who without any good ground, had miserably forsaken their fathers gods: and for
his own particular, he should instantly depart out of his Countries, lest his
anger might make him violate the Laws of Nations, and in his person, punish his
Masters insolence, whom he would prevent. That Ambassador who looked not at
all, for so rough an answer, so exasperated the King his Masters courage, which
was enough irritated before, that he immediately sent forth a hundred Ships and
more from the Port of the Maldives, to go succor the Rebels of Tanadarus.

In the mean time, as the Sectaries of that cursed law, think they cannot do
God better service, nor find a shorter way to heaven, than by murdering those
that oppose their belief, they plotted a furious conjuration against the Kings
person; twelve of the most resolute of his Rebel Subjects drink each others
blood, to encourage themselves, and take a firm resolution to go kill the King
in his Palace Hal, and in the middle of his Guards.

This open and generous Prince, who till that time had armed himself with no
defense, gave liberty to all sort of people as accustomed, to be in his Palace,
where, four of the conspirators entered, without notice taken of them, and as
the foremost of them lift his arm to strike the King, it was my happy fortune,
only of the company, to perceive him: for that Traitor, not at all troubled at
his damnable design, had so well taken his time, that if the Tutelary gods of
Zeylan, had not directed my cies unto him, undoubtedly the King had died. As
soon then, as I spied the action and motion of that perfidious murderers arm,
I threw my self at all hazard betwixt (...) and the King, and taking his hand,
to put by the blow, which slightly hurt me in the face, hold Traitor said I to
him, and fearing lest he might redouble it, I took him by the collar. The King
who saw my check bloody, and with what rage I opposed that Ruffin, whose design
be know not, asked what was the matter: Ah, (Sir) said I, doubtless some great
Treason plotted against your Majesty: then by and by he saw the Dagger, which
the murcherer had let fall, he was instantly set on the P^ack, where he
confessed ^he number of the parties sworn, who were found out, and quartered
alive, as well as himself.

The King was so much pleased with me for this action, as he embraced me before
them all, and praising what I had done to save him; I swear said he,
Euribaldus, that I will not be unthankful for the service you have done me, but
posterity shall know thou have obliged a thankful Prince: wherefore dispatch,
and ask me any thing in my power, and I protest to thee again by the tutelary
gods of this Kingdom, it shall begranted thee of whatsoever price it be.

I, being dazzled by so great a sev^^^, made him this answer on my knee, which
(...) than what had past, obliged his love of me. It is your only nobleness,
Sir, which makes the sinall service I was obliged to do you, acceptable,
although at hazard of my life: the gods forbid, that I should ever pretend to
deserve an acknowledgment from you, for what my duty bound me to, and for a
thing I ought my self; it is only Fortune whom you are to thank, for having
happily addressed mine eyes, unto the murderer, to turn his stroke, and I a
ssure my self, there is not any Subject you have, but would have shown the same
zeal to save you, admitting him the same good fortune.

The King seeing how gracefully I refused the good he offered me; Observe
truly, said he, turning toward Arbiran, a great deal of youth, accompanied
with a great deal of virtue, and I intend not that this service shall be
unrewarded. Say then, Euribaldus, what thou ask of me, I protest to take thy
silence as a scorn, if thou crave nothing of me.

When I saw my self thus put to it: Great Prince, answered I, I should be
wholly ignorant, if I did not acknowledge the gra^^ity which your Majesty
offers me, to proceed from your alone goodness, and I should injuce heaven,
which has caused me favor in your sight, if I should not obey your commands,
and ^^^^ish your Nobleness with some occasion. That then (Sir) which I crave
of you is, that it will please your Majesty to take from me, my former name
given me, which seems to reproach me ever with the shame of my birth, me I say,
who prefer honor before all other advantages of Fortune; Since you desire to
raise me, first take me from that poverty which Nature seems to have placed me
in, and you will give me a great deal, if you but courage me a little. Truly
answered he, thy request is too noble, and too just to be refused, I know not
who thy parents are, but who so ere thou art, I see that Nature has not been
so much a stepdam to thee as thou think, being so virtuously disposed. From
this time, I declare thee a Gentleman; and seeing that Gentility is a quality
depending on another, and which may happen to thy contrary, I mean a vicious
man, and of no worth; be it known, in case thy birth be mean, that I account it
far below the quality thy virtue gives thee. And, that henceforth, thy name may
not be only in the esteem, but reverence of my Subjects, my only daughter shall
name thee, and being bred her Page, thou shall henceforth be her Knight.
Presently, he commanded me to follow him to the Princess Chamber, who by the
Kings command, gave me the sweet name of Lisimantus, which ever since I have
enjoyed, and did me the honor to girt on my sword, which I have ever since
employed in that Kingdoms service.

The fair Princess was a little surprised when the King commanded her that
thing; for instantly she thought upon my love, and though no creature know
there of but herself, she could not choose but blush, finding she was obliged to
show me so much favor: but verily my sense was very different from hers, and
if I had not summoned all my force to help me in that mansport, I had given
apparent signs of my passion to the whole Court.

I resisted (in truth) my first motions of joy, with a great deal of constancy,
as well, when she gave me her fair name, as when she girded on my sword: but,
when according to the order of their ceremonies, I was commanded to kiss her
fair hand naked, which had done me so much honor, and that Love had emboldned
me to kiss that beauteous living Marble; I confess that all my senses were
troubled, and yet for the present I so contained my self, as she alone, could
take notice of my rapture.

Since that happy day, I had more liberty of seeing her and speaking with her,
as one who was her creature and Knight, made with her own hand, could every day
go seek employment of her: but foreseeing that the service I would do her, was
not what she desired of me, I oftentimes constrained the violence of my
desires, and fearful to displease her, did forbear to wait on her.

In the meanwhile, the King caused ten thousand men to depart in all diligence
to punish the Rebels of Tanadarus, who in such sort had encompassed those in
the Castle whom they had surpised; as had it not been for the succor which
the King of Maldives sent them, they had been already reduced to extremity, for
want of having provided what was necessary to sustain a Siege, and were even
ready to ask mercy. But, when they discovered the Ships which brought them aid,
they recovered new forces, and set up, on their walls, the King of Maldives
arms and Standards, to show, that they gave themselves to him, and acknowledged
him their Prince.

He that commanded that Fleet, was a Turk, renowned for his valor, and called
Ibraim, who to get glory in that occasion, and to witness his passion to serve
very well his religion, and new Master, (to whom he had given himself,) caused
all his Troops to land in the fury of the tide at a place of the Island where
they were not expected, very near to Tanadarus; Although the approach were
difficult enough, he boldly freed the passage, wherein some of his people were
drowned, and came with eight thousand men well armed with purpose to raise the
Siege; which succeeded to him, to our prejudice; for our men were fain to
expect him in open field, and give him Battle, where he was so happy, as to
remain Victor; he presently cast into that place, which was excellent, the
Victuals, and Ammunitions, he had brought in his Ship^, and so refreshed the
besieged, that in a whole years space they could not be taken by famine.

Being made proud with this victory, he sortified himself in the City,
expecting a second fleet, which arived, greater than the first: in so much, as
this ill news coming to us, the King was constrained to send Arbiran with new
troops, who would have me accompany him in that enterprise, and share in the
glory, which he hoped for, with him. Before my departure, I went to take leave
of the King, who showed me already a great deal of friendship, and seeing with
what cheerfulness, I undertook that voyage, said alond, that he had conceived
great hopes of me, which so inflamed my Courage, as I feared, it would not
find enough to be employed on. When I had received his commands, I went to the
Princess side, before whom, upon my Knee, I said, Madam, being obliged to give
you an account of all my actions, as your Knight, I am come to crave your
leave, that I may serve the King your Father, at Tanadarus, under the valiant
Arbiran, and there endeavor to do something, which may make me worthy of the
honor I have received from your Royal hands, and that you may be less sorry
for the extraordinary favor you have done me. My Knight answered she, with
somewhat more confidence, than ordinary, I shallnever repent the doing of a
just action, and whereto I have been invited by his command, who has all power
upon me, and who cannot sufficiently recompense the affection, which you have
had, to his service; Continue in well doing, and I am confident, you shall
hereafter reap other fruits of his love; He may Madam, replied I, make me as
great as he please, but though he should divide his very Crown with me, and
give me equal power over his Subjects with himself, do you think, I should
hold me more obliged to him for that favor, than for that he has already done
me, in consenting to the great honor I have received from you? Since you have
made me what I am, and that I have the glorious, advantage, of being called
after the greatest beauty of the world; assure your self, great Princess, that
I will cause discourse of me henceforward, and if death prevent not my
ambition, the illustrious name you have bestowed on me, shall travel far beyond
the limits of this Kingdom. I had engaged my self much farther in my
Complements, if I had not considered, that they already exceeded the bounds of
respect, which a subject ought his Princess, wherefore thinking it enough what
I had said, and inclining my self very low to kiss the hem of her garment, she
did me the honor to offer me her hand, which caused me to return, full of
ardent desire of glory to Arbiran, whom I found ready to depart, and whom, with
open signs of joy I followed.

I then entered the eighteenth year of my age, and was grown to such a strength
and advantageous stature, that I could desie the strongest, at wrestling, and
had so well bestowed my time with Arbiran, after I had left being Page, as that
my skill was more commended, than my strength. Besides, Lisimena had so many
charms, and all her features so well formed, that she ravished all men with her
beauty, which I dare not embolden my self to describe, lest I may not be able
to do it sufficiently: The ambition I had to do something, that might come to
her ears, was so sharp a spur unto me, as being at hand blows with our enemies,
whom we went to force, even in their own Trenches, my good fortune would, that
I had to do with their Chief, the valiant Ibraim, who till that time, had so
fortunately guided so great an enterprise. Him then I chose among the rest,
finding him doubly notable, as well for his aspect, as horrible slaughter he
made among our people; and after having some space resisted the fury of his
arm, in the end made him sink by a blow of my sword. I very happily disengaged
my self from the Troops which had encompassed me, who seeing him fallen, lost
their courage, and rather sought to succor, than revenge him; yet I was
Iustily assaulted by five or fix of his guard, with whom I fought stoutly, and
had they been seconded, I had been undoubtedly loft, by being too far engaged
in the throng.

Arbiran on his side, had done his part so well, being assisted by diverse
Gentlemen volunteers, who did indeed wonders in that occasion, that he put the
rest of our enemies to flight; and when he saw me return, covered with blood,
and sweat and dust, with the restimony of what I had been seen to do, and how I
had with my own hand slain the chief of the Maldives; he gave me great
commendation, and did me the honor to write more good of me to the King than he
had seen: I confess to you Sir, that little action gave me great estimation,
and from that instant I was thought fit to command a chosen Company of
Soldiers, who had loft their chief in that Battle, and which I afterward led
on many hot occasions.

As soon as we had routed the enemies Army, we had order from the King to
return to the siege of Tanadarus, and to take that place whatsoever it cost.
But I abuse your patience by telling you particulars of those things, whereof
all Asia is insorm'd, and which your self should know as well as those who did
them. Hereat the King of Cambaya expressed to him, that he should be very glad
from his mouth to learn the very particulars of the fortune he had run in those
Wars, which had so long lasted between the two enemies Kings; Whom Lisimantus
obeyed, and made him a summary discourse thereof in these words following.

After we had taken that City, whose Siege lasted ten whole months, and that we
had forced it at our enemies nose, who were come with the unprofitable power of
an hundred other sails, to succor it, the King gave me the government thereof:
Notwithstanding I rested not long there, because I was thought useful
elsewhere, and that the brave Arbiran, who was Admiral of Zeylan, did me the
honor to make me his Lieutenant to repel that Enemies Fleet, which since the
taking of Tanadarus, had never ceased pillaging our ships returning from
Narsinga, and ransacking whatsoever called it self ours. The King of Narsinga
brother in law to our King, and his especial friend, believing that we were not
strong enough to resist the King of Maldives power by sea, sent us of his own
accord, a hundred sail, to strengthen our Fleet, wherewith we went to present
Battle to our enemies, who at that time had not the heart to meet us: but six
months after, returning stronger than at that time, and we having notice of
them, although of less number, were so bold as to assault them, and the Fight
continuing until night, the advantage remained on both fides, equal; and had
the wind^ been as favorable unto as as to them, without doubt, the Victory had
been clearly ours. The next morning, when we thought to recompense the Fight,
there rose so furious a tempest, the wind at Southwest, as spoiled our whole
designs, and whether we would or no, were constrained to yield to the violence
of the storm, which dispersed a part of our Fleet, and drove the Admiral
wherein we were, into the Road of Commory, at the point of Narsigna.

The valiant Arbiran, impatient that he could not revenge as yet the injuries
which those barbarous Maldives had so many times done us, obtained of the King,
that he might land upon one of their Islands, to endammage them to purpose, and
do them the affront, with which they had but threatened us. The King having
approved this design, we were eight months on sitting our selves, that we might
not fail of our purpose; during which time, I remained at the Court, and
favored by the sight, and entertainment of my divine Princess, who touched
with that little reputation, which I had gotten in those last stirs, did so
much the rather force her inclination to endure me, that she looked
respectfully on me, and because she thought, that age which had acquired me
more knowledge, had diverted me from that disordered meaning, which I had in my
infancy, to serve her as a Lover. But alas, that liberty she gave me, was the
cause of all my ruin, for as it is the custom of Lovers to flatter themselves
in their passions, I made my self believe, that the good acceptance she began
to give me, was a testimony of her affection, and so blinded my self in my
love, as I took her civility for an argument of good liking. Being deceived
with this foolish belief, I proceeded farther, than before, even to embrace her
with mine eyes, and to give her certain proofs by all my actions, that my flame
was augmented. This obliged her to resume her former severity, and to live so
recluse unto me, that I am forced to say to my consusion, that since that day,
she never saw me but with trouble; Ny I was so unhappy, that fearing lest I
would take leave of her, the day of my departure, she said she was sick, and
kept herself unseen by any.

I lost not however my courage, although the better part of my amorous hopes;
and followed Arbiran as resolutely, as if I had departed with a favor from
Lisimena, so powerful in my soul, was the defire of glory, where ambition
reigned with Love. Our design succeeded happily, we forced the place we
attempted, which was the most important of all Atollon in the Province of
Padipol: but the poor Arbiran was slain, when he had don a thousand memorable
exploits of valor. This our irreparable loss, was so felt by all the Army,
and in such sort troubled it, not knowing where to go for counsel, and not
daring yet to trust its conduct to my youth, although I were Lieutenant to the
Admiral, that we returned without doing any thing, and without so much as
leaving a Garrison in the place we had taken.

I bare with great impatience (truly) the sorrow of that loss, and at my
return, I had the honor to be comforted by the Kings own mouth, who better than
any other, knew the cause I had to be afflicted. But alas, it was not from him
I looked for the healthful remedies of my sensible griefs, one only word from
Lisimenaes mouth, had comforted me not only for the loss of my friend, but
also of my heart, in serving her, and of all the troubles I endured for her.
But I was very far from the hope of that favor, she shunned me more than before,
and her scorns, which I could not endure, by little and little choack'd the
respect which remained for her in my soul. As though nature had made me
sensible of what I was, I thought in my self, that I deserved a milder usage,
and if not as a Lover, yet in the quality of Lisimenaes Knight I deserved, a
freer access unto her than she gave me. I could not conceal my displeasure,
but gave my passion so much considence, as it came to the Kings cars, as I have
since known, who feigned to know nothing, because I was so necessary for his
service; however he feared lest that affection might take too deep root in my
heart, and besides the extravagance which I might show to all the Court, I
might do him ill service, and make my self unworthy to command his Armies, if I
should lose the Mastery of my self. He therefore removed from my sight that
divine object, upon a pretense, favorable enough to his distrust; for as after
Arbirans death I had very ill handled the Maldives in two, or three
rancounters, who were put to sea, to repair their losses, and former outrager,
they resolved to make one final attempt, and having shut up all their Ports,
lest news might be brought us of their design, they prepared a great and mighty
Fleet to power on us; but they could not work so privately, but that a Spy
came to advertise us, of their enterpriz^, and assured us, that all that great
preparation, was for the City of Collombo, which these Barbarians had a purpose
to besiege by Sea and Land.

The King, who commonly abode in that Capital City of his Kingdom, thought not
his daughter which was his most precious jewel, in too great a surety there;
insomuch, as for delivering her from my troublesome suit, and to secure her
from the enemies in vasion, whose threatenings he thought not ^i^ to scorn, he
sent her to her Uncle, the King of Narsinga, to accompany her fair Cousin
Orazia, until the troubles of Zeylan were over.

Judge Sir, by what I have told you of my Love, if this separation must be
grievous to me; however, I must bear it, and constrain my self in the Kings
sight, who observed me more than he was wont, to see if my spirit were changed,
or whether I had rigor enough to digest that trouble without distraction. I was
indeed, very happy in my constancy, to resist my resentment in that occasion,
where it may be, any other, than my self might have suffered himself to be
overcome; for the King who had a very good opinion of my courage, believing I
had quire forgotten that passion, which kindled in my heart by Listmenaes
presence only, did me the honor, with the general consent of the whole Army, to
make me heir of all Arbirans command.

As soon as I found the whole force of the Kingdom in my hands, a new desire of
glory entered my heart, and seeing that our enemies were slow in coming to us,
and that they could not be a long time ready, I persuaded the King to give way
that I might go and assault them in the Isle of Bandos, near the City of Male,
where I had intelligence. What more shall I say? all succeeded happily unto me,
as you have known from others, and in spire of all the King of Maldives
strength, who came with a powerful Army to hinder my design, I took the C^stle
of Bandos, which was of greatest importance of all, for keeping of his thirteen
Provinces, or Atollous, whereof, I became master within the spa^r of eighteen
months, and having defeated himself with all his power, I compelled him to s^,
into the remotest parts of the Island of Palandurus. I had pursued him even
there, but that I pirried the misery of that poor Prince, who wanted no
courage, and who intruth would have done things worthy of his birth, if fortune
had but seconded his ambition.

I contented my self them, to have augmented the King of Zeylans possessions by
the whole extent of the Kingdom of the Maldives; where when I had left good
Garrisons, I returned Victorious to Tanadarus, honored by the King; and
reverenced by all his Subjects, who could not but admire at my prosperities,
and who imputed to me only, that particular favor of the heavens to accomplish
all my enterprises.

Scarce had I the refreshment there of one whole month; for we being advertised
that Rozalcan and Zabain, who to make themselves Lords of the Kingdom of Decan,
by a cruel, and tyrannous usurpation had again dared to assault the King of
Narfinga, from whom, we had had so great aids in all our Wars and necessities;
The King without expecting his defire of succors from him; sent back all his
Troops, which had assisted him in the Conquest of the Maldives, and having
added half so many of the best Soldiers in his Army unto them, which he must
else have dismissed, he commanded me to lead them, and present them to his
brother in law, and that I should receive directions from him of what we had to
do for his service. It would be needless for me to tell you, what I did, after
I had the honor done me to have the Command of the Army divided between the
Prince Arontus, and my self, and after what manner I regained the Country of
Canara, which had been usurped from the King of Narsinga: I know, Sir, that you
can speak of all those matters, as well as they that did them, and that nothing
since the death of Arontus has passed whereof you have not had very faithful
relations. Wherefore I will return again to my Love, and tell you some
particulars of that sad passion, which more than ever renewed in my soul, at
the sight of Lisimena, whom I found in the Kingdom of Narsinga. But I know not
how I shall yet remember that ungrateful beauty, who has always been so cruel
to me, and to oppress me with misfortune, and disgrace, has caused me to be
jealous of my own blood, which a beastly anger has enforced me to spill, that
ever after I might remain miserable, and find no where to comfort me in my
displeasures.

The poor Lisimantus, in uttering these words, could not restrain his tears,
which ran abound^n^ly from his eves, which so moved the King, as be seconded
them with his; and as he was disposing himself no continue the History of his
misfortunce, and to tell the King what sad occasion had so lightly moved him to
seek his brother Anaxanders death, they heard a great noise at the door, and
wondering who it should be, that was so bold to knock so loudly, they found it
was Pirobus, who was returned from Narsinga. The good old man at his arrival
hearing in how great trouble the King, and all the Court were, for the
imaginary death of Anaxander, made all baste to them, and to assure them of
both the young Princes health, and that they would within a few days, return
to Campanel.

As soon as the King had heard this welcome news, he embraced Lisimantus with
another manner of courage than he had done; and that the Queen might receive
him kindly, he would have him to give her the first knowledge of what she no
more looked for, and that he who had made the wound, might bring the remedy
himself. And because the Queen had not yet seen Lisimantus face, the King
commanded him to feign, that he was one of the King of Narsinga's Gentlemen,
who by command from his Master, was come to assure their Majesty's, that
Anaxander lived, and in health, and that not being perfectly healed of his
hurts, lest they might be in fear for him, he was dispatched to deliver them
from that disquiet.

Lisimantus observed punctually that command, and when with a smiling
countenance he entered the Queens chamber with that good news, she was ready to
die for joy; thinking verily, that Lisimantus was an Ambassador from the King
of Narsinga, she undid two strings of fair and goodly orient Pearl from her
neck, which she usually wore, to give them him; the King entered as he received
that Present, and asking the Queen if she had not all reason of the world to
cherish and embrace him, who came to drive all sorsows from her heart, and had
made so quick a passage of her mourning into joy? Sir, said she to him, being
transported, I should be very ungrateful, if I loved him not as long as I
live, seeing without the news he brings me, I had never been comforted. It Is,
Madam, said the King, all that he desires, that you love him, and it is the
only request I have to make you in his behalf: I may now safely tell you, he
is my Son, and that brave and generous Lisimantus, whom erewhiles you so
mortally hated, and who hated himself yet more, in the sorrow he conceived,
believing he had slain a Brother he knew not, and whose courage he admired.
Love him, Madam, I conjure you, and forgive his quarrel with Anaxander, since
he is so penitent, and willing to repair that fault by a thousand testimonies
of friendship, which he promises to give him hereafter, as his only Brother,
whom only likewise he will love.

The virtuous Anaxarette, seeing with what affection the King entreated her to
a thing, whereto the good looks, and news of Lisimantus had already inclined
her: Yes truly, said she, I will love him as much for the consideration of his
own merit, as for that you wish it: and that you may have testimony, that
henceforward I desire to account him my Son, I will give him a Mothers kiss;
which said, she embraced him before the King, who shed tears for joy. By and by
Pirobus was called, whom the King made repeat to the Queen all that Piroxenus
had said to him of Anaxander, and how they hoped shortly to come and rejoice
with their Majesty's, and make them laugh in good ca^nest at the King of
Narsinga's anger, who know them not, and who pursued them as violaters of his
Edict. After the confirmation of this common joy, they all went to the Temple
to give the gods thanks; the Court was presently full again of pleasure, and
the Cambaians thought of no one thing but doing him honor, whom but so lately
they were resolved to put to a shameful death; They talked of nothing now but
Gallantry, Balls, and Turnamen^s, after the Arabic manner, which was however
nothing to what they prepared for the return of the two young Princes, whom
they had so much lamented.

Lisimantus received a double cause of consolation, when he understood by
Pirobus all Anaxander's History, and that he pretended only to Orazia; a
thousand times he condemned his rashness, that had not patience to clear a
truth, which respected his dear Lisimena's honor, as well as his own
interests. The valiant Zenobus, who had shared in his displeasures, found
himself at that present partaker of his good fortune; he had a world of fair
Presents from the King, accompanied with as many assurances, that he should
have at all times what part he pleased of his childrens fortunes.

That which redoubled the pleasure of all the Court, and was subject of much
sport, was the wise faces which Eurimedes his Son made; that false Alcidaris,
seeing himself left of every body, at the first news of Lisimantus's being Heir
of the Crown of Cambaya, fell a crying like a child, and roaring in the
streets, so unfortunate, as to make them laugh, whom he thought to make pity
him by his tears. In this fashion he came to the Hall, where the Ball was to be
danced, and applying himself to the King, Sir, said he to him, is it true that
I am no longer your son? I swear to you every body comes and tells me so, and
all my Servants have left me, as if I were some scoundrel or poor fellow; I
pray cause the insolence of that rabble which you made of my Train, to be
punished, they mock me before my nose, like a Drunkard, and have let me come
hither alone, and am fain to carry my sword my self; I do not think, Sir, that
you have bid them use n^e so. What think you my friend, answered the King,
showing him Lisimantus, do you not believe this man has a better look for a
Prince than you, and deserves rather to be acknowledged for my Son? Ah Sir,
replied the Innocent, some Impostor doubtless has delivered him you to keep. I
feel plainly that I am your lawful son, if not, you would not have sent an
Ambassador to the King of Narsinga, to crave his only Daughter in marriage for
me; it may be this may be one of your Bastards; though his Mustacho be very
well set up, I do not think that your Subjects will acknowledge him to my
prejudice, being not so well bred as I. Lisimantus, who knew the whole story of
this false Alcidaris, and all his rudenesses, could not forbear laughing at his
words; and because he laughed heartily at it, all the company seconded him, that
the poor for knew it was in earnest they mocked him, and that they restrained
not themselves, as when he was taken for the Prince and Heir of Go^zarate.
Admire the weakness and inconstancy of men, it was not two bours before, that
this young man was adored of all the People, and followed of the whole Court;
and however extravagant he were, on the belief men had, that he was born a
Prince, they honored him as a god, although they knew he was a shame and
reproach to the Kingdom; and behold, in one hour, Fortune overturning in him
what soever was thought she had establih'd everlastingly; every body leaves
him, and that supposed rank which they feared; and disguised their faces with a
feigned approbation of his follies, being known for counterfeit, they freely
scoffed at the poor wretch, who soon became the sport of the whole Court. The
King however had some kind of pity on him, and truly, were it only but for
that, this poor unhappy creature, had had the honor to carry the title of
Prince, and to pass some years for the Kings only son, it was just, this that
somewhat should be assured him during his life, which might take him out of
that abject condition, where it to his rudeness had east him again.

The King then, finding that he was half in dispense concerning his greatness,
resolved to put him wholly out of his error, and to tell him how that supposal
grew; But, said he, Eurimedes, for you must retain that name henceforth, which
is you fathers; because I will be known to be kind, and charitable, and that I
will nor forsake, what I have once set in honor, and credit; Ask me any title,
or other thing which may be fit for you, in my Kingdom, and you shall gladly
have it.

Every man expected, he should have craved some high condition, where profit
might be joined with honor: but he deceived the company, when above all things,
with a smiling countenance, and see ling nothing at all of his past sorrow, he
desired he might have that poor wench of the Town whom he had in times past so
well liked; The great Aleidarts, could not abstain from laughing, and turning
him toward the Queen and Lisimantus: Truly, said he, Nature does, what she
does, very well, giving ordinarily mean thoughts to low souls, as noble hearts,
she makes capable of glory and of high desires. Yes, said he, Eurimedes, take
her; but, when thou are married to her, upon what will thou live? for I believe
my son will not let thee enjoy his revenue, nor those other things, which thou
usurpedst from him. Hereat, the poor blockhead lost his joy again, and not
knowing what to answer; the King assured him of a good Pension, and his father,
for his faithfulness a better; and the better to please the whole Court, which
could not enough honor his dear Lisimantus, he sent one of his guard to fetch
the Maid, and all her friends, and presently gave her to Eurimedes, who as
easily forgot all his greatnesses, as if he never had possessed them, and
bounded all his glory and ambition, with the possession of that woman his equal.

Lisimantus, was yet very pale, as well by reason of the wounds he had received
from his brothers hand, as for the little rest he had had in that dark prison,
where the Cambaians^ fury had some days detained him: yet was he a subject of
all the Ladies admiration of the Court, who sinding him as exquisite in spirit,
as shape, could no less praise his courtesy, than countenance; and blessed
heaven, that truth was manifest to their advantage, and that they were to live
under so fine, and gallant a Prince. But although he was as kind to them all,
as civility, and good manners permitted him, his mind forbear not to wander
other where, and the sight of so many beauties served, but to awake more
fervently the remembrance of his dear Lisimena; As soon as he knew himself a
Prince, that adorable beauty, was the first object which came into his
thoughts, and presently apprehended, that inequality would be no longer an
obstacle to his Love. If he were joyed at that quality, and if his heart were
touched to the quick, it was only because it promised him a freer access to
Lisimena; for otherwise, he was too generous, to prize that present of Fortune,
and be proud of it; he knew his courage was above the highest Thrones, and that
he had enough wherewithal to obtain those Crowns and greatnesses, which his
birth might have denied him: He found he had a Princes soul, and illustrious
blood was the least matter he accounted of, in such as governed with equity,
and who by sweetness rather than Tyranny made themselves more absolute in their
Dominion^.

The King his father, could not enough admire his actions; whenever he
remembered his past Victories, and thought upon the glory which his young son
Anaxander had gotten, and the courage they both had to meet so many encounters,
and dangerous occasions, he could not choose but thank the gods, and flatter
himself with that sweet vanity, that he was the happiest father, and most
redoubted King of all Asia, in such children.

His Physicians very provident for their new Princes health, fearing lest after
so ill usage, and so little rest as he had had in eight or ten days misery,
before his felicity, he might fall sick, desired his Majesty to persuade him to
keep his bed a while, that they might purge him of the evil humors, which
might have grown in him: But, it being by the King proposed to Lisimantus; Sir,
said be, if you will set my mind at rest, and purge it of all melancholy that
troubles it, I conjure you in the name of the gods, whom you worship, to send
instantly an Ambassador to the King of Zeylan. When you shall have assured him
that I have the honor to be acknowledged your son, I know he will nor deny me
his daughter, which is the only content of my soul, and thing in the world
which can make me happy. Son, said the King unto him, I have no other meaning
than yours, and I am only sorry that you have prevented me, by your request;
fo^^ intended to propose it to you for your good. But, do not you desire to
have your first name of Alcidaris restored to you, which you lost by so strange
a fortune; me thinks, my Subjects will have greater cause of joy, when they
shall see you inherit my name, as well as a good part of my Crown, and will
thereby the better know you for their lawful Lord. Let them, Sir, replied
Lisimantus, know me only, by the honor I have to be issued from you, and the
actions I intend to perform for their advantage, and suffer use to wear the
brave name of Lisimantus, so solemnly given me, by the fairest mouth of the
world, and being the first mark of credit which I got abroad; It may suffice if
you think fit, that I write my self Alcidaris like you, and name my self
Lisimantus. I promise you son, said the King, that I will never contradict what
you think fit, do but desire; And to let you see, I am as impatient for your
contentment as your self, I will presently go, and dispatch Albalor, Pirobus
his eldest son, in Embassage, to the King of Zeylan, to crave the Princess
Lisimena in your name: if you will accompany my dispatch with a word of your
own, make haste; for I already long, that you and your brother, were made happy
in the possession of your Mistresses. And hereupon they parted, and Lisimantus
ravished with content, that all things suited to his expectation, shut himself
in his Closet, where he writ this letter to Lisimena.

Lisimantus his letter to Lisimena.
Madam,
AT last, the gods have shown me justice, and have furnished me, with what I
may excuse the boldness you have heretofore blamed in me, to seek your Love;
if to declare my self unto you, it be requisite to be a Kings son; you shall by
this Ambassador, know, that Alcidaris, is my father; if for brave actions it
be needful to be recommended, you know what I have done for your Crowns safety;
if to have reputation in the world, you must needs have been told of the
renown, that there are but few Provinces, wherein I have not gotten worship for
the name you gave me; if you desire a faith with. out example, I call to
witness all the powers of heaven, and earth, that I have never loved but you,
and if you do me now the honor to consent unto my just desire, you shall see,
I have wherewith to blur the reputation and remembrance, of those ancient loves
proposed as miracles in their examples.


Because diligence was very requisite in this voyage, which respected the
contentment of the King in that of Lisimantus, Albalor a brave and accomplished
Knight, and worthy son of so virtuous a father, made ready his equipage with
all expedition, and taking with him fifty Gentlemen of the best born in the
Court, shipped himself at Bazaim, to reach the Island of Zeylan as soon as
possibly he could.

As soon as he was departed, the King thought now, on nothing more, than of his
dear Anaxanders return, whom he proposed already to see King of Norsinga,
Bisnager, and Orixa, besides the Crown of that fair Kingdom of Dulcinda, which
he was to have by his mothers side: That virtuous Princess had so recovered
her former graces and attractions, since the news of her sons life and health,
as very few Lodies of that Kingdom exceeded her in beauty, such a property has
joy to dilate it self, and from the heart ascend into the face; All day she
entertained her self with Evander, who on his part was to less ravished. And
as she had a great power with the King, she caused great largesses to be
distributed among the people, which were accompanied with a thousand sports:
yet was all that but little in comparison of the pomp and state, prepared for
Lisimantus coming, wherein Anaxander and Piroxenus were to have a good share;
their coming only was expected to celebrate it to the great contentment of
their Majesty's, and accomplishment of all Evanders joys, whom Lisimantus
heartily forgave for that cruelty he was constrained to show him, and whereto
his just resentement drove him.

THE INDIAN HISTORY OF ANAXANDER AND OF ORAZIA.
The sixth BOOK.
THe whole Court and City were full of joy, and all the people of Cambaya
forgetting their past grievances, fell to invent new Dances, and inviting one
another to Feasts, as well for the contentment they received already by the
sight of the of their Princes, as for the speedy return which they expected of
the other; when Fortune, which pleases her self in a disorderly government of
the things of this world, and cannot endore them long in one condition, cast
the Cambayans again into a greater confusion, than they were ever in, and
filled all the Court with fear, and disorder.

During the time of the Ball, without thinking of any thing save being merry,
as indeed there was no reason to suspect an evil, the King was astonished to
see the wise Almerin, Prince Anaxanders faithful Squire coming toward him,
out of breath, who at first throwing himself as his feet, Sir, if you make not
haste to succor your son speedily, he will run the hazard of dying the most
tragical death that ever was. Alas, had he listed to believe me, he had not
been in this trouble; for I did long ago conjure him to make himself known, and
to remember the affront done him at Visaporus: but he was ever obstinate in his
purpose, as likewise Piroxonus, to disguise themselves till now: in so much, as
at present, they cannot be believed that they are of your blood, because they
have been so long undiscovered to the King of Narsinga, who is about to punish
them, as breakers of his Edict, having lately fought a Duel within his
Dominions.

This news, did no less trouble the Company, than that which Pirobus had
brought but lately had contented them; and that a present remedy might be given
to that inconvenience, the King in great trouble, commanded Almerin, to tell
him what new misfortune had befallen his Son, and what course might be taken to
save his Life.

Know (Sir, said the Past, who had scarce the leisure given him to draw his
breath) that after the Prince my Master had fought with Lisimantus, as Pirobus
here come, may have told you, he concealed himself in a Castle belonging to
Saradin, the Princess Orazias Squire, intending to return unto you, as soon as
he recovered of his wounds, which were very grievous; and just as be was ready
to do so, and depart with Piroxenus, who never left him out of his sight, he
found an unexpected ambush laid for him.

I doubt not but you have heard, how the Princess: Orazia, immediately after
that unhappy combat, thought fit to spread a noise, that my Master was dead,
that the King her Father incensed against him, as much as is possible, night
have the less reason to send after him; The report of his death lasted for
some days: but being impossible to keep any thing very secret in the Court,
Saradin, who till that time had been very wise, could not choose but reveal it
at length unto a very intimate friend of his called Florestan, from whom he hid
very few things, and told him for truth, that our Princes (but told him not,
that they were so) were hid in his house, on the way to Baticalus, where the
King had layn without knowing it. This Florestan, was in favor with a Lady of
the Court, called Corisba, who was that Lerians Sister, whom anaxander had
slain in Duel, at his first coming to the Court of Narsinga, being provoked
by him, through his jealousy, that the Prince Arontus favored him too much;
and as it is the Custom of Lovers, to conceal nothing from their Mistresses,
Florestan was so unworthy, as to reveal his friends secret, unto his. This
wicked woman finding a fair way to be revenged on him, who had slain her
Brother, goes boldly to the King, tells him where our Masters were, and that at
hazard of her life, he should find them alive in Saradins Castle, where they
laughed at his authority, and skorn'd the rigor of his laws.

The King, who had been offended, and who kept his anger still in force, found
it renew within him, by this unhappy notice; he by and by commanded an Officer
to seize on Saradin, and to be answerable for him until he had seen whether it
were true which Corisba had told him, and to be thoroughly satisfied, he
dispacht the Provost of Bisnagar, with a great many of the guard, to bring our
Princes to him, either alive or dead, that however they came, they might serve
as a memorable example to posterity, of his despised authority. Saradin, who
presently found himself guilty of his little secrecy, sound means to advertise
the Princess Orazia of this disorder, that she might seek to remedy it, and
accused himself of having revealed the secret to one, whom he accounted as his
other self, not remembering that he kept his sister, whom Anaxander had slain.
The Princess incontinently writ all she knew to my Master, and advised him, by
her letter, that he should not stay till those of the guard came; that if he
were in cas to save himself, he should do it speedily, how that she thought it
not meet, that he should on that occasion declare himself what he was, for that
he would run hazard not to be believed, and that that would be a double cause
of disgrace: that if he were so unhappy as to be t^^en by them, she should
never be comforted, for that unawares she had let her Cousin Lasimena carry with
her, the dead Prince Arontus his letter, which might happily have served to
have verisied his birth, and that she wanted all other proof, if braven did not
send them some one or other in that present, and dangerous necessity.

The poor Princess relied on the Post for that road, but when her Post was
ready to be gone, ^o horse could be gotten, for that the King had forhidden all
men from being furnished. Mean time, the Provost went with all diligence, and
the best Orazia could do, was to send a Footman which went excellent well,
with promise of great reward if he came first to the Castle; The man was
subtle, and crafty, but notwithstanding all his ear, in seeking by-waies, that
those of the Guard might not see him, he came unto us but a half quarter of an
hour before the others.

Admire the extravagancy of Fare, and the malice of Fortune, we were ready the
very next day to be gone from that place, the Prince my Master was perfectly
well of his hurts, and we were in the pleasure of our approaching journey, when
this messenger came to us: At first without complement, he pressed us to be
gone, because he assured us, that those who sought our lives were not far from
us. Anaxander had scarce read the Princesses letter to Piroxenus and me, when
behold the Castle beleagured with that rabble of Archers which in number were
above two hundred, they so surprised us, as already twenty of them had gotten
in by a little door of the outer Court, before we had perceived them; we cried
out to shut that door, and pull pu the drawbridge, which was presently done by
our people, and then presently we rushed upon those unfortunate people which
remained all on the place; Anaxander nor Piroxenus gave one stroke in vain,
they seemed two angry Lions, which breathed nothing but revenge; and I may
truly say they alone did that great execution: for eight or ten of us that we
were of their people, besides my self, being but waiters and Grooms, lent them
but little aid. Meanwhile, the rest kept loudly beating at the great gate of
the base Court, saying that they came from the King, and that we must follow
them. When we had dispatched the forwardest, we consulted what we had to do:
and on the other side, those roagues, having heard the clashing of our swords,
incensed by our resistance, threatened to burn us if we came not forth, and
yield our selves to them. The generous Anaxander seeing us reduced to that
extremity, he who never feared in danger, nor never dreaded the greatest
threats of fortune, seeing we were to weak to resist that multitude of armed
men, and that as it would be weakness in us to suffer our destruction, without
resistance, so it would be rashness to set upon them, with so small a number
as we were; He directed the little gate to be opened again, whereby they could
not enter but two and two, which passage, we three would well enough maintain;
and, should they be so unwise as to hazard themselves, we might kill a good
many of them, and by so many, lessen the number of our enemies. His opinion was
presently put in execution; but when the first five or six came short, the rest
retired; insomuch, as we shut the gate again, to see what the gods would
counsel us; and truly in that eminent danger I was very sorry for Neanders
absence, whom Piroxenus had sent to Orixa, for being a man skilful and valiant,
he would by one means or another have been very helpful to us.

We were by this time weary of slaughter, where we had so good fortune, as but
one of ours were slain, and of us three Anaxander only had a light hurt in his
shoulder; but indeed, the Princes behaved themselves so courageously, that if
they had had to do but with a score of them, I believe they would have made no
more resistance to their fury than the former did.

The Provost discerning that by force he could not so soon possess himself of
us, in that Casile, by the advice of his companions, assembled the Peasants of
the next Village, who being commanded to bring with them, store of straw, and
dry fagots, they set fire to the gate of the base Court, and Stables belonging
to the Castle, with intention to burn it, or compel us to come forth; when we
perceived the fire to increase toward us, we thought it better became us, to
disput^ our lives courageously, than die unworthily without any resistance: The
Princes therefore took each a Lance which they found, and got upon two of the
swiftest horses in the stables, purposing rather to try to save, than to defend
themselves; there being no Lance for me, I took my sword in my hand, and our
people opening the gate as the Princes commanded them, which was already half
consumed, we set spurs lively to our horses, and past through the flame, which
was more favorable unto us than those that looked for us Anaxander who was best
mounted would pass first, and flying like lightning, ran three or four of them
through with his Lance, which in one body waited for us in the passage, and
gave leave to Piroxenus and me to save our selves, but as our unhappy Prince
thought himself free from those hangmens hands, ill fortune would that his
horse astonished at the flame, which hurt his eyes in passing, fell with him in
a ditch very near his enemies: they instantly fell upon him, and being under
his horse, we saw without being able to help him, how they took away his Lance
and sword, and bound him with cords, as soon as they had disarmed him.

Piroxenus would have returned, but when I had put into his consideration, that
at liberty he might be much better able to serve him, than if he exposed
himself to bonds with him, he was for that time persuaded by me, and as I
advised, he resolved to go in dispuise to Bisnagar, and try with the Princess
to save him whom he loved a thousand times more than himself. As for me he
commanded, that I should go advertise you of that misfortune with all speed,
and in case they condemned not the Prince suddenly, without any form of
process, you might dispatch an Ambassador to the King of Narsinga, time enough
to save his life. And this, Sir, has drawn me so hastily unto your Majesty; I
protest unto you I have scarce eaten or drank since this fell out, for fear,
the least stay night cause my Masters los^s. They cannot have carried him, (as
he was bound) very fast, and am consident it is as much as they have been able
to do, to bring him yesterday to Bisnagar, for I gave whatever was asked me for
fresh horses, where ever I could sinde them, and I believe never man made more
dispatch.

Here Almerin ended his discourse, which did not so much trouble the King, but
that there remained some hope for him: for knowing Orazias love, he believed
that fair Princess would not fail to use all her credit, and power for him
whom she was to marry: Besider, Paroxeaus his escape was another sign of
comfort, persuming that he would find friends in the Court to persuade the
King not to precipitate his condemnation, that should declare himself so great
a Prince, until the truth were known; In the meanwhile not to lose time, he
sent Falantus his Gentleman of the horse in all speed with such a direction as
he instantly conceived.

Alcidaris King of Cambaya, of Dulcinda, of Candahar, and Mandao, and absolute
Lord of whatsoever that great renowned River waters which gives name unto the
Indes. To thee Salamas, mighty King of Narsinga, of Bisnagar, and of Orixus,
and absolute Lord of the Seas, which furnish all the East with Pearl, his dear
and well-beloved brother, health.
I Am informed, that my young son Anaxander, for whose death I have twice
lamented, is the man, who has so worthily served thee in thy Wars, under the
name Ariomant, and who of late, has through his youthful heat first violated
thy just Edicts; whereof I give thee speedy advertisement by Falantus Gentleman
of my horse, and by this letter signed with my Hand, and Sealed with my Seal,
that thou may turn thy anger from him, and use him as thy brothers son, in
power, and equal in authority: I conjure thee moreover, to favor his suit, and
give credit to my Ambassador, who will tell thee, that the man whom I designed
for thy son in law, is worthy of thy kindred, and the fortune I had procured
him, as my son.


The King would added threats to the end of his letter, in case that some
misfortune might have befallen poor Anaxander ere the coming of these, but he
was dissuaded by his counsel, who were of opinion, that in case nothing had yet
happened to the Princes disadvantage, threats might incense the King of Narsinga,
and set him upon extremities, which his own inclinations might not move him to;
wherefore they thought it sufficient, to have a great Army in readynesse, which
Lisimantus should command, and should march great journeys, and be ready to
power on Narfinga, and revenge an affront which they yet but feared.

The Queen upon this bare fear, encouraged every man to revenge; it was a pity
to see her in such trouble as that new discontent had cast her into, more deep
than ever. Like those, who have run great hazards at sea, and endure nothing
with so great impatience, as shipwreck, threatened at the Haven: That poor
Princess unfortunate, who had so much already lamented her sons death, and
been battered by so many storms, and crosses past, was never so sensible, as of
this last torment, which assaulted her just when she thought her self under the
shelter of all manner of afflictions, and misfortunes; she had already
flattered her self with sweet hope of embracing her son, she had invited the
whole Court to honor his welcome, she imagined that the tenderness of a
mothers love, would not afford embraces enough, to cherish so virtuous a child,
when that sad messenger came and spoiled her at an instant of those sweet
meditations, to set her spirit on the rack, scarce pacified with some small
intervals of false joy.

The King would willingly have seconded her in her just sorrow, and found
matter of comfore for her, as he was wont, but the poor Prince had other things
to think on; for though in some sort he expected that the King of Narsinga,
would not proceed so fast; that point was too ticklish, to leave him without
great cause of doubt, and he was wise enough to foresee, that to ground any
hope upon the uncertain judgment of men, was but to build upon a moving sand.

He therefore caused Lisimantus at the head of a hundred thousand men, to
depart a few days after Falantus had his dispatch. That young Knight was full
of spirit, and exceedingly affectionate to his Masters service; and seeing that
his Princes safety, and the States quiet depended upon his diligence, he got
upon the best and swiftest horse in the Indes, and resolved to take him at far
as his heart, and legs would carry him, before he would take Post: But, whiles
he does his best, to come in good time to Bisnagar, let us make more haste
there than he, and see what is done against Anaxander.

After that unfortunate Prince had been very hardly used on the way, by those
men without pity, w hose number he had so courageously, and in vain
diminished, he was conducted into that sad place, where once he expected to
receive a more gentle entertainment; Piroxonus, who was arrived but one day
before him, had reaped no other fruit of his diligence, than lading the
Princess Orazia's spirit with affliction and sorrow, by recounting to her how
Anaxander was taken, and pressing her to use all the means she could or his
safety; but the poor Lady knew not to whom to adresse her self, and however
violent passion she had to save her dear husband, her shame too much withheld
her from declaring it to the King, whom she her self dared not to speak to, nor
knew she whom else to trust, or choose to do it in her stead.

That which caused the misfortune and the ruin of our Princes, was their having
lived with too much splendour and authority, during Arontus life, when they had
held such rank, and kept such state, among the Courtiers of Narsinga, as they
had got more jealousy, than friendship; One only, Saradin, had been able to
have helped them, in that extremity, and seconded the Princess good endeavor,
if himself, for his innocent ofsence, had not partaken with them.

When the King came to know, that he was guilty of concealing the breakers of
his Edict, he commanded him to be carried from his house where he was detayned,
to the same prison where the unhappy Anaxander was shut up. All that Piroxenus,
with the Princess, could do, was, to scatter a murmur through the Court, that
he, whom they had used with so great in humanity, was the Prince Anaxander,
Alcidaris the King of Cambayas Son, but very few were found that believed it,
and the King himself who heard thereof, laughed at it; because he had long time
believed the common report, that he, with Piroxenus, was slain, together with
the two Princes of Decan, in that sally they made, during the siege of
Visaporus, besides the assurance they had lately received from Pirobus his
mouth, that the King of Cambaya had but one Son alive. That had not retarded
his condemnation one minute, had there not happened a contestation between the
Ministers of Justice: The Grand Provost pretended that he ought to give
Judgment on him, because he had taken, and brought him by the Kings command;
and on totheer side, because he had commanded in Armies, and till that time,
done things, becoming a Gentleman, and a man of quality, The Chief Justice of
the Naires disputed, that it belonged to him to make his process, and spent
two or three days in this debate, the one undoing, and disanulling, what the
other commanded, insomuch, as the King was fain himself to regulate it. He was,
then, of opinion, that seeing there had been certain of the guard slain by
Ariomant, there was no reason, that their Chief should be both Judge and Party,
and that it was reasonable that the Court of Nayres knew that it was a very
easy matter to proceed against a man convicted, and that they should hasten
his Judgment, that he might quickly serve for an example.

The Princess had some small hope, that the King her Father would not so
wholly yield himself up to his passions, but that he would cast an eye to the
many services which her Anaxander had formerly done the dead Prince Arontus, as
well as the Crown, under the name of Ariomant: besides, she hoped for some
good, from the journey Almerin had made into Cambaya: but when she saw that the
King hastened so very much the Judgment of the cause; and that purposely for
that reason, he had sent to the Chief of the Judges; she thought he would run
great hazard, and that when it may be her Fathers nature might incline to Pity
and Compassion, he ight be too much engaged to this honor, and his word, not
to give such example to his people.

The greatest part of hte Judges, were very sorry for that poor offenders
misfortune, and seeing when they came to give Judgment, that there was no
liklihood of saving him, there was not one, but did it against his will, and
with sorrow condemned a man of so great merit; but the reverence of the Laws,
and the honor they bare unto the Princes authority, obliged them, rather to
save his Oaths, than him who had despised them; and seeing they must do
Justice, they pronounced the sentencce of death against Anaxander, and
condemned him, to have his Head struck off, in the great place before the
Palace.

When this sad sentence was read unto him in the Prison, he was marvelously
surprised; for beside, that he hoped for deliverance, by Pirexenus, and
Almerin, and from the Princess favor, he did not expect that the severity of
the Laws would have extended to that last rigor, and thought, when they had
only frighted him with punishment, they would have let him go. But when he saw
it was in good earnest they condemned him to death: Friend, said he, to him
that came as Deputy from the Court of Nayres, does the King know who I am, and
that he has no power of right over my life?

Sir, Answered the Judge, there has been a report spread here, that you are the
King of Cambayas Son; but the King will not believe it, and himself told us, he
had a thousand arguments to convince that falsehood; he^ ought at least, said
Anaxander, to have known the truth, before he had thus precipitated my
condemnation, and he should have found, that report very true: Remember my
Friend, that this sentence passes against himself and his own blood, because I
am his Daughters husband, and if he be so barbarous, and unnatural, as to
proceed farther to the execution of an unjust sentence, tell him, that besides
the revenge I expect from heaven, he shall draw on his head, all the powers of
the King my Father, who will never endure, so foul an action, to escape
unpunished. Is this the welcome that Strangers receive in this country, which
come to do is honor? although I were not as I am, born a Prince, yet ought my
person to be safe even by the Law of Nations; your Laws cannot by right extend
themselves beyond the limits of this Kingdom, nor punish crimes of honor, in
those, whom you have not forbidden, and are not subject to the observation of
your Laws. Must I serve as an example, and be the first man chastis'd for an
action, never yet by any man seen punished in Narsinga, though Ducls frequent
in it, and Edicts changed a thousand times? Ah, pray bid the King he look more
than once to what he does, and that a Kings Son ought not to be the first mark
of his vengeance. Go to him presently, if you love his honor, and ask the
Princess, whether in disgrace she will abandon those, whom in Prosperity she
has made show to love.

The Judge was much astonished at his words, and thought himself obliged to
tell them the King, wherefore he came knocking to the chamber door, to acquaint
him, w ith what he had learnt from Ariomant; but the Door keeper would not
admit him, because the King was private with his Daughter, and had forbidden
any whasoever, to be let in, till she were gone.

That amorous Princess, having known of Anaxanders condemnation, and seeing
that all her vain hopes of his liberty, promised no good, overcome by her
sorrow, and most earnestly importuned by Love, forgot all respect, and shame;
and believing, that that very day, he, whom she so tenderly loved, should
unhappily end his days, and be a shameful spectacle for all the Court,
jealous of his Virtues, and past Victories, went and cast her self at the King
her Fathers feet, and full of tears, told him the reason she had, to beg
Anaxanders life of him, whom she boldly avowed for her Husband, and with a
thousand oaths, and by the testimony of her dead brother Arontus, she confirmed
the noise that went of his illustrious extraction.

The King was so moved, and troubled in his mind at those words, as he was a
sufficient space without replying any thing: at length, looking with extreme
severity upon the Princess: Unhappy Woman, said he, is it possible thou
would endure thy self to be overtaken by this strangers prating, so mserable
an unknown man, who is come so far to laugh at my laws, to violate my Edicts,
and happily thy self also; say, quickly, has he stayn'd thy bed, and my race,
and whether surpised with his embraces, after thou went taken with his lies,
thou gave thy self up to his lewd desires.

The Princess: exceedingly amazed to find so harsh a usage from him, who had
never been but very kind to her, recollected yet, all her reason, and
strength, not to seem troubled in her answer, and to try to persuade her
Father, in her Lovers behalf.

How Sir, said she, to him, could you have so ill an opinion of your Daughter
as to think her able to commit so foul an Action? May not a man be valued
without giving ones self up to him? and do you think me so filly, and light, to
give Prince Anaxander the hearing, without first assurances of his birth, as
well by my dead Brother, as by his own confession: when in my Cousin Lisimenaes
hearing, he made me an ample relation of all his adventures. Believe me Sir, if
I have avowed him my affection, I have done it with all Modesty, becoming my
Condition, and my Sex, and being assured you never would dislike the sure of so
virtuous a Prince: for my sake only he stole from his Parents, run great hazard
in foreign parts, and would not discover himself to you, but in a Princes
equipage, which he was about to do, when you surpised him with your guard.

The King, whom rage had fully possessed, and made incapable of the Princess
reasons: O silly Maid, said he, how have then been so credulous to his
persuasions, whose errand here, was only to abuse thee? Where can thou sinde
me other proofs of his birth, than from his own mouth? he had, (say thou)
persuaded thy Brother, as foolish as thy self, and some ground he must needs
seek to build his treason on, and surprise thee. Were he the King of Cambayaes
Son, would he have been so lo ng among us, and not have made himself known to
some body? and had he lifted to have u s'd that quality to have married thee,
would he not have sent to his Father, who would have been but too glad to
favor his so high pretenses? But to let thee see, he is a mere deceiver, and
that Anaxander is really dead, did not thou lately see, that Pirobus
confirmed it, being sent Ambassador to me from the King of Cambaya, and assured
me, he had only Alcidaris left of the two Children the gods had given him?
Think thou that if Anaxander had not been slain in that sally, with
Piroxenus, and the two Princes of Decan, the King his Father who lamented him
infinitely, and made all possible means to over-take him, would not have
learned it by some of his servants, and that no man would be so charitable, as
to raise the Queen Anaxarette from the deep melancholy wherein her dear sons
loss had for ever cast her? Be gone unhappy Maid, reply no more, thou have
committed what thou never shall repair, by suffering that Persian impostor to
abuse thy credulous, and simple youth, without remembering that thy father is a
King: I have lost half and more, of that esteem I had thy virtue in, thou shall
be the cause that I this day put him to death, whose life, but for his treason
thou discoverest, I might have been willing enough to save. Be gone, go, weep
thy fault, and in six months appear not in my sight.

The poor Princess had not courage to reply unto the sharpness of that last
language, but full of confusion withdrew herself, considering the tragical
designs, and her mind feeding on nothing but deadly thoughts: How said she, in
her self, can I endure without resentment, that a Tyran: father, handle so
unworthily, the dearest thing I love in the world? shall I not have so much
credit as to save the one half of my soul, which a most cruel man will take
from me? Ah wretch that I am, I went too fearfully unto him; who fearfully
desires, teaches denial; I should have old him boldly, that if he slew my
husband, I would die with him, and that by death I would deliver me from his,
and Fortunes tyranny: but that unworthy fear, which Nature too last has bound
unto my feeble sex, restrained my tongue, which could not execute, what my
heart commanded; and yet I ruin thee my dear Anaxander, and yet I see thee
given to death, without a power to help thee, so miserable am I; but what say
I? she cannot be accounted miserable, who can die easily. I will follow the^,
(my dear Anaxander,) Is it possible, that thou should die without me, whiles
we two make but one? with me thou may; However I resolve to wait until the
last hour, that if by some miracle, and particular mercy from heaven, the gods
will save thy life, I may live with thee.

With this bloody resolution, she retired into her Chamber, and driving from
her as many as would divert her from her deadly sorrow, she caused a little
Page whom she loved, to be called to her, and with a seeming settled
understanding, and a countenance, which witnessed nothing less, than what was
in her thoughts, bid him go buy a fine Dagger which she would give him, to wear
with that little sword by his side, but that he should beware of letting her
women know it, because they would be jealous of the love she bare him. This
child, who was far from guessing at the Tragical design of his Mistress, did
presently, as he was commanded; and with the money she gave him, bought a pretty
little Poinard, which he came and delivered her. As soon as she found her self
so strongly armed with a remedy against her misfortunes: Ariston, (said she,)
(so was the Page called) I give thee leave to go see Ariomant executed by and
by, set thy self as conveniently as thou can, to see him, and as soon as thou
see his head off, come as fast as thou can, and bring me word; but left
thou lose thy Dagger in the throng, i will keep it till thy return.

The poor innocent, resolved to do as his Mistrisse commanded him, and in the
mean while, the unfortunate Orazia, who would not dine, shut her self in her
closet, where being alone sh: freely discharged her heart, which was however
but of tears; when it was thoroughly drayn'd, her agony was full as violent, and
lasting, it was agitated with an everlasting sorrow, which the poor afflicted
Lady promised shortly to determine by the end of her life, and for that purpose
kept the little dagger, (which Ariston had delivered her) in her bosom, to
make use of it as soon as she should hear of her Lovers death.

While she remaind in this deadly trouble, and bloody displeasure, lets see
what Piroxenus did on his side; when he heard publicly, that there was no more
hope for his friend; and that the Judge who pronounced the sentence of death
upon him, had been in vain persuading the King, that he should do well to delay
the execution, until the truth of what the offender said concerning his
extraction, were known. Indeed, he took an ill time, to discourse with that
Prince, on the instant when he was a fresh insensed against his daughter; so as
he gave him no more speed than her, and that advertisement, but made him hasten
so much sooner the execution, and redouble his anger.

Almost the whole Gentry of the Court considered that execution with horror,
and not sufficiently able to bemoan his misfortune that was to be the first
example, in an action for which no man was ever known to be put to death,
though many in like case have in their absence been condemned; but they ever
upon the first stir of War made their accommodations, which being over, the
King obliged himself likewise to forget their crimes past, and threaten them
again by new Edicts, which were lately published to Anaxanders confusion.

But let us leave these needless digressions, to acquit our selves of our
promise, in making all the world see the incomparable sorrow of that
incomparable friend, that faithful Piroxenus, who till that time concealed
himself (as guilty as Anaxander,) to see if he could find any means to succor
him. When he perceived that he had no more to hope, he thought he had no more
to fear, and seeing that they were about to carry his other self to execution,
his dear and faithful friend, for whom in times past, during Orixa's
misfortune, he had been forced to live, he was not long to resolve whether he
ought to die with him or no.

When he knew, that he was taken out of prison, to be conducted to his end,
environed with two companies of the Kings guard, he drew his sword to run
himself through, but recalling himself instantly from that precipirate actio^:
My deer Anaxander, said he, I may not in this manner follow thee, since having
lived so well, and worthily, thou art ready to die in favor with the gods, and
that I see already, heaven open to receive thee, I should never meet they happy
soul, if I should commit this outrage on my self, and move the gods by this so
contrary action to the laws of Nature. For thy sake then I will not die by my
own hands, because our souls may meet again; but I will force that rabble which
encompasse thee, to give me the stroke of death; I Will throw my self among them,
and the gods shall bear me witness, that I advance not my days, by an
unworthinesses of heart, which makes me sinck under under the burden of my
sorrows. I know it is the part of a courageous man, to resist with constancy
the crosses of Fortune; that to stand up against her, is to scorn her, and to
endure her evils patiently, is to deride her; But my dear Cousin, I am nto able
I confess, to endure for thy sake, what I could for my own: be it how it will,
I mean to follow thee, and should curse my life, a thousand times, if I should
happen to outlive thee a minute.

Thus saying, in great fury he came forth of his house, and without farther
care of being known in the streets, went strait to the place, where the poor
Anaxander was bound upon the Scaffold, paler through anger, than through fear,
and resolute to die, in that disability to defend himself from the outrage they
committed on his innocence. When Piroxenus saw him in that pitiful condition,
he grew doubly incensed, and in that passion of rage which blinded him,
resolved to revenge his own, and his friends death, on those who were not
guilty of it; and in spite of those that guarded the place, who were ranged
like a hedge and environed the Scaffold, to make way with his two swords unto
it, that he might once more say farewell to him he loved a thousand times more
than himself.

The two Bracmanes, who attended Anaxander, had already begun the last prayers
for his soul, all the company answered the sad time which they prayed in, and
the Hea^s (...) expected but the end of the Canticle to give the deadly blow,
had the Princes hair in hsi hand to cut it away, that it might not hinder the
striking off his head, when the hopeless Piroxenus took his time, to fly
through that innumerable multitude of people, which gave way to his two swords,
which he handled with a great deal of cunning, and fury; he mowed down the very
enclosure of Soldiers, maiming and cleaving all he met in his way; and when he
had got the middle of the place, he presently ascended the unhappy Theater,
where so Tragical an action was to be represented, and seeing the Hangman
handling the Princes hair; Art thou said he, so infamously impudent as to touch
that sacred head, and therewithal cleft his to the neck, and suddenly
unbinding his dear Anaxander, he gave the other sword into his hands.

Those Soldiers who suspected nothing, and were far from fearing any attempt
for Anaxander deliverance, were wonderfully amazed, and astonished, that the
boldness of one man proceeded to that extreme temerity, by and by, by their
Captains command, who blasphemed for anger, they encompassed the Scaffold,
which wae raised some ten steps, and could not be come to without a Ladder; but
as many as offered to come up were hewn in pieces, and those two Lions, who
looked for nothing less, than saving themselves, did wonderful effects, to
sell their lives, and well dispute them.

When Anaxander saw that they recoiled, and dared no longer approach them:
Friends, said he to them, the gods are my witnesses that with sorrow I spill
your blood, remember when I led you in War, and how, (it may be,) I helped you
very well to set the Crown on his head, who now would take away my life for an
action of honor, whereto beside, I was provoked by Lisimantus fault. Since my
ruin is inevitable, he shall shortly see, what it is tomeddle with the sone of
Kings his neighbor, who give not place to him for power.

Friends, said Piroxenus to the people, on the other side, if ye knew the
mischief which threateneth you in our loss, ye would all take arms to save us
from the fury of a Tyrant, whom we have delivered from the oppression of two
slaves, who were greedy after your goods and lives. Know, that however you see
us, we are two mighty Princes, left to the severity of Fortune, and if the
outrage unjustly begun, be finished upon us, ye shall all suffer, though ye be
innocent, and very shortly see, all the King of Cambayas power fall upon you,
and your children, who is my mothers brother, and that unhappy Princes sather,
whom I but now unloosed from the Hangmans hands.

These discourses assisted by the gracesful action of those two men of so
excellent aspect, began already to work some impression in the peoples minds;
there was not one civil man, who with horror beheld not the injustice done
those two brave courages, and who would not willingly have hazarded his life
for their safety; but the sequel was of too much fear, and the dread of the
Kings anger restrained the most factious among them: Meanwhile, the Soldiers
by the Captains command were gone to setch Ladders to assault our Princes on
every side, and try to take them alive, that by an ignominious death, the
slaughter they had made on their companions might be revenged, forbidding any
arrows to be shot at them, which had by some been done already; when from the
Palace gate-ward, a great throng was seen to come, and the King himself before
them, which began to cry on all sides, grace: but the confused noise the
Souldiees made about the Scaffold, hindered them from hearing that favorable
cry; when the King who caused room to be made, by the Archers of his guard who
went before him, was come near, and had understood what Piroxenus had done, he
wondered, and more again, when he saw the two Princes defend themselves so
courageously against an armed multitude. Hold, cried he out to the Soldiers,
as soon as he could be heard: all that were before him did the like, in as much
as at length, those blood-thirsty men perceived the King near them, and heard
his countermands.

His presence then, having clamed the storm, all held their peace, and bent
their eyes upon him, to see what 'twas he would command them, and understand
the reason of his coming personally there; when turning toward the Princes,
who were not less astonished at his coming, than the people, and directing
his speech to them, spoke in this manner.

I am so full of confusion, Sirs, for what I very lately have understood, that
whereas you think I am come to give you pardon, I come to ask it of you, and to
conjure you likewise, to forgive me a crime, which I have ignorantly committed,
and whereof my passion only, is guilty. See said he to Prince Anaxander, if you
know this young Kinight, Gentleman of the horse to the King your father, it is he
that has unfolded me my error, and who has freed me from a misfortune, after
which I never should have been comforted, if the last act of the Tragedy had
been performed on you.

When the Prince, (who was already well restored, by the Kings mild language,)
knew Falantus face, he leapt from off the Scaffold and embraced him, Piroxenus
did the like, and then presently turning to the King: In truth, Sir, said
Anaxander, you were a little too hasty, and me thinks, you should for me, have
made use of your accustomed wildom, and have ^een whether the report spread in
your Court concerning my extraction, were true or no, before you used so great
severity, as you have done. However, seeing the gods have pleased to stay the
course of this misfortune, we must forget what is past, and promise, Sir, that
neither my Cousin nor my self, will remain less affectionate to your service,
seeing it is our own fault, we had not told you who we were.

Consider me, Sirs, said the King, as your selves, and judge if the report of
your death being every where dispersed, and being lately renewed to me, by the
King of Cambayas E^bassadour, who assured me, his Master had but one son only
living, called Alcidaris, I had not cause to believe, all to be lies, that have
been toldme of you? verily, after all those untruths, accompanied with so many
of your feignings, and disguises, I had very good reason to redouble my anger
against you Anaxander, when I understood from my daughters own mouth, that
without declaring your self to any body, and passing but at an ordinary Knight,
you had taken the freedom to talk to her of love, and contract a Marriage with
her, wihout my consent, which had never been denied you, had I known your
birth: You have certainly cause to be angry with your selves, for the wrong
which has been done you: but for what I have contributed, I promise to repair
the injury by so many testimonies of assection, as you both shall henceforth
have more reason to love, than you have formerly had cause to hate me.

But in regard, this is no proper place for complements, lets go together to
the Palace, and make my Daughter partake of our joy, and first of all, lets
thank the gods, which have delivered you, from the imminent danger threatened
you, by you own fault; and have sent thy Knight of Cambaya, at the very minute,
to secure your lives.

At these words the Princes redoubled their embraces of Falantus; and truly
they had great reason so to do, as he who by his incredble diligence became
their redeemer, having in four days, and as many nights, rid more than two
hundred leagnes, whereto, that excellent horse very much contributed, which he
took with him, whereon without stop, he dispatched eight or nine Posts; by this
means he arrived at the time he should, to save their lives so dear to the King
his Master, and had he more delai'd, undoubtedly he had in vain performed that
journey; for the two generous Prince^, had been forced to yield to the power of
so great a number of Soldiers, as were ready to assault them every where.

They departed then from that place, to go directly to the Temple; and in the
meanwhile, the little Ariston, who had seen all these passages, went before to
advertise his Mistress, whom he found, laid on a little bed in her Closet,
wholly over come with sorrow, and already threatening her fair bosom, with the
Dagger, from which she hoped all her remedy.

As soon as she saw the Page come in, she rose up, and taking the Dagger in her
hand; Is It done, my friend, said she, is Ariomant dead? No Madam, answered he,
the King himself came and delivered him, and did him all manner of honor; there
is some mystery in the matter which I know not; for I understood by the
confused noise, which I heard from the middle of the place, that the offender
was the King of Cambayaes son; he told her after, what Piroxenus had done, and
the memorable exploits they both performed upon the Scaffold.

The Princess transported with that news, which she well enough understood,
could not forbear embracing the little Ariston, and was a quarter of an hour
and more in a kind of trouble; truly he did well to come, and prepare her mind
for that joy: for if at first it had come to her, from the Kings mouth, she
could never have forborne to have shown her ravishment, whereas, she had the
time to compose her self, to receive that pleasure without disquiet, and to
accompany her countenance, with a modest coldness, when her father came.

As soon as he had thanked the gods, he entered the Princess chamber, followed
by Anaxander, piroxenus, and Falantus, who however well prepared for that
visit, had much to do to disuise her contentment, and retain her joy; so long
it was, that she had not seen her dear Anaxander, as that only consideration
was enough to shake her resolution, and her constancy, and discover openly to
the King her father, the impatiency of her mind, and violence of her love: yet
she contained her self, and save one amorous glance she cast by stealth on
Anaxander, nothing unordinary was observed in her welcome.

Daughter, said the King, coming near her, you had reason to solicit for
Anaxanders freedom, and I confess I was too blame, in not satisfying my self
of a truth, which you so resolutely maintained: but fince that error is
remitted me, lets talk no more, but how to remedy it, and forget all our
displeasures past, to invent delights, and give our selves over to ou^ joy. I
declare that heartily I confirm that Marriage contracted secretly between you,
seeing it is true, that honor was the ground of your lover, and that nothing but
virtue and modesty has appeared in you embraces, and for a testimony of my
consent, I will in my presence have you now renew your vows, and that Falantus
may assure his Master of my granting all he asks; while I take order, that your
Marriage be solemnized, with a pomp to set all Asia in astonishment, and make
my greatness be admired of all my neighbors.

At these words our lovers could no longer conceal their transports, they
changed not only faiths, but kind embraces, before all the company, and with
mutual tears of joy which ran from their eyes, they dewed one another.
Meanwhile, the King having learned, that Lisimantus was coming with so mighty
an Army, which advanced to no purpose, and that he was to marry his Niece
Lisimena, he sent an Ambassador with speed to meet him, and acquaint him what
had past, and to enquire whether he would not partake of their contentment, and
desire to celebrate his Marriage, with his brother Anaxanders in his Country.

Only Piroxenus now as to be pleased, whose story the King was very glad to
hear, and much more, to see that he was able to show such arguments of his
generosity as to the rest, for though the whole Kingdom of decan, was
re-restablish'd under his obtdience, and he the sole and peaceable possessor of
it, knowing that the fair Orixa was yet living, he restored her presently her
twelve Provinces, and thought fit, that Piroxenus should go to her, who lived
unknown still, and carry her this good news himself, and bring her to Bisnagar
with Royal equipage, that those three happy Marriages, might be solemnized at
once.

After his dispatch to Lisimantus, and Orixa, he sent back Falantus to
Alcidaris, that he, better than any man, might express his own, and all his
subjects joy, whereof that great monarch intended to come, and share in his own
person; The Queen Anaxarette, not contented with the relations which would be
made her of the magnificences prepared for her sons Wedding, resolved to
accompany him in that journey.

They then, fitted themselves as soon as they could, and having left good
Garrisons in their Countries, although in peace, they chose out the most expert
Cavalliers of their Court, and the handsomest women of Amadaba, Campanel, and
Cambaye, to conduct them to that delightful place, where so many felicities
expected them, and causing a good part of the preparations for Lisimantus
entrance, and for Anaxanders, and Piroxenus return, to follow them in Chariots.

The King of Zeylan, having known hereof by a Post dispatched to him by the
King his brother in law, he would likewise carry with him his daughter, whom
with a great deal of contentment he had vowed to Lisimantus, whose birth he
learnt from Albalot, whom Alcidaris had sent him, and failed not to be waited
on by all the beauty of his Island, that his Subjects might be seen to want,
nor skill, nor power, and that they might compare with all other nations. He
did Albalot the honor to take him into his own Ship, with all the Cambayan
Knights, whom he brought with him, that in a more stately train, they might go
all to Baticalus, which is the next Haven to Bisnagar.

That City was exceeding great, and one of the most renowned of the East; but
by reason of the great multitude, and innumerable affluence which came from all
parts of Asia to make some at the sports prepared, and magnificencies, which
invited every body to them, they were fain to set up Tents and Pavillions
without the Walls, and mark out all the lodgings of the City, for the followers
of those three Kings, who came with the fairest and the richest ornaments of
their Courts.

They all arrived severally, at that stately City, which at that time, might
justly boast to be the splendour, and the glory of the East; So great a pomp,
and so many wonders were never seen before together, and I must make a Volume
greater far than this, if I would undertake to describe them all exactly, and
express the ravishments of all our Princes, in their common rancounters, as
the Author of this book has done, with all the Conquests they have made (since
their Marriages) of Lands usurped from Tamberlins children, from whom they were
descended; but besides that other occasions busy me, I should fear that this
History might pass for a Fable, becanse it would not be believed, that Indian
King^ were so mighty in their States as in my writings.

It shall suffice, that I tell you how that great Mogull, who at this day makes
all the East tremble, and who justly boasts to be the greatest Monarch of the
World, vaunts him also to be issued out of Alcidaris, the sole remainder of
great Tamberlins race, and to descend in a right line from Anaxander. This
whole History is painted in his great Palace Gallery at Lahor, and in that of
Dely, which he has had with the Kingdom of Citor, and Decan by succession of
Piroxenus, who died childlesse, as he has inherited Cambaya, and diverse other
Kingdoms lost, and gotten again, by the death of such as have descended from
Lisimantus. He got other great Countries and Kingdoms, by his valor, as all
Indostan, which is bounded by Indus, and Ganges, where the great City Agria is
situated, which is one of the chiefest scats of his Empire; for he remains
mostly at Lahor, which is above fix score leagues from the Coast of Cambaya, of
whose magnificences all the East do talk with wonder.

He possesses likewise, Bengalus, Aracam* Ava, Verma, and an infinite number
of other Kingdoms, on this side Ganges and beyond: but some: likewise have been
taken from his Prdeceessors, of those which lawfully belonged to him, as
Narsinga, Calicut, and all the Coasts of Malabor, which after Piroxenus death
were divided into diverse little Kingdoms, of some of which the Portugals have
made themselves Masters, during the reign of Emanuel, and since. Yet at this
time the Idalcan, and the Nissamaluque enjoy all, that the two slaves
revolters, Rozalcan, and Zabain usurped from Demonax, and oppose themselves
against his almightinesse, with as much courage, as at this day the Hollanders
do, against their lawful Lord.

A friend of mine, who has been a Voyage into the East Indies, took this
History out of the great Moguls Cabinet, which I have translated into our
Language; But he added all the magnificencies of our three Hero's Weddings, out
of which I have drawn this little Summary, to make appear, that they come not
short for dexterity of the Knights of Europe, and that they are capable of all
the gallantries of which we vainly believe our selves the first inventors.

I will not repeat in order the wonders of the field, wherein were employed all
the ornaments of Architecture that could be found, nor of the Kings Scaffold,
the Ladies, and the Judges, whereof, Jasper, Marble, and Porphire, were the
least adornments, nor the Hero's ceremonies, nor the entries and retraits of
the defendants and assailants, nor all the wonders of the Tryumphs.
C^rrouzels, which are very amply described, in all the representations of the
Combats, which pertained to the magnificence of those public Feasts; but I
will mention only some of their Rules, which I found very pretty, as well in
their Fencing Combats, which they more freqoently practice than the rest of all
India on this side Ganges, as in their fighting with Darts.

Those of Fencing in throng, are two manner of ways used among them
ordinarily, by such as defend or maintain Ambition, against those that maintain
Love; of these latter, there are two sorts, the pleased, against the
malcontents, and the malcontents against the despairers; No man comes into the
place of Fence, save the Combatants, and their Godfathers, except such as can
prove that they have there gained five Victories formerly, and such are set by
the Judges side to assist them.

The Combats of Darts are more mysterious; for a man can use no other than such
as are given by Ladies. They take glory in obliging strangers particularly, by
the civility of entertainment, in their houses, and send them the fairest they
can devise, adorned with characters, and devises, and the Combatants tie them
to their Girdles with great gold and silk Ribbans. The Godfathers, go and
entreat the Combatants Mistresser, that they may have their liking, to bear
such names as they have chosen, and afterward cause them to be written down,
before the Judges of the Combat, who cannot exercise that office, until they
have been at the least, ten times Conquerers; the Heralds of Arms are at the
entrance of the field, to do their messages, clad in very rich coats of Arms,
aster the Indian manner; Before the Combat begins, because the field is of a
square form, the four Heralds go to the four corners, to publish the Law, and
Ordinances of Combat, which the Judges deliver them, whereof I give you here
the tenor.

1 NO man may enter the combat except he first show a Favor from his Mistress,
which she must publicly allow of. 2 If two Rivals fight, though either of them
be hurt, no man may separate them except the Mistress command it, the rest are
parted by the Judges. 3 He that lets fall his Dart cannot take it up again but
by his enemies leave, and a great many that will not ask it assault their
adversaries with their Target. 4 Each carries the Arms of his house in his
Target above, and his devise under, and his Ladies Picture in the middle. 5 The
conquered are led prisoners before the Ladies from whom they crave two
liberties, the one that they may be freed from the chains of Love, the other
from those that bind them. 6 The Conquered gives up his Target to his
Mistress, because her Picturec is there painted, and the Conqueror delivers
his prisoners Dart to his. 7 If a Combatant fall, it is death to hurt him on
the ground, and loss of honor to hurt him upon his knee. 8 The Combatant that
finds himself strongest must cast his eyes upon the Knight of honor, who holds
a Pennon, composed of all the Ladies Liveries; for if he lift it up, it is a
sign of grace, and that the Ladies will have the other weaker, no longer
oppressed in their presence. 9 That Lady, who has had ten Victorious Lovers,
which she may verify by her Darts, has voice in the Ordinances of the Combat
as the Judges have.
They observe likewise some others, but I found only these in the
entertainments, at our Lovers solemnity, who were of all parts of the gallantry
expressed in honor of them, by the most expert Knights of the four Kingdoms I
have described; A great many other adventurers persented themselves, as well of
Baticalus, as other neighbor Provinces, who excellently acquitted themselves,
as well in the regulated exercises, as in the Combats of throng, where a
thousand Battalions encountered with great skill and courage.

The Trumpets gave them encouragement against one another, and nothing seen but
a pleasing consusion, from whence the shouts on all sides, in some sort,
equalled the pleasure of the cars with that of the eye. The strong had there
the advantage, and in those innocent Combats, the weak falling under the
harmless blow, gave the beholders greater joy than pity.

Anaxander who was the chief of the defendants, in the Combat of the A kine of
Spear.
ZIgayes, was very advantagiously clothed, and mounted; but the luster of his
countenance, was sarre above that of the Diamonds, which were rough cast, as it
were, upon his Arms; his Target was the Master-peice of an excellent China
workman, whereon, no riches possible was spared, to adorn it: above, there were
the Arms of Dulcinda, and because they bear sinople, all the field was Emerods,
and the rest, of Rubies, and Diamonds; under these Arms, according to the Laws
established by the Judges, the fair Orazia was painted to the life, with the
Arms of Narsinga, empaled with Bisnagar, and Orixa, which sparkled with a five
grace in a corner of the Picture, under which, were written these six verses in
Arabic, which I have thus translated.

How her black Eyes attractive be,
What fires they have, what darts we see,
How dexterous, and how sull of might,
How handsome are their Victories,
What sweetness, and what power of right,
To take our Hearts, and Eyes?
Under that Picture, was a new devise which he had taken, after so many
crosses, and misfortunes, and that he had passed from sorrow to joy, and from
the apprehension of so many deaths, unto a happy life. The body wa's shining
Sun, sending forth beams, with these words, which have more elegance in Arabic.

After the Night and Clouds.
Lisimantus on his part marched in a wonderful pomp, leading the first day of
the Sports and ceremonies, the Troop of adventurers. Because he was as a
stranger in Narsinga, a great part of the foreiners ranged themselves under his
Standard; his Harness, as well as his horses, was stately, he had the same
advantages of natural grace, as in the invention of his habit, which I forbear
to describe, which his brother had; The Arms of Cambaya were painted on his
Buckler, with like ornament to his brother Anaxander under them, was the
Picture of his dear Lisimena; and because she was somewhat browner than Orazia,
which diminished nothing of her beauty, many thought that somewhat of purpose he
accompanied it with these verses.

How this brown hue does shame the fair,
Mixed as it is, with blood so rare,
Which ever ravished has my frame,
A man would say, its glory lies,
In being swarted by that flame,
Which rises from her Eyes.
Under the Picture, was his devise, which he had likewise newly taken, and
since he knew his birth, to which only it seemed, they gave the prize which his
love and virtue deserved, he had for the body, a great Looking-glass painted,
whost Curtain was draw^ with these words, which signify somewhat more in their
language.

I was acknowledged, when I knew my self. Piroxenus, and the other Princes, and
Knights, had likewise very sine devises in their Targets, and were all richly
clad, and waited on with stately equipages in their Combats, as their
Carrouzels, which followed, where a number ogreat Elephants, and Lions, were
seen to do unst imaginable things: but as I have already said, besides that I
should fill three greater Volumes than this, if I should describe all
particulars, I should cause the Author of this admirable History, to be doubted
for a Liar.

FINIS.

