THE UNION OF THE TWO KINGDOMS OF SCOTLAND AND ENGLAND: OR, The elaborate
Papers of Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam, Viscount of St. Alban, sometime High
Chancellor of England;

The greatest Sates-man of his Nation, and Scholar of his Age, concerning that
Affair.

Published in this form, for public satisfaction.

Nullum numen abest.

Edinburgh, Printed in the year, 1670.

FOR The Right HONORABLE, Sir ANDREW RAMSAY KNIGHT, Barron of Abbots-hall,
etc. Lord Provost of Edinburgh, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council.
My Lord,
OF the Union of the two Kingdoms now happily intended, these being the
Elaborate and most Learned Thoughts and Resolutions of that great Statesman,
yet more great Lawyer, but most of all, the far greatest Scholar of his Age
and Nation, Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam, Viscount of St. Alban, presented
to our sometimes Great SOVEREIGN, King James, the most Wise and Learned; I have
advised them again to the Press, for the satisfaction of diverse Noble and
Worthy Persons, the Book in which they first came to light, being too
voluminous for ordinary use, and rarely to be found in this Kingdom. And now,
my Lord, I have made bold to give you the trouble of this Address, and present
these few Papers, though small in bulk, yet vast in matter, to your hands, both
upon my own, and the Authors account. Upon mine own, who have ever been your
most humble Client, and have had your noble Friendship and Favor to
countenance me in all my private concerns: And moreover, you do as Chief
Magistrate, govern that City in which I was first educate in the
Peripatetickwalks, and under, and in which, I have for diverse years professed
Letters, or practiced Chyrurgery and Physic; and with the rest of my fellow
Citizens, have found such refreshment under your Shade and Care, that I thought
it my duty to signify it by this small testimony of my thankfulness. And I am
sure, that upon the Authors account, there is not a fitter Person, to whom
these Papers could be committed. The great prudence and knowledge he had in
State Affairs, made him very acceptable to the Kings and People of his own
Nation; and the great moderation, watchfulness and wisdom you have used in
governing this City, one of the greatest Interests of this Kingdom, has
endeared you to all the Princes and Chiefs of this People. What labor and
trouble you put upon your self to preserve it under the late Usurpers, your
very enemies do acknowledge and praise. How your care and resolution preserved
it from ruin, when the West Malcontents came marching to its very Gates,
all that were faithful to His Majesty's Service are ready to witness. And with
what sweetness and calmness you have kept together the Union of the
Burgesses, who were ready, through heat and unadvisedness, to divide
themselves, your late appearance before the Right Honorable Committee of
Trade, and your oppose to those that were ready to violate the old Set of the
Good-Town, is a testimony above exception. I could add many more evidences of
your great Prudence and Moderation; but I will rather forbear them, then give
the least blush or trouble to your modesty: Only this I must add, that as your
Lordship has been a great Preserver of the Union of this Burgh; So I do not
doubt, but you, who are the most eminent Member of a Party not least concerned
in this Affair, I mean the Buroughs, will with your good advices, endeavor
such an Union of the two Kingdoms, as shall most advance the Glory and
Prerogative of our Gracious King, and promove most the Honor, Trade and Safety
of both People. This and your Preservation, shall ever be the sincere Devotion
of,

My Lord, Your most humble Servant, C. Irvin.

A Speech used by Sir Francis Bacon in the Lower House of Parliament, 50.
Jacobi, concerning the Article of general Naturalization of the Scots Nation.
IT may please you (Mr. Speaker) Preface I will use none, but put my self upon
your good Opinions, to which I have been accustomed beyond my deservings.
Neither will I hold you in suspense, what way I will choose; but now at the
first, declare my self, that I mean to counsel the House to Naturalize this
Nation. Wherein, nevertheless, I have a request to make unto you; which is of
more efficacy to the purpose I have in hand, then all that I shall say
afterward. And it is the same which Demosthenes did, more then once in great
Causes of Estate, to the people of Athens, Ut cum calcul^ Suffragiorum, sumant
Magnanimitatem Reip. That when they took into their hands, the Balls whereby to
give their Voices, (according as the manner of them was) They would raise their
thoughts, and lay aside those considerations which their private Vocations and
Degrees might minister and represent unto them; And would take upon them
cogitations and minds, agreeable to the Dignity and Honor of the Estate.

For, (Mr. Speaker) as it was aptly and sharply said by Alexander to Parmenio;
when upon the Recital of the great offers which Darius made, Parmenio said unto
him, I would accept these offers, were I as Alexander: He turned it upon him
again, So would I (says he) were I as Parmenio. So in this cause, if an honest
English Merchant (I do not single out that State in disgrace, for this Island
ever held it Honorable, but only for an instance of a private profession) If
an English Merchant should say, Surely I would proceed no further in the Union,
were I as the King; It might be reasonably answered, No more would the King,
were He as an English Merchant. And the like may be said of a Gentleman of the
Country, be he never so worthy and sufficient; Or of a Lawyer, be he never so
wise and learned; Or of any other particular condition in this Kingdom. For
certainly (Mr. Speaker) if a man shall be only or chiefly sensible of those
respects, which his particular Vocation and Degree shall suggest and infuse
into him, and not enter into true and worthy considerations of Estate, he shall
never be able aright to give counsel, or to take counsel in this matter. So
that it this request be granted, I account the cause obtained.

But to proceed to the matter it self. All Consultations do rest upon Questions
comparative. For when a question is de Vero, it is simple, for there is but one
Truth: But when a question is de Bono, it is for the most part comparative: For
there be differing degrees of Good and Evil; and the best of the Good is to be
preferred and chosen, and the worst of the Evil is to be declined and avoided.
And therefore, in a Question of this nature, you may not look for Answers
proper to every inconvenience alleged; For somewhat that cannot be specially
answered, may nevertheless be encountered and overweighed, by matter of greater
moment. And therefore, the matter which I shall set forth unto you, will
naturally receive this distribution of three parts.

First, an Answer unto those inconveniences which have been alleged to ensue,
if we should give way to this Naturalization; which, I suppose, you will find
not to be so great as they have been made; but that much dross is put into the
balance, to help to make weight.

Secondly, an Encounter against the remain of those inconveniences which cannot
properly be answered, by much greater inconveniences which we shall incur, if
we do not proceed to this Naturalization.

Thirdly, an Encounter likewise, but of another nature; That is, by the gain
and benefit which we shall draw and purchase to our selves, by proceeding to
this Naturalization. And yet to avoid confusion, which evermore follows of
too much Generality, it is necessary for me, before I proceed to persuasion, to
use some distribution of the Points or Parts of Naturalization: which certainly
can be no better nor none other, than the ancient distribution of Jus
Civitatis, Jus Suffragii, vel Tribus, and Petitionis, sive Honorum. For all
ability and capacity is either of private Interest, of Meum and Tuum, or of
public Service: And the public consists chiefly, either in Voice or in
Office. Now it is the first of these (Mr. Speaker) that I will only handle at
this time, and in this place; and reserve the other two for a Committee,
because they receive more distinction and restriction.

To come therefore to the inconveniences alleged on the other part. The first
of them is, that there may ensue of this Naturalization, a surcharge of people
upon this Realm of England, which is supposed already to have the full charge
and content; and therefore, there cannot be an adm^ssion of the adoptive,
without a diminution of the Fortunes and Conditions of those that are Native
Subjects of this Realm. A grave objection (Mr. Speaker) and very dutiful; for
it proceeds not of any unkindness to the Scots Nation, but of a natural
fastness to our selves. For that Answer of the Virgins, Ne forte non sufficiat
Vobis and Nobis, proceeded not out of any envy or malign humor, but out of
providence, and that original charity which begins with our selves. And I must
confess (Mr. Speaker) that as the Gentleman said, when Abraham and Lot, in
regard of the greatness of their Families, grew pent and straightened; it is true,
that (Brethren though they were) they grew to difference, and to those words,
Vade tu ad dextram, and ego ad sinistram, etc. But certainly, I should never
have brought that example on that side; for we see what followed of it, how
that this separation, ad dextram and ad sinistram, caused the miserable
captivity of the one Brother, and the dangerous, though prosperous war, of the
other, for his rescous and recovery.

But to this objection (M. Speaker) being so weighty and so principal, I mean
to give three several Answers; every one of them being, to mine understanding,
by it self sufficient.

The first is, that this Opinion of the numbers of the Scots Nation, that
should be likely to plant themselves here amongst us, will be found to be a
thing rather in conceit then in event. For (Mr. Speaker) you shall find these
plausible similitudes, of a Tree that will thrive the better if it be removed
into the more fruitful Soil; And of Sheep or Cattle, that if they find a gap or
passage open, will leave the more barren Pasture, and get into the more rich
and plentiful; To be but Arguments merely superficial, and to have no sound
resemblance with the transplanting or transferring of Families. For the Tree,
we know, by nature, as soon as it is set in the better ground, can fasten upon
it and take nutriment from it; And a Sheep, as soon as he gets into the better
Pasture, what should let him to graze and feed? But there belongs more (I
take it) to a Family or particular person, that shall remove from one Nation to
another: For if (Mr. Speaker) they have not Stock, Means, Acquaintance and
Custom, Habitation, Trades, Countenance and the like; I hope, you doubt not but
they will starve in the midst of the rich Pasture, and are far enough off from
grazing at their pleasure. And therefore, in this point which is conjectural,
experience is the best Guide; for the time past is a Pattern of the time to
come. I think no man doubts (Mr. Speaker) but his Majesty's first coming in
was as the greatest Springtide, for the confluence and entrance of that
Nation. Now I would fain understand, in these four years space, and in the
fullness and strength of the Current and Tide, how many Families of the Scots
men are planted in the Cities, Buroughs and Towns of this Kingdom? For I do
assure my self, that, more then some persons of Quality about his Majesty's
Person here at the Court and in London, and some other inferior persons that
have a dependancy upon them; The Return and Certificate, if such a Survey
should be made, would be of a number extremely small. I report me to all your
private knowledges, of the places where you inhabit.

Now (Mr. Speaker) as I said, Si in Ligno viridi it a fit, quid fiet in arido?
I am sure there will be no more such Spring-tides. But, you will tell me of a
multitude of Families of the Scots Nation in Polonia; And if they multiply in a
Country so far off, how much more here at hand? For that, (Mr. Speaker) you
must impute it, of necessity, to some special accident of time and place, that
draws them thither. For you see plainly, before your eyes, that in Germany,
which is much nearer, and in France, where they are invited with Privileges,
and with this very Privilege of Naturalization, yet no such number can be
found: So as it cannot be either nearness of place or privilege of person,
that is the cause. But shall I tell you (Mr. Speaker) what I think; Of all the
places in the world, near or far off, they will never take that course of life
in this Kingdom, which they content themselves with in Poland: For we see it to
be the nature of all men, that they will rather discover poverty abroad then at
home. There is never a Gentleman that has overreached himself in expense, and
thereby must abate his Countenance, but he will rather travel and do it abroad
then at home. And we know well, they have good high Stomachs, and have ever
stood in some terms and emulation with us; and therefore they will never live
here, except they can live in good fashion. So as I assure you (Mr. Speaker) I
am of opinion, that the strife which we have now to admit them, will have like
sequel as that contention had between the Nobility and People of Rome, for the
admitting of a Plebeian Consul; which while it was in passing, was very
vehement and mightily stood upon: and when the people had obtained it, they
never made any Plebeian Consul, no not in sixty years after. And so will this
be for many years, as I am persuaded, rather a matter in opinion, then in use
or effect. And this is the first Answer that I give to this main inconvenience
pretended, of surcharge of People.

The second Answer which I give to this Objection, is this. I must have leave
to doubt, (Mr. Speaker) that this Realm of England is not yet peopled to the
full. For certain it is, that the Territories of France, Italy, Flanders and
some parts of Germany, do in equal space of ground bear and contain a far
greater quantity of People, if they were mustered by the Poll. Neither can I
see, that this Kingdom is so much inferior unto those foreign parts in
fruitfulness, as it is in population; which makes me conceive, we have not our
full charge. Besides, I do see manifestly among us, the badges and tokens
rather of scarceness then of press of people; as drowned Grounds, Commons,
Wastes and the like: Which is a plain demonstration, that howsoever there may
bean over swelling throng and press of people here about London; which is most
in our eye, yet the body of the Kingdom is but thin sown with People. And
whosoever shall compare the ruins and decays of ancient Towns in this Realm,
with the erections and augmentations of new; cannot but judge, that this Realm
has been far better peopled in former times, It may be, in the Heptarchy or
otherwise: For generally the Rule holds, The Smaller State, the greater
Population, proratd. And whether this be true or no, we need not seek further
then to call to our remembrance, how many of us serve here in this place, for
desolate and decayed Buroughs. Again (Mr. Speaker) whosoever looks into the
Principles of Estate, must hold it, that it is the Mediterrane Countries, and
not the Maritime, which need to fear surcharge of People. For all
Sea-Provinces, especially Islands, have another Element besides the Earth and
Soil, for their sustentation. For what an infinite number of people are and may
be sustained by Fishing, Carriage by Sea and Merchandising? wherein I do again
discover, that we are not at all pinched by multitude of people: For if we
were, it were not possible that we should relinquish and resign such an
infinite benefit of Fishing to the Flemmings, as it is well known we do. And
therefore, I see that we have wastes by Sea, as well as by Land: which still is
an infallible Argument, that our Industry is not awaked to seek maintenance,
by any over great press or charge of People.

And lastly (Mr. Speaker) there was never any Kingdom, in the Ages of the
world, had, I think, so fair and happy means to issue and discharge the
multitude of their People (if it were too great) as this Kingdom has; in
regard of that desolate and avasted Kingdom of Ireland, which (being a Country
blessed with almost all the Dowries of Nature, as Rivers, Havens, Woods,
Quarries, good Soil and temperate Climate, and now at last, under his Majesty,
blessed also with obedience) does, as it were, continually call unto us for our
Colonies and Plantations. And so I conclude my second Answer to this pretended
inconvenience of surcharge of People.

The third Answer (Mr. Speaker) which I give is this. I demand, what is the
worst effect which can follow of surcharge of People? Look into all Stories,
and you shall find it none other then some honorable War, for the enlargement
of their Borders, which find themselves pent, upon foreign parts. Which
inconvenience, in a valourous and warlike Nation, I know not whether I should
term an inconvenience or no: For the saying is most true, though in another
sense, Omne solum forti Patria. It was spoken indeed of the patience of an
exiled man; but it is no less true of the valout of a warlike Nation. And
certainly (Mr. Speaker) I hope I may speak it without offense, That if we did
hold our selves worthy, whenever just cause should be given, either to
recover our ancient Rights, or to revenge our late wrongs, or to attain the
Honor of our Ancestors, or to enlarge the Patrimony of our Posterity; We would
never in this manner forget considerations of Amplitude and Greatness, and fall
at variance about Profit and Reckonings; fitter a great deal for private
Persons, then for Parliaments and Kingdoms. And thus (Mr. Speaker) I leave this
first Objection, to such satisfaction as you have heard.

The second Objection is, that the Fundamental Laws of both these Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, are yet diverse and several; Nay more, that it is declared
by the Instrument, that they shall so continue, and that there is no intent in
his Majesty to make innovation in them: And therefore, that it should not be
seasonable to proceed to this Naturalization, I hereby to endow them with our
Rights and Privileges, except they should likewise receive and submit
themselves to our Laws. And this Objection likewise (Mr. Speaker) I allow to be
a weighty Objection, and worthy to be well answered and discussed.

The Answer which I shall offer, is this. It is true, for mine own part (Mr.
Speaker) that I wish the Scots Nation governed by our Laws; for I hold our
Laws, with some reducement, worthy to govern, if it were the world. But, this
is that which I say, and I desire therein your attention; That, according to
the true reason of Estate, Naturalization is, in order, first and precedent to
Union of Laws; in degree, a less matter then Union of Laws; and in nature,
separable, not inseparable, from Union of Laws. For, Naturalization does but
take out the marks of a Forraigner; but Union of Laws makes them entirely as
our selves: Naturalization takes away separation, but Union of Laws does take
away distinction. Do we not see (Mr. Speaker) that in the administration of the
world, under the great Monarch, God himself, that His Laws are diverse; one Law
in Spirits, another in Bodies; One Law in Regions Celestial, another
Elementary; And yet the Creatures are all one Mass and Lump, without any vacuum
or separation? Do we not see likewise, in the State of the Church, that amongst
people of all Languages and Linages, there is one Communion of Saints; and that
we are all fellow Citizens, and naturalized of the Heavenly Jerusalem: And
yet, nevertheless, diverse and several Ecclesiastical Laws, Policies and
Hierarchies? According to the Speech of that worthy Father, In vest varietas
sit, scissura non sit. And therefore, certainly (Mr. Speaker) the Bond of Law
is the more special and private Bond; and the Bond of Naturalization the more
common and general. For the Laws are rather Figura Reip. then Forma; and rather
Bonds of Perfection, then Bonds of Entireness. And therefore, we see in the
experience of our own Government, that in the Kingdom of Ireland, all our
Statute-Laws, since Poyning-Laws, are not in force; and yet we deny them not
the benefit of Naturalization. In Gersey, Guernsey and the Isle of Man, our
Common Laws are not in force; and yet they have the benefit of Naturalization.
Neither need any man doubt, but that our Laws and Customs must in small time
gather and win upon theirs. For, here is the Seat of the Kingdom, whence come
the supreme Directions of Estate; Here is the Kings Person and Example, of
which the Verse says, Regis ad exemplum tot us componitur Orbis.

And therefore, it is not possible, although not by solemn and formal Act of
Estates, yet by the secret operation of no long time, but they will come under
the yoke of our Laws; and so, Dulcis tractus pari jugo. And this is the Answer
I give to this second Objection.

The third Objection is, some inequality in the Fortunes of these two Nations,
England and Scotland; By the commixture whereof, there may ensue advantage to
them, and loss to us: Wherein (Mr. Speaker) it is well, that this difference or
disparity consists but in external Goods of Fortune. For indeed, it must
needs be confessed, that for the Goods of the Mind and Body, they are Alteri
Nos, Other our selves. For, to do them but right, we know in their capacity and
understanding, they are a People ingenious; in Labor industrious; in Courage
valiant; in Body hard, active and comely. More might be said, but in commending
them, we do but in effect commend our selves: for they are of one piece and
continent with us; and the truth is, we are participant both of their Virtues
and Vices. For, if they have been noted to be a Pople not so tractable in
Government, we cannot without flattering our selves, free our selves altogether
from that fault, being a thing indeed incident to all Martial People. As we see
it evident by the example of the Romans and others: Even like unto fierce
Horses, that though they be of better service then others, yet are they harder
to guide and to manage.

But for this Objection (Mr. Speaker) I purpose to answer it, not by Authority
of Scripture, which says, Beatius est dare quam accipere; but by an Authority,
framed and derived from the judgment of our selves and our Ancestors, in the
same case as to this point. For (Mr. Speaker) in all the Line of our Kings,
none uses to carry greater commendation then his Majesty's Noble Progenitour,
King Edward, the first of that Name: And amongst his other commendations both
of War and Policy, none is more celebrated then his purpose and enterprise for
the Conquest of Scotland; as not bending his designs to glorious Acquests
abroad, but to solid strength at home: which nevertheless, if it had succeeded
well, could not but have brought in all those inconveniences, of the commixture
of a more opulent Kingdom, with a less, that are now alleged. For it is not
the yoke either of our Arms or of our Laws, that can alter the nature of the
Climate, or the nature of the Soil: Neither is it the manner of the commixture,
that can alter the matter of the commixture. And therefore (Mr. Speaker) if it
were good for us then, it is good for us now; and not to be prised the less
because we paid not so dear for it. But a more full Answer to this Objection, I
refer over to that which will come after to be spoken, touching Surety and
Greatness.

The fourth Objection (Mr. Speaker) is not properly an Objection, but rather a
pre-occupation of an Objection of the other side: For it may be said, and very
materially, whereabout do we contend? The benefit of Naturalization is by the
Law, in as many as have been, or shall be born since his Majesty's coming to
the Crown, already settled and invested. There is no more then, but to bring
the Ante-nati into the degree of the Post-nati; that men grown that have
well-deserved, may be in no worse case then children which have not deserved;
and elder brothers in no worse case then younger brothers. So as we stand upon
Quiddam, not Quantum; being but a little difference of time, of one Generation
from another.

To this (Mr. Speaker) it is said by some, that the Law is not so, but that the
Post-nati are Aliens as well as the rest. A point that I mean not much to
argue; both because it has been well spoken to, by the Gentleman that spoke
last before me; and because I do desire in this case and in this place, to
speak rather of Convenience than of Law. Only this will I say, That that
opinion seems to me contrary to reason of Law, contrary to form of pleading in
Law, and contrary to Authority and Experience of Law. For reason of Law, when I
meditate of it, Methinks the wisdom of the Common Laws of England, well
observed, is admirable, in the distribution of the benefit and protection of
the Laws, according to the several conditions of persons, in an excellent
proportion. The degrees are four, but bipartite; Two of Aliens, and two of
Subjects. The first degree is of an Alien, born under a King or State that is
an enemy. If such an one come into this Kingdom without safe conduct, it is at
his peril: The Law gives him no protection, neither for Body, Lands nor Goods;
So as if he be slain, there is no remedy by any Appeal at the parties suit,
although his Wife were an English woman: Marry at the Kings suit the case may
be otherwise, in regard of the offense to the Peace. The second degree, is of
an Alien that is born under the Faith and Allegiance of a King or State that is
a friend. Unto such a person, the Law does impart a greater benefit and
protection; that is, concerning things personal, transitory and moveable; as
Goods and Chattels, Contracts and the like: But not concerning Freehold and
Inheritance: And the reason is, because he may be an enemy, though he be not.
For the State, under the obeisance of which he is, may enter into quarrel and
hostility; and therefore, as the Law has but a transitory assurance of him, so
it rewards him but with transitory benefits. The third degree is of a Subject,
who having been an Alien, is by Charter made Denizen. To such an one, the Law
does impart yet a more ample benefit: For, it gives him power to purchase
Freehold and Inheritance to his own use, and likewise enables the Children,
born after his Denization, to inherit: But yet, nevertheless, he cannot make
Title, or convey Pedigree from any Ancestour Paramount. For the Law thinks not
good to make him in the same degree with a Subject born; because he was once an
Alien, and so might once have been an enemy. And Nemo subito fingitur: Men's
affections cannot be so settled by any benefit, as when from their Nativity
they are inbred and inherent. And the fourth degree, which is the perfect
degree, is of such a person that neither is enemy, nor can be enemy in time to
come, nor could have been enemy at any time past; And therefore, the Law gives
unto him the full benefit of Naturalization. Now (Mr. Speaker) if these be the
true steps and paces of the Law, no man can deny, but whosoever is born under
the Kings Obedience, never could, in aliquo puncto temporis, be an enemy; (a
Rebel he might be, but no Enemy) And therefore, in reason of Law, is
naturalized: Nay, contrary-wise, he is bound, Jure Nativitatis, to defend this
Kingdom of England against all Invaders or Rebels: And therefore, as he is
obliged to the protection of Arms, and that perpetually and universally; So he
is to have the perpetual and universal benefit and protection of Law, which is
Naturalization.

For form of Pleading, it is true, that has been said, That if a man would
plead another to be an Alien, he must not only set forth negatively and
privatively, that he was born out of the obedience of our Sovereign Lord the
King, but affirmatively, under the obedience of a foreign King or State in
particular; which never can be done in this case.

As for Authority, I will not press it; you know all what has been published
by the Kings Proclamations.

And for experience of Law, we see it in the Subjects of Ireland, in the
Subjects of Gersey and Guernsey, parcels of the Duchy of Normandy; in the
Subjects of Calleis (when it was English) which was parcel of the Crown of
France. But, as I said, I am not willing to enter into an Argument of Law, but
to hold my self to point of Convenience.

So as for my part, I hold all Post-nati naturalized, ipso jure. But yet, I am
far from opinion, that it should be a thing superfluous to have it done by
Parliament; chiefly, in respect of that true principle, Principum Actiones
praecipue ad famam sunt componendae. It will lift up a Sign to all the world,
of our love toward them, and good agreement with them. And these are (Mr.
Speaker) the matterial Objections which have been made of the other side,
whereunto you have heard mine Answers: Weigh them in your wisdoms. And so I
conclude that general part.

Now (Mr. Speaker) according as I promised, I must fill the other balance, in
expressing unto you the inconveniences which we shall incur, if we shall not
proceed to this Naturalization: Wherein, that inconvenience, which of all
others and alone by it self, if there were none other, does exceedingly move
me, and may move you, is a Position of Estate, collected out of the Records of
time; which is this, That wheresoever several Kingdoms or Estates have been
united in Sovereignty, if that Union has not been fortified and bound in with
a further Union, and namely that which is now in question, of Naturalization;
this has followed, That at one time or other they have broken again, being
upon all occasions apt to revolt, and relapse to the former separation.

Of this assertion, the first example which I will set before you, is of that
memorable Union which was between the Romans and the Latins, which continued
from the Battle at the Lake of Regilla, for many years, until the Consulships
of T. Manlius and P. Decius. At what time, there began about this very point of
Naturalization, that War which was called, Bellum Sociale; being the most
bloody and pernicious War, that ever the Roman State endured; wherein, after
numbers of Battails, and infinite Sieges and Surprises of Towns, the Romans in
the end prevailed, and mastered the Latins. But as soon as ever they had the
honor of the War, looking back into what perdition and confusion they were
near to have been brought, they presently naturalized them all. You speak of a
Naturalization in blood; there was a Naturalization indeed in blood.

Let me set before you again, the example of Sparta, and the rest of
Peloponnesus their Associats. The State of Sparta was a nice and jealous State
in this point, of imparting Naturalization to their Confederates: But what was
the issue of it? After they had held them in a kind of Society and Amity for
diverse years, upon the first occasion given (which was no more, then the
surprise of the Castle of Thebes, by certain desperate Conspirators in the
habit of Masquers) There ensued immediately a general revolt and defection of
their Associats; which was the ruin of their State, never afterward to be
recovered.

Of later time, let me lead your consideration to behold the like events in the
Kingdom of Arragon; which Kingdom was united with Castille and the rest of
Spain, in the persons of Ferdinando and Isabella, and so continued many years;
But yet so, as it stood a Kingdom severed and divided from the rest of the Body
of Spain in Privileges; and directly in this point of Naturalization, or
capacity of Inheritance. What came of this? Thus much; That now of fresh
memory, not past twelve years since, only upon the voice of a condemned man,
out of the Grate of a Prison toward the Street, that cried, Fueros, (which is
as much as Liberties, or Privileges) There was raised a dangerous Rebellion,
which was suppressed with difficulty with an Army Royal, and their Privileges
disannulled, and they incorporated with the rest of Spain. Upon so small a
spark, notwithstanding so long continuance, were they ready to break and severe
again.

The like may be said of the States of Florence and Pisa; which City of Pisa
being united unto Florence, but not endued with the benfite of Naturalization,
upon the first light of foreign Assistance, by the expedition of Charles the
eighth of France into Italy, did revolt; though it be since again reunited and
incorporated.

The same effect we see in the most barbarous Government; which shows it the
rather to be an effect of Nature. For, it was thought a fit Policy by the
Council of Constantinople, to retain the three Provinces of Transylvania,
Valachia and Moldavia, (which were as the very Nurses of Constantinople, in
respect of their Provisions) to the end, they moght be the less wasted, only
under Vayvods as Vaslals and Homagers, and not under Bassa's and Provinces of
the Turkish Empire; which Policy we see, by late experience, proved
unfortunate, as appeared by the revolt of the same three Provinces, under the
Arms and conduct of Sigismund Prince of Transylvania, a Leader very famous for
a time; which Revolt is not yet fully recovered. Whereas we seldom or never
hear of revolts of Princes incorporate to the Turkish Empire.

On the other part (Mr. Speaker) because it is true which the Logicians say,
Opposita, juxta se posita, magis elucescunt: let us take a view and we shall
find, That wheresoever Kingdoms and States have been united, and that Union
corroborate by the Bond of mutual Naturalization; you shall never observe them
afterward, upon any occasion of trouble or otherwise, to break and severe
again: As we see most evidently before our eyes, in diverse Provinces of France;
that is to say, Guien, Provence, Normandy, Britain, which, notwithstanding the
infinite infesting troubles of that Kingdom, never offered to break again.

We see the like effect in all the Kingdoms of Spain, which are mutually
naturalized; As Leon, Castile, Valencia, Andaluzia, Granada and the rest;
except Arragon, which held the contrary course, and therefore had the contrary
success, as we said; and Portugal, of which there is not yet sufficient Trial.

And lastly, we see the effect in our own Nation, which never rent assunder,
after it was once united; so as we now scarce know whether the Heptarchy were a
Story or a Fable. And therefore (Mr. Speaker) when I revolve with my self these
examples and others, so lively expressing the necessity of a Naturalization, to
avoid a relapse into a separation, and do hear so many arguments and scruples
made on the other side; It makes me think on the old Bishop, which upon a
public Disputation of certain Divines, Christians, with some learned men of
the Heathens, did extremely press to be heard; and they were loath to suffer
him, because they knew he was unlearned, though otherwise an holy and
well-meaning Man: But at last, with much ado, he got to be heard; and when he
came to speak, in stead of using Arguments, he did only say over his Belief;
but did it with such assurance and constancy, as did strike the minds of those
that heard him, more then any Argument had done. And so (Mr. Speaker) against
all these witty and subtle Arguments, I say that I do believe, and would be
sorry to be found a Prophet in it, That except we proceed with this
Naturalization (though not perhaps in his Majesty's time, who has such
Interest in both Nations) yet in the time of his Descendants, these Realms will
be in continual danger to divide and break again. Now if any man be of that
careless mind, -- -- Maneat nostras ca cura Nepotes; Or of that hard mind, to
leave things to be tried by the sharpest Sword; sure I am, he is not of St.
Paul's opinion, who affirms, That whosoever uses not foresight and
provision for his Family, is worse then an unbeliever: Much more, if we shall
not use foresight for these two Kingdoms, that comprehend so many Families,
but leave things open to the peril of future divisions. And thus have I
expressed unto you, the inconvenience which of all other sinketh deepest with
me, as the most weighty.

Neither do their want other inconveniences (Mr. Speaker) the effect and
influence whereof, I fear, will not be adjourned to so long a day, as this that
I have spoken of. For, I leave it to your wisdom to consider, whether you do
not think, in case by the denial of this Naturalization, any pike of alienation
or unkindness (I do not say where) should be thought to be, or noised to be,
between these two Nations, whether it will not quicken and excite all the
envious and malicious humors wheresoever (which are now covered) against us,
either foreign or at home; and so open the way to practices and other engines
and machinations, to the disturbance of this State? As for that other
inconvenience of his Majesty's engagement into this Action, it is too binding
and pressing to be spoken of, and may do better a great deal in your minds,
then in my mouth, or in the mouth of any man else; because, I say, it does
press our Liberty too far. And therefore (Mr. Speaker) I come now to the third
general part of my division, concerning the Benefits which we shall purchase,
by this knitting of the knot surer and streighter between these two Kingdoms,
by the communicating of Naturalization.

The Benefits may appear to be two; the one Surety, the other Greatness.
Touching Surety (Mr. Speaker) it was well said by Titus Quintius the Roman,
touching the State of Peloponnesus, That the Tortois is safe within her shell;
Testudo intra tegumen tuta est; but if there be any parts that lie open, they
endanger all the rest. We know well, that although the State at this time, be
in a happy Peace; yet, for the time past, the more ancient enemy to this
Kingdom has been the French, and the more late the Spaniard; and both these
had, as it were, their several postern Gates, whereby they might have approach
and entrance to annoy us. France had Scotland, and Spain had Ireland. For these
were the two accesses which did comfort and encourage both these enemies, to
assail and trouble us. We see that of Scotland is cut off, by the Union of both
these Kingdoms, if that it shall now be made constant and permanent. That of
Ireland is likewise cut off, by the convenient situation of the North of
Scotland toward the North of Ireland, where the sore was: Which we see, being
suddenly closed, has continued closed by means of this Salve; So as now,
there are no parts of this State exposed to danger, to be a temptation to the
ambition of Forraigners, but the approaches and avenues are taken away. For, I
do little doubt, but those Forraigners, which had so ill success when they had
these advantages, will have much less comfort now, that they be taken from
them. And so much for Surety.

For Greatness (Mr. Speaker) I think a man may speak it soberly, and without
bravery; That this Kingdom of England, having Scotland united, Ireland reduced,
the Sea Provinces of the Low Countries contracted, and Shipping maintained, is
one of the greatest Monarchies in Forces, truly esteemed, that has been in the
world. For certainly, the Kingdoms here one Earth, have a resemblance with the
Kingdom of Heaven; which our Savior compares, not to any great Kernel or Nut,
but to a very small Grain; yet such an one, as is apt to grow and spread. And
such, do I take to be, the constitution of this Kingdom; if indeed we shall
refer our Counsels to Greatness and Power, and not quench them too much with
consideration of Utility and Wealth. For (Mr. Speaker) was it not, think you, a
true Answer that Solon of Greece made to the rich King Cresus of Lydia, when he
showed unto him a great quantity of Gold that he had gathered together, in
ostentation of his Greatness and Might? But Solon said unto him, contrary to
his expectation; Why, Sir, if another come that has better Iron then you, he
will be Lord of all your Gold. Neither is the Authority of Machiavel to be
despised, who scorneth the Proverb of Estate, taken first from a Speech of
Mucianus, That Moneys are the Sinews of War; And says, There are no true
Sinews of War, but the very Sinews of the Arms of valiant men. Nay more (Mr.
Speaker) whosoever shall look into the seminaries and beginnings of the
Monarchies of the world, he shall find them founded in Poverty. Persia, a
Country barren and poor, in respect of the Medes whom they subdued. Macedon, a
Kingdom ignoble and mercenary, until the time of Philip, the Son of Amyntas.
Rome had poor and pastoral beginnings. The Turks, a Band of Sarmatian Scythes,
that in a vagabond manner, made impression upon that part of Asia, which is yet
called Turcomania. Out of which, after much variety of Fortune, sprung the
Ottoman Family, now the terror of the world. So we know the Goths, Vandals,
Alanes, Huns, Lombards, Normans, and the rest of the Northern people, in one
Age of the world made their descent or expedition upon the Roman Empire; And
came not as Rovers, to carry away prey and be gone again, but planted
themselves in a number of fruitful and rich Provinces; where not only their
Generations, but their Names, remain till this day: witness Lombardy,
Catalonia, a name compounded of Goth and Alane; Andaluzia, a name corrupted
from Vandelicia; Hungary, Normandy and others. Nay, the fortune of the Swizzes
of late years, (which ate bred in a barren and mountainous Country) is not to
be forgotten, who first ruined the Duke of Burgandy, the same who had almost
ruined the Kingdom of France; what time, after the Battle of Granson, the Rich
Jewel of Burgandy, prized at many thousands, was sold for a few pence by a
common Soldier, that knew no more what a Jewel meant, then did Aesops Cock.
And again, the same Nation, in revenge of a scorn, was the ruin of the French
Kings Affairs in Italy, Lewis the 12 th. For, that King, when he was pressed
somewhat rudely by an Agent of the Swizzes to raise their Pensions, brake into
words of choler, What (said he) will these Villains of the Mountains put a Tax
upon me? which words lost him his Duchy of Millain, and chased him out of
Italy. All which examples (Mr. Speaker) do well prove Solons opinion, of the
Authority and Mastery that Iron has over Gold. And therefore, if I shall speak
unto you mine own heart, Methinks we should a little disdain, that the Nation
of Spain (which, howsoever of late it has grown to Rule, yet of ancient time
served many Ages, first, under Carthage, then under Rome, after under Saracens,
Goths and others) should of late years, take unto themselves that Spirit, as to
dream of a Monarchy in the West, according to that devise, Video Solemn Orientem
in Occidente; only because they have ravished from some wild and unarmed
People, Mines and store of Gold: And on the other side, that this Island of
Brittany, seated and manned as it is, and that has (I make no question) the
best Iron in the world, (that is, the best Soldiers of the world) should think
of nothing but reckonings and audits, and Meum and Tuum, and I cannot tell what.

Mr. Speaker, I have (I take it) gone through the Parts which I propounded to
my self; Wherein, if any man shall think that I have sung Placebo, for mine own
particular, I would have him know, that I am not so unseen in the world, but
that I discern it were much alike, for my private Fortune, to rest a Tacebo, as
to sing a Placebo, in this Business. But I have spoken out of the Fountain of
my Heart, Credidi, propter quod locutus sum; I believed therefore I spoke. So
as my Duty is performed, the Judgment is yours. God direct it for the best.

A Speech used by Sir Francis Bacon in the Lower House of Parliament, by
occasion of a motion concerning the Union of Laws.
ANd it please you (Mr. Speaker) were it now a time to wish, as it is to
advise, no man should be more forward or more earnest then my self in this
wish, That his Majesty's Subjects of England and Scotland were governed by one
Law; And that for many Reasons:

First, because it will be an infallible assurance, that there will never be
any relapse in succeeding Ages to a separation.

Secondly, Dulcis tractus pari jugo; If the Draught lie most upon us, and the
yoke lightest upon them, it is not equal.

Thirdly, the Qualities, and (as I may term it) the Elements of their Laws and
ours are such, as do promise an excellent temperature in the compounded Body:
For if the Prerogative here be too indefinite, it may be the Liberty there is
too unbounded: If our Laws and proceedings be too prolix and formal; it may be
theirs are too informal and summary.

Fourthly, I do discern, to my understanding, there will be no great difficulty
in this work. For their Laws, by that I can learn, compared with ours, are like
their Language compared with ours: For, as their Language has the same roots
that ours has, but has a little more mixture of Latin and French; So their
Laws and Customs have the like grounds that our have, with a little more
mixture of the Civil Law, and French Customs.

Lastly, the mean to this work seems to me no less excellent then the work it
self; For if both Laws shall be united, it is of necessity, for preparation and
inducement thereunto, that our own Laws be reviewed and compiled; Then the
which, I think, there cannot be a work that his Majesty can undertake, in these
times of Peace, more Politic, more Honorable, nor more Beneficial to his
Subjects for all Ages;

Pace data Terris, Animum ad Civilia vertit
Fura suum, Legesque tulit justissimus Auctor.
For this continual heaping up of Laws, without digesting them, makes but a
Chaos and confusion, and turns the Laws many times, to become but snares for
the People, as is said in the Scripture, Pluet super eos Laqueos. Now, Non sunt
pejores Laquei, quam Laquei Legum: And therefore, this work, I esteem to be
indeed a work (rightly to term it) Heroical. So that for this good wish of
Union of Laws, I do consent to the full; And I think, you may perceive by that
which I have said, that I come not in this to the opinion of others, but that I
was long ago settled in it my self. Nevertheless, as this is moved out of zeal,
so I take it to be moved out of time, as commonly zealous motions are; while
men are so fast carried on to the End, as they give no attention to the Mean.
For, if it be time to talk of this now, it is either because the business now
in hand cannot proceed without it; or because in time and order, this matter
should be precedent; or because we shall leese some advantage, toward this
effect so much desired, if we should go on in the course we are about. But none
of these three, in my judgment, are true; And therefore, the motion, as I
said, unseasonable.

For first, that there may not be a Naturalization, without an Union in Laws,
cannot be maintained. Look into the example of the Church, and the Union
thereof, you shall see several Churches that join in one Faith, one Baptism,
(which are the points of spiritual Naturalization) do many times in Policy,
Constitutions and Customs, differ. And therefore, one of the Fathers made an
excellent observation, upon the two Mysteries; the one, that in the Gospel,
where the Garment of Christ is said to have been without seam; the other, that
in the Psalm, where the Garment of the Queen is said to have been of diverse
colors; And concludes, In vest variet as sit, scissura non sit. So in this
case, (Mr. Speaker) we are now in hand to make this Monarchy of one piece, and
not of one color. Look again into the examples of foreign Countries, and take
that next us of France; and there you shall find, that they have this
distribution, Pais du droit Escript, and Pais du droit Constumier. For
Gascoign, Languedock, Provence, Daulphenie, are Countries governed by the
Letter or Text of the Civil Law; But the Isle of France, Tourrain, Berry, Anjou
and the rest, and most of all Britain and Normandy, are governed by Customs,
which amount unto a Municipal Law, and use the Civil Law but only for Grounds,
and to decide new and rare cases; and yet, nevertheless, Naturalization passes
through all.

Secondly, that this Union of Laws should precede the Naturalization, or that
it should go on, pari passu, hand in hand, I suppose likewise can hardly be
maintained; but the contrary, that Naturalization ought to precede. Of which my
opinion, as I could yield many reasons, so because all this is but a
digression, and therefore ought to be short, I will hold my self now only to
one, which is briefly and plainly this; That the Union of Laws will ask a great
time to be perfected, both for the compiling, and for the passing; dureing all
which time, if this mark of Strangers should be denied to be taken away, I fear
it may induce such a habit of Strangeness, as will rather be an impediment than
a preparation to further proceeding. For he was a wise man that said, Opportuni
magnis conatibus transitus Rerum. And in those cases, Non progredi est regredi.
And like, as in a pair of Tables, you must put out the former writing, before
you can put in new; and again, that which you write in, you write Letter by
Letter; but that which you put out, you put out at once: So we have now to deal
with the Tables of men's Hearts, wherein it is in vain to think you can enter
the willing acceptance of our Laws and Customs; except you first put forth all
Notes either of Hostility or foreign Condition. And these are to be put out
simul and semel, at once, without gradations; whereas the other points are to
be imprinted and engraven distinctly and by degrees.

Thirdly, whereas it is conceived by some, that the communication of our
Benefits and Privileges is a good hold that we have over them, to draw them to
submit themselves to our Laws. It is an Argument of some probability, but yet
to be answered many ways: For first, the intent is mistaken, which is not, as
I conceive it, to draw them wholly to a subjection to our Laws; but to draw
both Nations to one uniformity of Law. Again, to think that there should be a
kind of articulate and indented Contract, that they should receive our Laws to
obtain our Privileges, it is a matter, in reason of Estate, not to be
expected; being that which scarcely a private man will acknowledge, if it come
to that, whereof Seneca speaks, Beneficium accipere, est Libertatem vendere:
No, but courses of Estate do describe and delineat another way; which is, to
win them either by Benefit or Custom. For, we see in all Creatures, that men do
feed them first, and reclaim them after: And so in the first institution of
Kingdoms, Kings did first win people by many Benfits and Protections, before
they pressed any yoke. And for Custom, which the Poets call, imponere Morem; who
doubts, but that the Seat of the Kingdom, and the example of the King resting
here with us, our manners will quickly be there, to make all things ready for
our Laws:

And lastly, the Naturalization which is now propounded, is qualified with such
restrictions, as there will be enough kept back, to be used at all times, for
an Adamant of drawing them further on to our desires. And therefore, to
conclude, I hold this motion, of Union of Laws, very worthy, and arising from
very good minds, but not proper for this time.

To come therefore to that which is now in question; It is no more, but whether
there should be a difference made in this privilege of Naturalization, between
the Ante-nati and the Post-nati; not in point of Law (for that will otherwise
be decided) but only in point of Convenience [as if a Law were now to be made,
de novo] In which question, I will at this time, only answer two Objections,
and use two Arguments, and so leave it to your judgment.

The first Objection has been, that if a difference should be, it ought to be
in favor of the Ante-nati; because they are persons of merit, service and
proof; whereas the Postnati are infants, that (as the Scripture says) know not
the right hand from the left.

This were good reason (Mr. Speaker) if the question were, of Naturalizing some
particular persons by a private Bill; but it has no proportion with the
general. For now, we are not to look to respects that are proper to some, but
to those which are common to all. Now then, how can it be imagined, but that
those that took their first breath, since this happy Union, inherent in his
Majesty's person, must be more assured and affectionat to this Kingdom, then
those generally can be presumed to be, which were sometimes Strangers. For,
Nemo subito fingitur; the conversions of Minds are not so swift as the
conversions of times. Nay, in effects of Grace, which exceed far the effects of
Nature, we see St. Paul makes a difference between those he calls Neophites,
that is, newly grafted into Christianity; and those that are brought up in the
Faith. And so we see, by the Laws of the Church, that the Children of
Christians shall be baptized, in regard of the Faith of their Parents; But the
Child of an Ethnic may not receive Baptism, till he be able to make an
understanding Profession of his Faith.

Another Ojection has been made, that we ought to be more provident and
reserved, to restrain the Post-nati then the Ante-nati; because, during his
Majesty's time, being a Prince of so approved Wisdom and Judgment, we need no
better caution, then the confidence we may repose in him: But in the future
Reigns of succeeding ages, our caution must be in Re, and not in Persona.

But, (Mr. Speaker) to this I answer, That as we cannot expect a Prince
hereafter, less like to err in respect of his Judgment; So again, we cannot
expect a Prince so like to exceed (if I may so term it) in this point of
Benificence to that Nation, in respect of the occasion. For, whereas all
Princes and all men are won, either by merit or conversation, there is no
appearance that any of his Majesty's Descendents, can have either of these
causes of Bounty toward that Nation, in so ample degree as his Majesty has.
And these be the two Objections which seemed to me most material, why the
Post-nati should be left free, and not be concluded in the same restrictions
with the Ante-nati, whereunto you have heard the Answers.

The two Reasons which I will use on the other side, are briefly these; The one
being a Reason of Common Sense, the other a Reason of Estate. We see (Mr.
Speaker) the time of the Nativity is, in most cases, principally regarded. In
Nature, the time of planting and setting is chiefly observed. And we see, the
Astrologers pretend to judge of the fortune of the party, by the time of the
Nativity. In Laws, we may not unfitly apply the case of Legitimation, to the
case of Naturalization. For, it is true, that the common Canon Law does put the
Ante-natos and the Post-natos in one degree; But when it was moved to the
Parliament of England, Barons una voce responderunt, Nolumus Leges Angliae
mutare. And though it must be confessed, that the Ante-nati and Post-nati are
in the same degree in Dignities, yet were they never so in Abilities: For, no
man doubts, but the Son of an Earl or Baron, before his Creation or Call, shall
inherit the Dignity, as well as the Son born after.

But the Son of an Attainted Person, born before the Attainder, shall not
inherit as the after-born shall, notwithstanding Charter of Pardon.

The Reason of Estate is, That any restriction of the Ante-nati is temporary,
and expireth with this Generation: But if you make it in the Post-nati also,
you do but in substance, pen a perpetuity of Separation.

Mr. Speaker, in this point I have been short, because I little expected this
doubt, as to point of Convenience; and therefore, will not much labor, where,
I suppose, there is no greater opposition.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE, Of the happy UNION OF THE KINGDOMS OF ENGLAND and SCOTLAND.
Dedicated in private to His MAJESTY.

I Do not find it strange (excellent King) that when Heraclitus (he that was
surnamed, the Obscure) had set forth a certain Book (which is not now extant)
many men took it for a Discourse of Nature, and many others took it for a
Treatise of Policy. For there is a great affinity and consent between the Rules
of Nature, and the true Rules of Policy. The one being nothing else, but an
Order in the Government of the World; And the other, an Order in the Government
of an Estate. And therefore, the education and erudition of the Kings of Persia
was in a Science, which was termed by a Name then of great Reverence; but now
degenerate, and taken in the ill part. For the Perasin Magic, which was the
secret Literature of their Kings, was an application of the Contemplations and
Observations of Nature, unto a sense Politic; taking the fundamental Laws of
Nature, and the Branches and Passages of them, as an Original or first Model,
whence to take and describe a Copy and Imitation for Government.

After this manner, the foresaid Instructers set before their Kings, the
examples of the Celestial Bodies, the Sun, the Moon and the rest, which have
great glory and veneration, but no rest or intromission, being in a perpetual
office of motion, for the cherishing (in turn and in course) of inferior
Bodies: Expressing likewise the true manner of the motions of Government; which
though they ought to be swift and rapide, in respect of dispatch and occasions;
yet are they to be constant and regular, without wavering or confusion.

So did they represent unto them, how the Heavens do not enrich themselves by
the Earth and the Sea; nor keep no dead Stock nor untouched Treasures of that
they draw to them from below: But whatsoever moisture they do levy and take
from both Elements in vapors, they do spend and turn back again in showers;
only holding and storing them up for a time, to the end, to issue and
distribute them in season.

But, chiefly, they did express and expound unto them, that fundamental Law of
Nature, whereby all things do subsist and are preserved; which is, that every
thing in Nature, although it has his private and particular affection and
appetite, and does follow and pursue the same in small moments, and when it is
free and delivered from more general and common respects; yet, nevertheless,
when there is question or case, for sustaining of the more general, they for
sake their own particularities, and attend and conspire to uphold the public.

So we see, the Iron, in small quantity, will ascend and approach to the
Lodestone, upon a particular sympathy; But, if it be any quantity of moment,
it leaves his appetite of amity to the Lodestone, and like a good Patriot,
falls to the Earth; which is the Place and Region of massy Bodies.

So again, the Water, and other like Bodies, do fall toward the Center of the
Earth, which is (as was said) their Region or Country: And yet, we see nothing
more usual in all Waterworks and Engines, then that the Water (rather then to
suffer any distraction or disunion in Nature) will ascend, for saking the love
to his own Region or Country, and applying it self to the Body next adjoining.

But, it were too long a digression to proceed to more examples of this kind.
Your Majesty your self, did fall upon a passage of this nature, in your
gracious Speech of thanks unto your Council; when acknowledging Princely, their
vigilancies and well-deservings, it pleased you to note, that it was a success
and event above the course of nature, to have so great Change, with so great a
Quiet; Forasmuch as sudden mutations, as well in State as in Nature, are
rarely without violence and perturbation. So as still I conclude, there is (as
was said) a congruity between the principles of Nature and Policy. And lest
that instance may seem to oppone to this Assertion, I may, even in that
particular, with your Majesty's favor, offer unto you a Type or Pattern in
Nature, much resembling this event in your State: Namely Earthquakes, which
many of them bring ever much terror and wonder, but no actual hurt; the Earth
trembling for a moment, and suddenly stablishing in perfect quiet, as it was
before.

This knowledge then, of making the Government of the World a mirror for the
Government of a State, being a Wisdom almost lost (whereof the reason I take to
be, because of the difficulty for one man to embrace both Philosophies) I have
thought good to make some proof (as far as my weakness, and the straights of my
time will suffer) to revive in the handling of one particular, wherewith now I
most humbly present your Majesty: For surely, as has been said, it is a form
of Discourse anciently used toward Kings; And to what King should it be more
proper, then to a King that is studious to conjoin contemplative Virtue and
active Virtue together?

Your Majesty is the first King that had the Honor to be Lapis Angularis, to
unite these two mighty and warlike Nations of England and Scotland, under one
Sovereignty and Monarchy. It does not appear, by the Records and Memories of
any true History, or scarcely by the fiction and pleasure of any fabulous
Narration or Tradition, That ever, of any Antiquity, this Island of Great
Britain was united under one King before this day. And yet there be no
Mountains or races of Hills, there be no Seas nor great Rivers, there is no
diversity of Tongue or Language, that has invited or provoked this ancient
Separation or Divorce. The lot of Spain was, to have the several Kingdoms of
that Continent ( Portugal only except) to be united in an Age not long past;
and now in our Age, that of Portugal also, which was the last that held out, to
be incorporate with the rest. The lot of France has been, much about the same
time, likewise to have re-annexed unto that Crown, the several Dutchies and
Portions which were in former times dismembered. The lot of this Island is the
last, reserved for your Majesty's happy times, by the special Providence and
Favor of God; who has brought your Majesty to this happy conjunction with
great consent of Hearts, and in the strength of your Years, and in the maturity
of your Experience. It rests but, that (as I promised) I set before your
Majesty's Princely consideration, the grounds of Nature touching the Union and
Commixture of Bodies; and the correspondence which they have with the grounds
of Policy, in the conjunction of States and Kingdoms.

First, therefore, that Position, Vis unita fortior, being one of the common
notions of the Mind, needs not much to be induced or illustrate.

We see the Sun, when he enters, and while he continues, under the Sign of
Leo, causes more vehement heats then when he is in Cancer; what time, his
Beams are nevertheless more perpendicular. The reason whereof, in great part,
has been truly ascribed to the conjunction and corradiation, in that place of
Heaven, of the Sun, with the four Stars of the first magnitude; Syrius,
Canicula, Cor Leonis, and Cauda Leonis.

So the Moon likewise, by ancient tradition, while she is in the same Sign of
Leo, is said to be at the Heart; which is not for any affinity which that place
of Heaven can have with that part of man's Body; but only, because the Moon is
then, by reason of the conjunction and nearness with the Stars aforenamed, in
the greatest strength of influence; and so works upon that part in inferior
Bodies, which is most Vital and Principal.

So we see, Waters and Liquors, in small quantity, do easily putrify and
corrupt; but in large quantity, subsist long, by reason of the strength they
receive by union.

So in Earthquakes, the more general do little hurt, by reason of the united
weight which they offer to subvert; but narrow and particular Earthquakes have
many times overturned whole Towns and Cities.

So then, this point, touching the force of Union, is evident. And therefore,
it is more fit to speak of the manner of Union; wherein again, it will not be
pertinent to handle one kind of Union, which is Union by Victory, when one Body
does merely subdue another, and converteth the same into his own nature,
extinguishing and expulsing what part soever of it it cannot overcome. As when
the Fire converteth the Wood into Fire, purging away the smoke and the ashes,
as unapt Matter to inflame: Or, when the Body of a Living Creature does convert
and assimilate Food and Nourishment, purging and expelling whatsoever it cannot
convert. For, these Representations do answer, in matter of Policy, to Union of
Countries by conquest, where the conquering State does extinguish, extirpate
and expulse any part of the State conquered, which it finds so contrary, as
it cannot alter and convert it. And therefore, leaving violent Unions, we will
consider only of natural Unions.

The difference is excellent, which the best Observers in Nature do take
between Compositio and Mistio, putting together and mingling; the one being but
a conjunction of Bodies in place, the other in quality and consent; the one the
Mother of Sedition and Alteration; the other of Peace and Continuance; the one
rather a Confusion then an Union, the other properly an Union. Therefore, we
see those Bodies, which they call imperfecte mista, last not, but are speedily
dissolved. For, take for example, Snow or Froath, which are compositions of Air
and Water, and in them you may behold, how easily they severe and dissolve, the
Water closing together and excluding the Air.

So those three Bodies, which the Alchymists do so much celebrate, as the three
Principles of things; that is to say, Earth, Water and Oil, (which it pleases
them to term, Salt, Mercury and Sulphur) we see, if they be united only by
composition or putting together, how weakly and rudely they do incorporate: For
Water and Earth makes but an unperfect slime; and if they be forced together
by agitation, yet by a little settling, the Earth resideth in the bottom. So
Water and Oil, though by agitation it be brought into an Ointment; yet, after a
little settling, the Oil will float on the top: So as such imperfect mistures
continue no longer then they are forced; and still in the end, the worthiest
gets above.

But otherwise it is of perfect mistures. For we see these three Bodies of
Earth, Water and Oil, when they are joined in a Vegetable or Mineral, they are
so united, as without great subtilty of Art and force of Extraction, they
cannot be separated and reduced into the same simple Bodies again. So as the
difference between Compositio and Mistio, clearly. set down is this; That
Compositio is the joining or putting together of Bodies, without a new Form;
and Mistio is the joining or putting together of Bodies, under a new Form. For,
the new form is commune Vinculum; and without that, the old Form will be at
strife and discord.

Now, to reflect this Light of Nature upon matter of Estate: There has been
put in practice, these two several kinds of Policy, in uniting and conjoining
of States and Kingdoms: The one to retain the ancient Form still severed, and
only conjoined in Sovereignty; The other to superinduce a new Form, agreeable
and convenient to the entire State. The former of these has been more usual,
and is more easy; but the latter is more happy. For, if a man do attentively
revolve Histories of all Nations, and judge truly thereupon, he will make this
conclusion, That there was never any States that were good commixtures, but the
Romans. Which because it was the best State of the World, and is the best
Example of this Point, we will chiefly insist thereupon.

In the Antiquities of Rome, Virgil brings in Jupiter by way of Oracle or
Prediction, speaking of the mixture of the Trojans and the Italians:

Sermonem Ausonii Patrum, moresque tenebant,
Utque est nomen erit; Commixti Corpore tantum,
Subsident Teucri, Morem, Ritusque Sacrorum,
Adjiciam; faciamque omnes uno ore Latinos.
Hinc genus Ausonio mistum, quod sanguine surget,
Supra Homines, supra ira Deos, pietate videbis.
Wherein Jupiter makes a kind of partition or distribution, That Italy should
give the Language and the Laws; Troy should give a mixture of Men, and some
Religious Rites; and both people should meet in one name of Latins.

Soon after the foundation of the City of Rome, the people of the Romans and
the Sabines mingled upon equal terms. Wherein the interchange went so even,
that (as Livy notes) the one Nation gave the Name to the Place, the other to
the People. For, Rome continued the name, but the people were called Quirites;
which was the Sabine word, derived of Cures, the Country of Tatius.

But that which is chiefly to be noted, in the whole continuance of the Roman
Government, they were so liberal of their Naturalizations, as in effect, they
made perpetual mixtures. For the manner was, to grant the same, not only to
particular Persons, but to Families and Linages; and not only so, but to whole
Cities and Countries. So as in the end, it came to that, that Rome was communis
Patria, as some of the Civilians call it.

So we read of Saint Paul, after he had been beaten with Rods, and thereupon
charged the Officer with the violation of the Privilege of a Citizen of Rome;
The Captain said to him, Art thou then a Roman? That Privilege has cost me
dear. To whom Saint Paul replied, But I was so born. And yet in another place,
Saint Paul professes himself that he was a Jew by Tribe: So as it is manifest,
that some of his Ancestors were naturalized; and so it was conveyed to him and
their other descendants.

So we read, that it was one of the first despites that was done to Julius
Casar; That whereas he had obtained Naturalization for a City in Gaul, one of
the City was beaten with Rods of the Consul Marcellus.

So we read in Tacitus, that in the Emperor Claudius time, the Nation of Gaul,
(that part which is called Comata, the wilder part) were Suitors to be made
capable of the honor of being Senators and Officers of Rome. His words are
these: Cum de supplendo Senatu agitaretur, primoresque Galliae, quae Comata
appellatur, faedera and Civitatem Romanam pridem assecuti, Jus adipiscendorum
in urbe Honorum, expeterent; multus, easuper re, variusque Rumor, and studiis
diversis, apud Principem, certabatur. And in the end, after long debate, it was
ruled they should be admitted.

So likewise, the Authority of Nicholas Matchiavel seems not to be contemned;
who enquiring the causes of the growth of the Roman Empire, does give
Judgment, there was not one greater then this, That the State did so easily
compound and incorporate with Strangers.

It is true, that most Estates and Kingdoms have taken the other course. Of
which this effect has followed, That the addition of further Empire and
Territory has been rather matter of Burden then matter of Strength unto them:
yea, and further, it has kept alive the seeds and roots of Revolts and
Rebellions for many Ages: As we may see, in a fresh and notable Example of the
Kingdom of Arragon; which though it were united to Castile by Marriage, and not
by Conquest, and so descended in hereditary Union, by the space of more then
one hundred years; yet, because it was continued in a divided Government, and
not well incorporated and cemented with the other Crowns; entered into a
Rebellion, upon point of their Fueros, or Liberties, now of very late years.

Now, to speak briefly of the several parts of that form, whereby States and
Kingdoms are perfectly united, they are (besides the Sovereignty it self) four
in number; Union in Name, Union in Language, Union in Laws, Union in
Employments.

For Name, though it seem but a superficial and outward matter, yet it carries
much impression and enchantment: The general and common name of Grecia made the
Greeks always apt to unite (though otherwise full of divisions amongst
themselves) against other Nations, whom they called Barbarous. The Helvetian
Name is no small Band, to knit together their Leagues and Confederacies the
faster. The common Name of Spain (no doubt) has been a special means of the
better Union and Conglutination of the several Kingdoms of Castile, Aragon,
Granada, Navarrc, Valentia, Catalonia and the rest; comprehending also now
lately Portugal.

For Language, it is not needful to insist upon it, because both your Majesty's
Kingdoms are of one Language, though of several Dialects; and the difference is
so small between them, as promises rather an enriching of one Language, then a
continuance of two.

For Laws, which are the principal Sinews of Government, they be of three
natures; Jura, which I will term Freedoms or Abilities, Leges and Mores.

For Abilities and Freedoms, they were amongst the Romans of four kinds, or
rather degrees. Jus Connubii, Jus Civitatis, and Jus Suffragii, Jus Petitionis,
or Honoram. Jus Connubii is a thing in these times, out of use; for Marriage is
open between all diversities of Nations. Jus Civitatis answers to that we
call Denization or Naturalization. Jus Suffragii answers to the Voice in
Parliament. Jus Petitionis answers to place in Council or Office. And the
Romans did many times severe these Freedoms, granting Jus Connubii, sine
Civitate; And Civitatem, sine suffragio; And Suffragium, sine Jure Petitionis,
which was commonly with them the last.

For those we called Leges, it is a matter of curiosity and inconveniency, to
seek either to extirpate all particular Customs, or to draw all Subjects to one
place or resort of Judicature and Session. It suffices there be an uniformity
in the Principal and Fundamental Laws, both Ecclesiastical and Civil: For in
this point, the Rule holds which was pronounced by an ancient Father,
touching the diversity of Rites in the Church; For, finding the Vesture of the
Queen in the Psalm (which did prefigure the Church) was of diverse colors; and
finding again, that Christ's Coat was without a seam, he concludes well, In
Vest varietas sit, scissura non sit.

For Manners, a consent in them is to be sought industriously, but not to be
enforced: For nothing amongst people breeds so much pertinacy in holding
their Customs, as sudden and violent offer to remove them.

And as for Employments, it is no more but in indifferent hand, and execution
of that Verse, Tyros, Triusque mihi nullo discrimine agetur.

There remains only to remember, out of the grounds of Nature, the two
conditions of perfect mixture; whereof the former is Time. For the Natural
Philosophers say well, that Compositio is opus Hominis; and Mistio, opus
Naturae. For it is the duty of Man, to make a fit application of Bodies
together: But the perfect fermentation and incorporation of them, must be left
to Time and Nature; and unnatural hasting thereof, does disturb the work, and
not dispatch it.

So we see, after the Graft is put into the Stock and bound, it must be left to
Time and Nature to make that continuum, which at the first was but contiguum.
And it is not any continual pressing or thrusting together that will prevent
Natures season, but rather hinder it. And so in Liquors, those commixtures
which are at the first troubled, grow after clear and settled, by the benefit
of rest and time.

The second condition is, That the greater draw the less. So we see, when two
Lights do meet, the greater does darken and dim the less. And when a smaller
River runs into a greater, it loses both his Name and Stream. And hereof,
to conclude, we see an excellent example in the Kingdoms of Judah and Israel.
The Kingdom of Judah contained two Tribes; the Kingdom of Israel contained ten:
King David reigned over Judah for certain years; And after the death of
Isbosheth, the Son of Saul obtained likewise the Kingdom of Israel. This Union
continued in him, and likewise in his Son Solomon, by the space of seventy
years at least, between them both: But yet, because the Seat of the Kingdom was
kept still in Judah, and so the less sought to draw the greater; upon the
first occasion offered, the Kingdoms brake again, and so continued ever after.

Thus having, in all humbleness, made oblation to your Majesty of these simple
Fruits of my Devotion and Studies; I do wish, and do wish it, not in the nature
of an impossibility (to my apprehension) That this happy Union of your
Majesty's two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, may be in as good an hour, and
under the like Divine Providence, as that was between the Romans and the
Sabines.

CERTAIN ARTICLES OR CONSIDERATIONS, Touching the Union of the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland.
Collected and dispersed for His MAJESTY'S better Service.

YOur Majesty being (I do not doubt) directed and conducted by a better Oracle,
then that which was given for light to Aeneas in his peregrination, ( Antiquam
exquirite Matrem) has a Royal, and indeed an Heroical desire, to reduce these
two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, into the Unity of their ancient Mother
Kingdom of Britain. Wherein, as I would gladly applaud unto your Majesty, or
sing aloud that Hymn or Anthem, Sic itur ad Astra; So in a more soft and
submiss voice, I must necessarily remember unto your Majesty, that Warning or
Caveat, Ardua, quae pulchra; It is an action that requires, yea, and needs
much, not only of your Majesty's Wisdom, but of your Felicity. In this
Argument, I presumed, at your Majesty's first entrance, to write a few Lines
indeed Scholastically and Speculatively, and not Actively or Politickly, as I
held it fit for me at that time, when neither your Majesty was, in that your
desire, declared, nor my self in that Service, used or trusted. But now, that
both your Majesty has opened your desire and purpose, with much admiration,
even of those who give it not so full an approbation; and that my self was by
the Commons, graced with the first Vote of all the Commons, selected for that
Cause; Not in any estimation of my ability (for therein so wise an Assembly
could not be so much deceived) but in an acknowledgement of my extreme labors
and integrity in that business, I thought my self every ways bound, both in
duty to your Majesty, and in trust to that House of Parliament, and in consent
to the matter it self, and in conformity to my own travails and beginnings; not
to neglect any pains that may tend to the furtherance of so excellent a work:
Wherein I will endeavor, that that which I shall set down be Nihil minus quam
verba: For length and ornament of Speech are to be used for persuasion of
Multitudes, and not for information of Kings; especially such a King, as is the
only instance that ever I knew, to make a man of Plato's opinion, That all
knowledge is but remembrance, and that the mind of Man knows all things, and
demands only to have her own Notions excited and awaked. Which your Majesty's
rare and indeed singular gift and faculty of swift apprehension, and infinite
expansion or multiplication of another man's knowledge by your own, as I have
often observed, so I did extremely admire in Goodwins Cause, being a matter
full of Secrets and Mysteries of our Laws, merely new unto you, and quite out
of the path of your Education, Reading and Conference: Wherein, nevertheless,
upon a spark of light given, your Majesty took in so dexterously and
profoundly, as if you had been indeed Anima Legis, not only in execution, but
in understanding: The remembrance whereof, as it will never be out of my mind,
So it will always be a warning to me, to seek rather to excite your Judgment
briefly, then to inform it tediously; and if in a matter of that nature, how
much more in this, wherein your Princely cogitations have wrought themselves
and been conversant, and wherein the principal Light proceeded from your Self.

And therefore, my purpose is only to break this matter of the Union into
certain short Articles and Questions; and to make a certain kind of Anatomy or
Analysis of the Parts and Members thereof; not that I am of opinion, that all
the Questions which I now shall open, were fit to be in the Consultation of the
Commissioners propounded. For I hold nothing so great an enemy to good
resolution, as the making of too many questions; specially in Assemblies, which
consist of many. For Princes, for avoiding of distraction, must take many
things by way of admittance; and if questions must be made of them, rather to
suffer them to arise from others, then to grace them and authorize them, as
propounded from themselves. But unto your Majesty's private consideration, to
whom it may better sort with me, rather to speak as a Remembrancer, then as a
Counceller, I have thought good to lay before you, all the Branches, Lineaments
and Degrees of this Union, that upon the view and consideration of them and
their circumstances, your Majesty may the more clearly discern, and more
readily call to mind, which of them is to be embraced, and which to be
rejected; And of these which are to be accepted, which of them is presently to
be proceeded in, and which to be put over to further time; And again, which of
them shall require Authority of Parliament, and which are fitter to be effected
by your Majesty's Royal Power and Prerogative, or by other Policies or Means;
And lastly, which of them is liker to pass with difficulty and contradiction,
and which with more facility and smoothness:

First therefore, to begin with that Question, that I suppose will be out of
question.

Statutes concerning Scotland, and the Scots Nation.
Whether it be not meet, that the Statutes which were made touching Scotland, or
the Scots Nation, while the Kingdoms stood severed, be repealed?

It is true, there is a diversity in these; For some of these Laws consider
Scotland as an Enemy Country; Other Laws consider it, as a Foreign Country
only: As for example, the Law of Rich. 2. Anno 70. which prohibiteth all Armor
or Victual to be carried to Scotland; And the Law of 70. of K. H. the 7. that
Enacteth all the Scots Men to depart the Realm, within a time prefixed; Both
these Laws and some others, respect Scotland as a Country of hostility: But
the Law of 22. of Ed. 4. that endueth Barwick with the Liberty of a Staple,
where all Scots Merchandises should resort, that should be uttered for England;
And likewise all English Merchandises that should be uttered for Scotland: This
Law beholds Scotland only as a Foreign Nation, and not so much neither; for
there have been erected Staples in Towns in England for some Commodities, with
an exclusion and restriction of other parts of England.

But this is a matter of the least difficulty; your Majesty shall have a
Calendar made of the Laws, and a Brief of the Effect, and so you may judge of
them: And the like, or reciproque, is to be done by Scotland, for such Laws as
they have concerning England and the English Nation.

Laws, Customs, Commissions, Officers of the Borders or Marches.
The second Question is, what Laws, Customs, Commissions, Officers, Garrisons
and the like, are to be put down, dis-continued or taken away, upon the Borders
of both Realms?

This point, because I am not acquainted with the Orders of the Marches, I can
say the less.

Herein falls that question, Whether that the Tennants, who hold their
Tennant-Rights in a greater freedom and exemption, in consideration of their
service, upon the Borders; and that the Countries themselves, which are in the
same respect, discharged of Subsidies and Taxes, should not now be brought to
be in one degree with other Tennants and Countries? Nam cessante causa,
tollitur effectus; wherein, in my opinion, some time would be given, Quia adhuc
little Messis in herba est: But some present Ordinance would be made, to take
effect at a future time; considering it is one of the greatest points and marks
of the division of the Kingdoms. And because Reason does dictate, that where
the principal Solution of Continuity was, there the healing and consolidating
Plaster should be chiefly applied; There would be some further device, for the
utter and perpetual confounding of those imaginary Bounds (as your Majesty
terms them) And therefore, it would be considered, whether it were not
convenient to plant and erect at Carleil or Barwick, some Council or Court of
Justice, the Jurisdiction whereof might extend part into England, and part into
Scotland; With a Commission, not to proceed precisely, or merely according to
the Laws and Customs either of England or Scotland, but mixtly, according to
Instructions by your Majesty to be set down, after the imitation and precedent
of the Council of the Marches here in England, erected upon the Union of Wales.

Further Union, besides the removing of inconvenient and dissenting Laws and
Usages.
The third Question is, that which many will make a great question of, though
perhaps, your Majesty will make no question of it; And that is, Whether your
Majesty should not make a stop, or stand here, and not to proceed to any
further Union, contenting your Self with the two former Articles or Points?

For it will be said, That we are now well (thanks be to God) and your Majesty
and the State of neither Kingdom is to be repented of; And that it is true
which Hippocrates says, That, Sana Corpora difficile medicationes ferunt; It
is better to make alterations in sick Bodies, then in found. The consideration
of which point, will rest upon these two Branches; What inconveniences will
ensue with time, if the Realms stand as they are divided, which are yet not
found nor sprung up. For it may be, the sweetness of your Majesty's first
entrance, and the great Benefit that both Nations have felt thereby, has
covered many inconveniences; Which nevertheless, be your Majesty's Government
never so gracious and politic, continuance of time and the accidents of time
may breed and discover, if the Kingdoms stand divided.

The second Branch is, Allow no manifest or important peril or inconvenience
should ensue, of the continuing of the Kingdoms divided; yet, on the other
side, whether that, upon the further uniting of them, there be not like to
follow that addition and increase of Wealth and Reputation, as is worthy your
Majesty's Virtues and Fortune to be the Author and Founder of, for the
advancement and exaltation of your Majesty's Royal Posterity, in time to come.

Points wherein the Nations stand already united.
But, admitting that your Majesty should proceed to this more perfect and entire
Union, wherein your Majesty may say, Majus opus moveo; To enter into the parts
and degrees thereof, I think fit, first, to set down, as in a brief Table, in
what points the Nations stand now at this present time already united, and in
what points yet still severed and divided; that your Majesty may the better see
what is done, and what is to be done; and how that which is to be done, is to
be inferred upon that which is done.

The Points wherein the Nations stand already united are,

In Sovereignty.

In the Relative thereof, which is Subjection.

In Religion.

In Continent.

In Language.

And now lastly, by the Peace your Majesty concluded with Spain in Leagues and
Confederacies; For now both Nations have the same Friends and the same Enemies.

Yet notwithstanding, there is none of the six Points wherein the Union is
perfect and consummate; But every of them has some scruple, or rather grain of
separation, enwrapped and included in them.

Sovereignty: Line-Royal.
For the Sovereignty, the Union is absolute in your Majesty and your Generation;
But if it should so be, (which God of his infinite mercy defend) that your
Issue should fail, then the descent of both Realms does resort to the several
Lines of the several Bloods Royal.

Subjection. Obedience.
For Subjection, I take the Law of England to be clear, (what the Law of
Scotland is, I know not) That all Scots men, from the very instant of your
Majesty's Reign begun, are become Denizens; And the Post-nati are naturalized
Subjects of England, for the time forwards: For, by our Laws, none can be an
Alien, but he that is of another Allegiance Alien. Naturalization.
then our Sovereign Lord the Kings; For there be but two sorts of Aliens,
whereof we find mention in our Law; an Alien Ami, and an Alien Enemy; whereof
the former is a Subject of a State in amity with the King, and the latter a
Subject of a State in hostility: But, whether he be one or other, it is an
essential difference unto the definition of an Alien, if he be not of the Kings
Allegiance; As we see it evidently in the precedent of Ireland, who since they
were Subjects to the Crown of England, have ever been inheritable and capable,
as Natural Subjects; And yet, not by any Statute or Act of Parliament, but
merely by the common Law, and the Reason thereof. So as there is no doubt, that
every Subject in Scotland was and is in like plight and degree, since your
Majesty's coming in, as if your Majesty had granted particularly your Letters
of Denization or Naturalization to every of them, and the Post-nati wholly
Natural. But then, on the other side, for the time backwards, and for those
that were Ante-nati, the Blood is not by Law naturalized; So as they cannot
take it by descent from their Ancestors, without Act of Parliament. And
therefore, in this point, there is a defect in the Union of Subjection.

Religion, Church. Government.
For matter of Religion, the Union is perfect in points of Doctrine; but in
matter of Discipline and Government, it is imperfect.

Continent, Borders.
For the Continent; It is true, there are no natural Boundaries of Mountains or
Seas, or Navigable Rivers; But yet there are Badges and Memorials of Borders:
Of which point, I have spoken before.

Language, Dialect.
For the Language; It is true, the Nations are unius Labii, and have not the
first curse of disunion, which was Confusion of Tongues, whereby one understood
not another: But yet the Dialect is differing, and it remains a kind of mark
of distinction. But for that, Tempori permittendum, it is to be left to time:
For, considering that both Languages do concur in the principal Office and Duty
of Language, which is to make a man's self understood; For the rest, it is
rather to be accounted (as was said) a diversity of Dialect then of Language;
and as I said in my first Writing, it is like to bring forth the enriching of
one Language, by compounding and taking in the proper and significant Words of
either Tongue, rather then a continuance of two Languages.

Leagues, Confederacies, Treaties.
For Leagues and Confederacies; It is true, that neither Nation is now in
hostility with any State, wherewith the other Nation is in amity: but yet so,
as the Leagues and Treaties have been concluded with either Nation
respectively, and not with both jointly; which may contain some diversity of
Articles of straitness with one, more then with the other.

But many of these matters may perhaps be of that kind, as may fall within that
Rule, In vest variet as sit, scissura non sit.

Now to descend to the particular points, wherein the Realms stand severed and
divided, over and besides the former six points of separation, which I have
noted and placed as the defects or abatements of the six points of the Union,
and therefore shall not need to be repeated. The points, I say, yet remaining,
I will divide into External and into Internal.

External Points of the Separation and Union.
The External Points therefore of the separation, are four.

1. The several Crowns; I mean, the ceremonial and material Crowns.

2. The second is, the several Names, Styles or Appellations.

3. The third is, the several Prints of the Seals.

4. The fourth is, the several Stamps or Marks of the Coins of Moneys.

It is true, that the External are, in some respect and parts, much mingled and
interlaced with considerations Internal; and that they may be as effectual to
the true Union, which must be the work of time, as the Internal, because they
are operative upon the conceits and opinions of the People: The uniting of
whose hearts and affections, is the life and true end of this Work.

The Ceremonial or Material Crown.
For the Ceremonial Crowns, the question will be, whether there shall be framed
one new Imperial Crown of Britain, to be used for the time to come?

Also, admitting that to be thought convenient, whether in the Frame thereof,
there shall not be some reference to the Crowns of Ireland and France?

Also, whether your Majesty should repeat or iterate your own Coronation and
your Queens; or only ordain, that such new Crown shall be used by your
Posterity hereafter?

The difficulties will be, in the conceit of some inequality, whereby the Realm
of Scotland may be thought to be made an accession unto the Realm of England.
But that rests in some circumstances; for the compounding of the two Crowns
is equal; The calling of the new Crown, The Crown of Britain, is equal. Only
the place of Coronation, if it shall be at Westminster, which is the ancient,
august and sacred place for the Kings of England, may seem to make an
inequality: And again, if the Crown of Scotland be discontinued, then that
Ceremony which I hear is used in the Parliament of Scotland, in the absence of
the Kings, to have the Crowns carried in solemnity, must likewise cease.

The Styles and Names.
For the Name, the main question is, whether the contracted Name of Britain
shall be by your Majesty used, or the divided Names of England and Scotland.

Admitting there shall be an alteration, then the case will require these
following Questions.

First, whether the Name of Britain shall not only be used in your Majesty's
Style, where the entire Style is recited; and in all other forms, the divided
Names to remain, both of the Realms and of the People; Or otherwise, that the
very divided Names of Realms and People, shall likewise be changed or turned
into special or sub-divided Names of the general Name; That is to say, for
example, whether your Majesty in your Style, shall denominate your self, King
of Britain, France and Ireland, etc. And yet, nevertheless, in any Commission,
Writ or otherwise, where your Majesty mentions England or Scotland, you shall
retain the ancient Names, as Secundum consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae; or
whether those divided Names shall be for ever lost and taken away, and turned
into the sub-divisions of South-Britain and North-Britain, and the People to be
South-Britains and North-Britains; And so in the example foresaid, the Tenor
of the like clause to run, Secundum consuetudinem Britanniae Australis.

Also, if the former of these shall be thought convenient, whether it were not
better for your Majesty, to take that Alteration of Style upon you by
Proclamation, as Edward the third did the Style of France, then to have it
enacted by Parliament?

Also, in the alteration of the Style, whether it were not better to transpose
the Kingdom of Ireland, and put it immediately after Britain, and so place the
Islands together; and the Kingdom of France, being upon the Continent, last? In
regard these Islands of the Western Ocean seem, by Nature and Providence, an
entire Empire in themselves; and also, that there was never King of England so
entirely possessed of Ireland as your Majesty is: So as your Style to run, King
of Britain, Ireland, and the Islands adjacent, and of France, etc.

The difficulties in this have been already thoroughly beaten over, but they
gather but to two Heads.

The one, point of Honor, and love to the former Names.

The other, Doubt; left the alteration of the Name may induce and involve an
alteration of the Laws and Policies of the Kingdom: Both which, if your Majesty
shall assume the Style by Proclamation, and not by Parliament, are in
themselves satisfied: For then the usual Names must needs remain in Writs and
Records; the Forms whereof cannot be altered, but by Act of Parliament, and so
the point of Honor satisfied. And again, your Proclamation alters no Law;
and so the scruple of a tacit or employed alteration of Laws likewise
satisfied. But then, it may be considered, whether it were not a Form of the
greatest Honor, if the Parliament, though they did not enact it, yet should
become Suitors and Petitioners to your Majesty to assume it?

The Seals.
For the Seals, That there should be but one Great Seal of Britain, and one
Chancellor; and that there should only be a Seal in Scotland for Processes and
ordinary Justice; And that all Patents of Grants of Lands or otherwise, as well
in Scotland as in England, should pass under the Great Seal here, kept about
your Person: It is alteration Internal whereof I do not now speak.

But the Question in this place is, whether the Great Seals of England and
Scotland should not be changed into one and the same form of Image and
Superscription of Britain? which nevertheless is requisite should be, with some
one plain or manifest alteration, lest there be a Buz, and suspect that Grants
of things in England may be passed by the Seal of Scotland; Or e converso.

Also, whether this alteration of Form may not be done without Act of
Parliament, as the Great Seals have used to be heretofore changed, as to their
Impressions?

The Standards and Stamps, Moneys.
For the Moneys, as to the Real and internal consideration thereof, the question
will be, Whether your Majesty should not continue two Mints? which (the
distance of Territory considered) I suppose, will be of necessity.

Secondly, how the Standards (if it be not already done, as I hear some doubt
made of it in popular rumor) may be reduced into an exact proportion for the
time to come; and likewise the computation, tale, or valuation to be made
exact, for the Moneys already beaten?

That done, the last Question is, (which is only proper to this place) whether
the Stamp, or the Image and Superscription of Britain, for the time forwards,
should not be made the self same in both places, without any difference at all?
A matter also which may be done, as our Law is, by your Majesty's Prerogative,
without Act of Parliament.

These points are points of Demonstration, ad faciendum Populum; But so much
the more they go to the root of your Majesty's intention, which is to imprint
and inculcate into the Hearts and Heads of the People, that they are one People
and one Nation.

In this kind also, I have heard it pass abroad in speech, of the erection of
some new Order of Knighthood, with a Reference to the Union, and an Oath
appropriat thereunto; which is a point likewise deserves a Consideration. So
much for the External Points.

Internal Points of Union.
The Internal Prints of Separation, are as follows.

1. Several Parliaments.

2. Several Councils of Estate.

3. Several Officers of the Crown.

4. Several Nobilities.

5. Several Laws.

6. Several Courts of Justice, Trials and Processes.

7. Several Receipts and Finances.

8. Several Admiralties and Merchandizings.

9. Several Freedoms and Liberties,

10. Several Taxes and Imposts.

As touching the several States Ecclesiastical, and the several Mints and
Standards, and the several Articles and Treaties of Intercourse with Foreign
Nations, I touched them before.

In these points, of the straight and more inward Union, there will interveen
one principal difficulty and impediment, growing from that root, which
Aristotle in his Politics, makes to be the root of all division and
diffention in Commonwealths; And that is, Equality and Inequality. For the
Realm of Scotland is now an Ancient and Noble Realm, substantive of it self:
But, when this Island shall be made Britain, then Scotland is no more to be
considered as Scotland, but as a part of Britain; no more then England is to be
considered as England, but as a part likewise of Britain: And consequently,
neither of these are to be considered as things entire in themselves, but in
the proportion that they bear to the whole. And therefore, let us imagine ( Nam
id Mente possumus, quod Actu non possumus) that Britain had never been divided,
but had ever been one Kingdom; then that part of Soil or Territory, which is
comprehended under the name of Scotland, is in quantity (as I have heard it
esteemed, how true I know not) not past a third part of Britain; And that part
of Soil or Territory which is comprehended under the name of England, is two
parts of Britain; leaving to speak of any difference of Wealth or Population,
and speaking only of Quantity. So then, if for example, Scotland should bring
to Parliament as much Nobility as England, then a third part should countervail
two parts, Nam si inaequalibus aequalia addas, omnia erunt inaequalia. And
this, I protest before God and your Majesty, I do speak, not as a man born in
England, but as a man born in Britain. And therefore, to descend to particulars.

1. Parliament.
For the Parliaments, the consideration of that Point will fall into four
Questions.

1. The first, what proportion shall be kept between the Votes of England, and
the Votes of Scotland.

2. The second, touching the manner of Proposition, or possessing of the
Parliament of Causes there to be handled, which in England is used to be done
immediately by any Member of the Parliament, or by the Prolocutor; and in
Scotland is used to be done immediately by the Lords of the Articles; whereof
the one form seems to have more Liberty, and the other more Gravity and
Maturity: And therefore, the Question will be, whether of these shall yield to
other? Or, whether there should not be a mixture of both by some Commissions,
precedent to every Parliament, in the nature of Lords of the Articles; and yet,
not excluding the Liberty of propounding in full Parliament afterward?

3. The third, touching the Orders of Parliament, how they may be compounded,
and the best of either taken.

4. The fourth, how those, which by inheritance or otherwise, have Offices of
Honor and Ceremony in both the Parliaments, as the Lord Steward with us, etc.
may be satisfied, and duplicitly accommodated?

2. Councils of Estate.
For the Councils of Estate, while the Kingdoms stand divided, it should seem
necessary to continue several Councils; But if your Majesty should proceed to a
strict Union then, howsoever your Majesty may establish some Provincial
Councils in Scotland, as there is here of York, and in the Marches of Wales;
Yet the Question will be, whether it will not be more convenient for your
Majesty, to have but one Privy Council about your Person; whereof the principal
Officers of the Crown of Scotland to be, for Dignity sake, howsoever their
abiding and remaining may be as your Majesty shall employ their Service? But
this point belongs merely and wholly to your Majesty's Royal Will and
Pleasure.

3. Officers of the Crown.
For the Officers of the Crown, the consideration thereof will fall into these
Questions.

First, in regard of the latitude of your Kingdom, and the distance of place,
whether it will not be matter of necessity to continue the several Officers,
because of the impossibility for the Service to be performed by one?

The second, admitting the duplicity of Officers should be continued, yet
whether there should not be a difference, that one should be the principal
Officer, and the other to be but special and subalterne? As for example, one to
be Chancellor of Britain, and the other to be Chancellor, with some special
addition; As here of the Duchy, etc.

The third, if no such specialty or inferiority be thought fit, then whether
both Officers should not have the Title and the Name of the whole Island and
Precincts? As the Lord Chancellor of England, to be Lord Chancellor of Britain,
and the Lord Chancellor of Scotland, to be Lord Chancellor of Britain; But with
several Proviso's, that they shall not intromit themselves, but within their
several Precincts.

4. Nobilities.
For the Nobilities, the consideration thereof will fall into these Questions.

The first, of their Votes in Parliament (which was touched before) what
proportion they shall bear to the Nobility of England? Wherein, if the
proportion which shall be thought fit be not full, yet your Majesty may, out of
your Prerogative, supply it: For, although you cannot make fewer of Scotland,
yet you may make more of England.

The second is, touching the Place and Precedence; wherein, to marshal them
according to the Precedence of England in your Majesty's Style, and according
to the Nobility of Ireland, that is, all English Earls first, and then Scots,
will be thought unequal for Scotland: To marshal them according to Antiquity,
will be thought unequal for England, because, I hear their Nobility is
generally more ancient: And therefore, the Question will be, whether the
indifferentest way were not, to take them interchangeably; As for example,
first the ancient Earl of England, and then the ancient Earl of Scotland: And
so Alternis vicibus.

5. Laws.
For the Laws, to make an entire and perfect Union, it is a matter of great
difficulty and length, both in the collecting of them, and in the passing of
them. For, first, as to the collecting of them, there must be made by the
Lawyers of either Nation, a Digest, under Titles, of their several Laws and
Customs, as well Common Laws, as Statutes; that they may be collated and
compared, and that the diversities may appear and be discerned of. And for the
passing of them, we see by experience, that Patrius Mos, is dear to all men,
and that men are bred and nourished up in the love of it; and therefore, how
harsh Changes and Innovations are. And we see likewise, what Disputation and
Argument the alteration of some one Law does cause and bring forth; How much
more the alteration of the whole Corpse of the Law? Therefore, the first
Question will be, whether it be not good to proceed by parts, and to take that
that is most necessary, and leave the rest to time? The parts therefore, or
subject of Laws, are for this purpose, fitliest distributed, according to that
ordinary didivision of Criminal and Civil; and those of Criminal Causes, into
Capital and Penal.

The second Question therefore is, Allowing the general Union of Laws to be too
great a Work to embrace, whether it were not convenient, that Cases Capital
were the same in both Nations? I say the Cases, I do not speak of the
Proceedings or Trials; That is to say, whether the same Offenses were not fit
to be made Treason or Felony in both places?

The third Question is, whether Cases Penal, though not Capital, yet if they
concern the Public State, or otherwise the discipline of Manners, were not fit
likewise to be brought into one degree? As the case of Misprision of Treason,
the Case of Praemunire, the Case of Fugitives, the Case of Incest, the Case of
Simony and the rest.

But the Question, that is more urgent then any of these, is, Whether these
Cases, at the least, be they of an higher or inferior degree, wherein the Fact
committed or Act done in Scotland, may prejudice the State and Subjects of
England, or e converso; are not to be reduced to one uniformity of Law and
Punishment? As for example, a Perjury committed in a Court of Justice in
Scotland, cannot be prejudicial in England, because Depositions taken in
Scotland, cannot be produced and used here in England. But a Forgery of a Deed
in Scotland, I mean with a false date of England, may be used and given in
evidence in England. So likewise, the depopulating of a Town in Scotland, does
not directly prejudice the State of England: But if an English Merchant shall
carry Silver and Gold into Scotland, (as he may) and thence transport it into
Foreign Parts, this prejudiceth the State of England, and may be an evasion to
all the Laws of England ordained in that case: and therefore, had need to be
bridled with as severe a Law in Scotland, as it is here in England.

Of this kind, there are many Laws.

The Law of the 50. of Rich. the 2. of going over without License, if there be
not the like Law in Scotland, will be frustrated and evaded: For any Subject of
England, may go first into Scotland, and thence into Foreign parts.

So the Laws prohibiting transportation of sundry Commodities, as Gold and
Silver, Ordnance, Artillery, Corn, and c. if there be not a correspondence of
Laws in Scotland, will in like manner be deluded and frustrate: For any English
Merchant or Subject may carry such Commodities first into Scotland, as well as
he may carry them from Port to Port in England; And out of Scotland to Foreign
parts, without any peril of Law.

So Libels may be devised and written in Scotland, and published and scattered
in England.

Treasons may be plotted in Scotland, and executed in England.

And so in many other cases, if there be not the like severity of Law in
Scotland, to restrain offenses, that there is in England (whereof we are here
ignorant, whether there be or no) it will be a gap or stop, even for English
Subjects, to escape and avoid the Laws of England.

But for Treasons, the best is, that by the Statute of 26. King Hen. the 8 th.
Cap. 13. any Treason committed in Scotland, may be proceeded with in England,
as well as Treasons committed in France, Rome, or elsewhere.

6. Courts of Justice, and Administration of Laws.
For Courts of Justice, Trials, Processes, and other Administration of Laws, to
make any alteration in either Nation, it will be a thing so new and unwonted to
either People, that it may be doubted, it will make the Administration of
Justice (which of all other things, ought to be known and certain, as a beaten
way) to become intricate and uncertain: And besides, I do not see that the
severalty of Administration of Justice, though it be by Court Sovereign of last
resort, (I mean, without appeal or error) is any impediment at all to the
Union of a Kingdom: As we see by experience, in the several Courts of
Parliament in the Kingdom of France. And I have been always of opinion, that
the Subjects of England do already fetch Justice somewhat far off, more then in
any Nation that I know, the largeness of the Kingdom considered, though it be
helped in some part, by the Circuits of the Judges, and the two Councils at
York, and in the Marches of Wales established.

But it may be a good Question, whether as commune vinculum, of the Justice of
both Nations, your Majesty should not erect some Court about your Person, in
the nature of the Grand Council of France; To which Court you might, by way of
evocation, draw Causes from the ordinary Judges of both Nations; For so does
the French King from all the Courts of Parliament in France; many of which are
more remote from Paris, then any part of Scotland is from London.

7. Receipts, Finances, and Patrimonies of the Crown.
For Receipts and Finances, I see no Question will arise; in regard it will be
matter of necessity, to establish in Scotland a Receipt of Treasure, for
Payments and Erogations to be made in those parts: And for the Treasure of
Spare, in either Receipts, the custodies thereof may well be several;
considering, by your Majesty's Commandment, they may be at all times removed or
disposed, according to your Majesty's occasions.

For the Patrimonies of both Crowns, I see no Question will arise; except your
Majesty would be pleased to make one compounded Annexation for an inseparable
Patrimony to the Crown, out of the Lands of both Nations; And so the like for
the Principality of Britain, and for other Appen^ages, of the rest of your
Children; Erecting likewise such Dutchies and Honors, compounded of the
Possessions of both Nations, as shall be thought fit.

8. Admiralty, Navy and Merchandising.
For Admiralty or Navy, I see no great question will arise; For I see no
inconvenience your Majesty to continue Shipping in Scotland. And for the
Jurisdictions of the Admiralties, and the Profits and Casualties of them, they
will be respective unto the Coasts over against which the Seas lie and are
situated, As it is here with the Admiralties of England.

And for Merchandising, it may be a question, whether that the Companies of the
Merchant-Adventurers of the Turkey Merchants and the Muscovy Merchants (if they
shall be continued) should not be compounded of Merchants of both Nations,
English and Scots? For, to leave Trade free in the one Nation, and to have it
restrained in the other, may, per-case, breed some inconvenience.

9. Freedoms and Liberties.
For Freedoms and Liberties, the Charter of both Nations may be reviewed; And
of such Liberties as are agreeable and convenient for the Subjects and People
of both Nations, one Great Charter may be made and confirmed to the Subjects of
Britain; And those Liberties which are peculiar or proper to either Nation, to
stand in State as they do.

10. Taxes and Imposts.
But for Imposts and Customs, it will be a great Question how to accommodate
them, and reconcile them: For, if they be much easier in Scotland then they be
here in England, (which is a thing I know not) then this inconvenience will
follow, That the Merchants of England may unlade in the Ports of Scotland, and
this Kingdom to be served from thence, and your Majesty's Customs abated.

And for the Question, whether the Scots Merchants should pay Strangers Custom
in England? That rests upon the point of Naturalization, which I touched
before.

Thus have I made your Majesty a brief and naked Memorial, of the Articles and
Points of this great Cause; which may serve only to excite and stir up your
Majesty's Royal Judgment, and the Judgments of wiser men, whom you will be
pleased to call to it: Wherein I will not presume to persuade, or dissuade any
thing, nor to interpose mine own opinion; but expect light from your Majesty's
Royal Directions, unto the which, I shall ever submit my Judgment, and apply
my Travails. And I most humbly pray your Majesty, in this which is done, to
pardon my errors, and to cover them with my good intention and meaning, and
desire I have to do your Majesty service, and to acquit the Trust that was
reposed in me; And chiefly, in your Majesty's benign and gracious Acceptance.

FINIS.

