A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE FIRST RISE OF THE Name Protestant; And what
Protestantism is: with a Justification of it; and an earnest Exhortation to all
Protestants to persist in that Holy Religion.

By a Professed Enemy to Persecution.

LORD BISHOP of CORK'S Protestant Peacemaker. Page 128. -- I am, and must be
in the mind, that the Strength of the Protestant Cause, both here at Home, and
throughout Christendom, lies in the Union of Protestants; and the Glory,
Purity, and Power of Christianity in the World, stands or falls with
PROTESTANTISM.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1688.

THE EPISTLE TO THE Protestant Reader,
THE following Papers were, for the most part of them, writ two Years since,
and had then been offered to your view, if they had not been obstructed by some
Persons, and for some Considerations, of no use to be here mentioned.

The Author conceived at that time, there was occasion to suspect, that many
who pretended to be Protestants, closed with that Profession out of Interest,
or something akin to that, rather than from Knowledge and Conscience. Many
appeared ignorant of the occasion of the Protestant Name, and to understand no
better what was Protestantism it self. These seemed to be so wavering and
uneasy under their present Circumstances, that little less was necessary to
reconcile them to the Roman Religion, than to be certainly secured from the
terrible effects of Humane Statutes, provided to deter Men from such
Reconciliation.

This prompted the Author (having some undesired vacation at that time, from
his usual Employ) to endeavor to contribute something toward the helping of
such, who were thus unsteady, to discern what it was they were about to
relinquish; and consequently, enquire what it is, on the other side, they must
espouse. People, in matters of Religion, ought to be considerate and wary; they
should not deal with Religion as they do with their Hats and Clothes, when out
of the fashion. He thinks that Gibbets aad Confiscations, and such Engines, are
no Gospel Appointments to befriend the True Faith. Yea, he is of opinion, that
the Ambition and Sloth of Church Officers, did first introduce Penal Laws, to
defend and guard Christianity, and force People into a Profession of the Truth.
And that Christianity made greater numbers of real Proselites, during
Constantine's general Toleration, than were made by the Penal Laws under that
Emperor's Government, or by all the Penal Laws that ever were made since that
time. He thinks that Penal Laws have not wholly rendered Christianity
ineffectual; but how much they have impeded its progress, he thinks, is very
hard to comprehend. They have certainly very much promoted Hypocrisy and
Formality.

The Author is indeed a Conformist, but one that was grieved at the indiscreet,
and less charitable censures and carriages of many who boasted of the same
character. He was really troubled to see them, who said they were Protestants,
behave themselves so unbeseemingly toward their fellow Protestants, and so
industriously weaken and undermine that very Church they made such a clamor
about. He does not impute what they did, entirely to spleen and malice against
the Church they pretended to. As for many of them, he apprehends their
Intellectuals were so impotent, they had few thoughts of their own, by which to
govern themselves, but were wholly under a foreign conduct, which yet they
perceived not. How many more were influenced by motions too mean and carnal for
any good Man voluntarily to resign himself unto? For the first sort, we may
pray, as our Savior did for his Crucifiers, Lord, forgive them, for they knew
not what they did. But as for the other sort, he leaves others to consider what
measure of Charity belongs to them, who furiously ruin their Religious
Neighbors, and pull down the Church they seem to own, merely to satisfy their
own filthy and most detestable Lusts. He manifested some resentment, that
Protestantism should be treated with so much harshness, by those who pretended
to the same Religion. Which occasioned his having some experience, not only of
the reproachful language, but the ruder effects of the misguided vehemence of
some of his own Communion. But these things he overlooks, and hopes that
others, whose treatment has not been very obliging, will so forget what is
past, as not to insist thereon, to the prejudice und damage of the Religion in
common amongst us.

The Prefacer concurring in all these matters with the Author thinks he may,
with greater confidence, apply to all sorts of Protestants, in entreating and
beseeching them, that they will not do any thing now against, but for the
Truth. And more particularly, I would desire,

1. Those who are indifferent and wavering, to consider, and think seriously
before they change. Some, it may be, would make no scruple to depart from the
Protestant Profession, were it not they were awed with the dread and terror of
some future danger in this World, that may possibly overtake them, should they,
under present Circumstances, resign up themselves to a Profession our Laws have
made Criminal. But true Religion is a matter quite distinct from Humane Laws:
it is of most necessary and important concern to Men's Souls, and their Eternal
Salvation. And Humane Laws, whether for, or against it, do not alter the Case.
And therefore both as Christians and as Men, you ought to consider and weigh
things. Where different Religions are proposed, you must examine the
Particulars on each side, by the Only Rule of Religion, and must govern your
selves by Evidence. The nature and importance of Religion, and the unvaluable
worth of your own Souls, require this. There is nothing so foolish and absurd,
as to be of a Religion you do not understand, or to change your Profession, you
know not why, nor wherefore. Would you alter, to obtain Preferments and
Honors? Alas, how littlt reason have you to expect these things, whilst there
are others of more desert, and who bring better Testimonials with them than you
can? For he that changes inconsiderately, gives no proof, either of his Parts,
or of his Integrity. Do you hope, by altering your Religion, to escape Troubles
and Sufferings? This is an ill course to be taken for such a purpose, and not
likely to succeed, because God can find you out, and has ways enough to punish
you. Besides, you are assured you shall not be forced to relinquish the
Profession or Exercise of your Religion, by a Royal Promise. A Promise, which
fully performed, will attract greater repute and glory to the Roman Religion,
than all the Arguments and Devices, the most learned and subtle Adherers to
that See, did ever invent. So that you have nothing, under which you may
shelter your Apostasy, nothing to patronize your Revolt. And to Apostatise
without a Temptation, is at once both a Folly and Wickedness, that nothing can
match on either account.

2. Those, who pretending to the Church of England, have by an extravigant
fervency, and unneighbourly earnestness, done all that was in their power to
impoverish, macerate, and render their follow Protestants uneasy and
comfortless: These I would entreat to think with sedateness on what they have
done, how much they have injured the Protestant Interest, and what a stroke
they have laid the Communion to which they pretended, open unto? It Is high time
you to betake your selves to a deep Humiliation, godly Sorrow, and sound
Repentance for what you have done; yea, to take care you manifest your
Humiliation and Repentance in so solemn and public a manner, as may bear some
proportion to the Notoriety of your fault. What inexcusable wrong have you done
to the Protestant Cause? What a dreadful blow have you given the Church of
England? Have you not made it thus to totter? Have you not laid it almost
irrecoverably prostrate? What wounds like those which were made by pretended
Friends! Go not about to contrive excuses, to palliate the mischief you have
done, no verbal Apology can make amends for your Crime. Repent and weep, and
pray and reform, and this speedily, thoroughly aggrevate your guilt, take shame
to your selves publicly, and by hearty Repentance, and through Reformation,
hasten to put a stop to those Inundations of Judgments you have made way for;
this is the least you ought to do. Remember that Heathens and Jews, in
prosecuting the Old Christians; and the Romanists in persecuting Protestants,
have this excuse above you, that they never persecuted for things which they
themselves acknowledged to be merely indifferent. As you have not been afraid
to commit these evil things against your Fellow Protestants, with a high hand,
and in the sight of the Sun; so be not now ashamed to make your Repentance as
open and visible: neither be averse, by restitution to the utmost of your
power, to make satisfaction for all your unjust and merciless exactions. What
have you wrung and squeezed from others in an violent arbitrary way? How many
have you impoverish't, and reduced to utmost extremities; and this for things,
which at the same time you could not but acknowlede, were not worth one hair of
any Man's Head? Suffer not the Wages of unrighteonsness to remain in any of
your Hands, or in any of your Houses; but by faithful restitution, do the best
you can to secure your selves from the dreadful Recompenses such Wickednesses
do expose you unto. If you make not the best satisfaction you are able, to
those you have wronged, what can you expect, but that God will remember your
doings against you, and that you shall perish for ever like your own dung? He
has swallowed down Riches, and he shall vomit them up again, God shall cast
them out of his Belly. Job. 20. 15. Have you not just reason to be afraid,
least Divine Vengeance should overtake you on the sudden; and that God should
make the Land spew out such Inhabitants? Wherefore let my Counsel be acceptable
unto you, and break off your Sins by Righteousness, and your Iniquities, by
showing Mercy to the Poor, if it may be a lengthening of your Tranquillity, Dan.
4. 27.

3. Those who dissent from the Church of England: These I would desire to take
care, they do not resent their former unkind Treatment with any exorbitances,
nor suffer the remembrance thereof to alienate them from their Protestant
Brethren of the other Communion. Do not indulge to your Passions, nor keep at
any greater distance than needs you must. Be not hurried into any unadvised
compliances, on the one Hand; or stifness on the other. Permit not wrath or
revenge to have any place in you, much less, to transport you into any
unchristian indecencies. Fall not your selves into what you have perceived to
have no comeliness in the Conformist Party. Fall not out one with another:
improve the Ease, Freedom, and Liberty you enjoy, for the real Interest of
Religion. Be not concerned to make Parties; neither be overwarm for Notions or
Practices which have no plain and express warrant in Scripture.

Let us all unite, and be brotherly affectioned one toward another. Let us lay
aside and cast from us, with utmost dislike, all our Animosities, carnal
Interests, and unjust Prejudices on every hand. Let us wholly mind the things
of Christ, and bear on another burdens; leave all Indifferencies just as
Christ has left them; make the Scriptures our only Rule, and lay no more
stress on any particulars, than Christ himself has laid on them. Let us all
pray earnestly, improve diligently, both the Instructions of the Holy
Scriptures, and the present Calls of Providence. Let us all humble our selves
duly under the Mighty Hand of God; search into, and try our Hearts and our
Ways, and turn to the Lord from all our evil doings, with our whole might. Let
us all be of one mind, striving together for the Faith of the Gospel; and let
us follow after Peace with all Men, and Holiness; without which none must see
the Lord. Then will the Lord return and be gracious: And the Ransomed of the
Lord shall return, and come to Zion with Songs, and everlasting Joy upon their
Heads. They shall obtain Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow and Sighing shall flee
away. Isal. 35. 10.

AN ACCOUNT Of the FIRST RISE of the Name Protestant, etc.
MAimburgh (in his History of the League) having occasion to take notice of a
Story, which had been published, and had passed very currently a long time
without contradiction, for which he could find no warrant; after he had made a
full inquiry about it, makes this Remark: This in reason should give a caution
to such as undertake the writing of a History, not to trust all sorts of
Writers, and not ambitiously to swell their Works with all they find written in
certain unauthentick Memoirs, without giving themselves the leisure to examine
their merit and their quality. Page 169.

Had this Author himself exactly remembered, and strictly kept to this hint in
all his Writings, he would have done much to have raised himself a lasting
honorable Reputation, he would have greatly befriended and obliged the present
Generation and Posterity, none could have had good warrant to write against
him, his Histories would have been more considerable for their Truth, than now
they be for their Style.

And if others, who pretend to mislike misrepresenting, had but carefully
observed this Rule of Main-burgh's, with others of the like import, Christians,
the most innocent, and of greatest worth, could not have been so injuriously
asperst and bespattered, as of late they have been by several hands.

Whatever complaints and outcries may be raised against the Protestants, as if
they were not candid and just enough in the Accounts they give the World of the
Romanist's Faith, Worship, and Practice; though we should allow, that in some
particulars, particular Writers have exceeded, and not kept within such
moderate bounds as they would have done, had they followed the examples of our
most Learned and Judicious Authors; who beyond contradiction, have proved more
against their Adversaries than we do ordinarily expressly charge them with; yet
upon supposition that some of our Writers have been faulty this way, they are
not the only Persons guilty; and of all people in the world, the Romanists have
the least reason to insist on a charge of this nature; for though their fault
does not excuse any of our Writers, if guilty in the same manner, yet it
renders them very unmeet to upbraid and reproach, and make tragical complaints
against others, for what they are more enormiously faulty in themselves.

It is but too obvious, that some pains have been taken of late, to
misrepresent the Protestants all over, and to persuade the world into a belief
of very odd and strange things both concerning their Persons and Religion, yea,
the very Name by which they are every where known.

Indeed the word Protestant, and its Rise, have been so decyphered and
represented under such ungrateful Characters, by persons of one complexion and
of another, that some (who, it might have been expected, had had more
knowledge, and more wit) have been almost, or rather, quite ashamed of that
Name which their Ancestors accounted an honor, and by which the Religion they
pretend to, is every where known: what thoughts such have of the Religion it
self, time may discover. Who would ever have thought that Englishmen, who had a
long time, or rather, all their time been brought up in the Church of England,
and would fain have made a Figure in their Countries, should yet be at a loss
by what name to call the Religion they did profess; certainly the common name
might have past well enough, had not some unjust prejudice prevailed: And it is
very probable, this prejudice did take its Rise from one or others
misrepresenting, and giving a wrong account of that Name.

Those who prefess true and unmixt Christianity, have for a great while, been
distinguished in most parts of the World, by the name of Protestants; from
others, who have mingled with a profession of Christianity a great many gross
contradictions and inconsistencies: And till now of late, none who owned the
Religion, were ashamed of the Name: Those who liked not the Romish Communion,
did not think it a reproach to be called Protestants. Though the Name might be
first devised by the Adversaries of our Religion, and might be used by them at
first in scorn and contempt, with reference to those who would not embrace and
submit to all the foreign and unscriptural Notions and Practices which
received life and authority from Rome; yet the ancient love to, and zeal for
Religion, only as commanded by divine Authority, and as warranted by those
Books which are universally acknowledged by all Christians to be writ by men
divinely inspired, reconciled our Ancestors to that Name by which the
Adversaries of their Religion would have redicul'd them out of their
Profession. And how it is come to pass, that people professing the same
Religion, should now appear shy, and boggle at the Name, as if some dreadful
and hideous matter were wrapped up in the word Protestant, I cannot imagine,
unless either their love to, and zeal for their Religion, be less than their
Ancestor's was; or that some false representations have been made to them of
the importance and first occasion of this Name. What sort of writers have
contributed most to create prejudices in men's minds against the name
Protestant, I will not determine: but I do not lay all the fault of
misrepresenting in this case, on those who do openly profess themselves of the
Romish Communion; and yet I cannot wholly excuse them, because of late, they
have been at no small study and trouble to persuade people to entertain very
wrong Idea's both of the Protestant Name and Religion.

We are lately told, that The Protestant Persuasion has its Name, Being, and
Support, not from what it is in it self, but from what it is not, in defying
and protesting against their Neighbors. Rep. in behalf of Amicable Accomod.
page 17.

Now it may not be altogether improper, in order to the setting of some weaker
people right in their apprehensions, to give a short and true account of the
first occasion and rise of this Name Protestant, and its general use ever
since, from Authors of the best credit and repute on each side.

And that this Account may be the more clear and distinct, it will be requisite
to observe in general, That a great corruption had for many Ages overspread
Christianity, in the Romish Church. Afterward we may take notice, how Princes
and People were more directly prepared to renounce and cast off those
Corruptions; and then it will be proper to relate the particular matter of Fact
which occasioned this Name Protestant: and when these are dispatched, you shall
hear what Protestantism is, and wherein Protestantism does really consist.

The word Protestant is a foreign word, derived to us from other people; and
it has been, and is still used with relation to Religion, in all Nations where
it is mentioned. So that every where, those who have owned and professed the
Protestant Religion, have past currently with all sorts of people for
Protestants. And the Protestant Religion is the true Christian Religion,
rescued and reformed from those Corruptions and humane Additions the Church of
Rome had for many Ages, without good warrant, intermixed with it.

The Mystery of Iniquity, which began in the Apostles days, did by degrees
increase to that height in the Roman Church, that it almost overwhelmed true
Christianity, and made Religion appear, and be in the world little else than a
trick of policy, and a mere piece of Pageantry. And when the people had been a
great while inured to nothing but lifeless Superstitious Formalities, and were
brought up blindly in a superstitious, carnal, gay sort of practice, which was
called Worship, the Bishops of that See did by several artifices and tricks,
first acquire, and then improve opportunities, to gratify their own utmost and
unreasonable ambition: for the Princes and People were in many places so
effeminated, made so soft and easy, and unthinking by their methods, they very
tamely and patiently gave way to their most unjust encroachments, till at last
they were not able to help themselves, nor oppose the increasing greatness of
that See. And when matters were brought to this pass, then several points were
forced on the whole Western Church; the burden of which, the Inhabitants of
those parts had never before felt; and which those who first gave way to the
Usurpations of that See, never dreamed of. Now an universal Supremacy over the
whole Church was challenged, and a power pretended, to make whatever pleased a
Duty. In short, the Bishop of that See pretended an Infallibility, which must
not be called in question; he assumed a power to dispose of People's Sins and
Souls as he thought fit, and persuaded them he could consecrate any thing they
would buy, to be an effectual means to purge away their guilt. Nay, at last he
claimed a power to dispose of Governments, appropriating to himself a
Superiority in every Prince's Dominions; and both Princes and People were
blinded to that degree, through the Ignorance, Superstitions, and Impurity
which they had given way to, and the just infatuation which God suffered to
crawl on and overpower them, that for a long time, very few, either of the
Princes or People, did make any considerable attempts to extricate themselves
out of that Bondage, or get rid of the Tyranny and Apostasy into which they
were sunk.

But the time hastening on, when God would deliver his People out of of that
wretched estate: The Head and principal Instruments of the Romish State were
grown so secure and fearless of danger, they gave up themselves to their Lusts,
and minded nothing but how to invent new ways to impoverish the people; by
which means they occasioned the people to awake, and suggested to their minds
the most powerful and justest prejudices against the way they were in, and that
Church they did then adhere to.

For though there were many beams of light which shone up and down in the
world, yet two things did principally dispose the people to cast off that
Spiritual and Civil Yoke which had mightily galled both their Consciences and
their Necks, and to inquire after the Truth and Purity of Religion.

The first, was the obvious, prodigious Ignorance, Sloth, and beastly
Sensuality and Debauchery of the generality of those who pretended they had the
keeping of the people's Souls and Consciences; the Wickedness, Tyranny, and
Unsatiableness of the greatest part, by far, of the Clergy, was such as struck
most violently on the outward senses of the People: So that they were forced to
conclude, God would not entrust any extraordinary Depositum with such persons.
A German Bishop, in the year 1519 (which was not long before the Reformation,)
complains (as in Museccle I find him quoted) in this manner: I am afraid the
Doctrine of the Apostle, touching the Qualifications of a Bishop, is but very
ill observed in these days, or rather, that we are fallen into those Times
which he noted, when he said, I know that after my Departure Ravenous Wolves
will come among you, not sparing the Flock. Where may one see a good Man chosen
to be a Bishop? One approved by his Works and his Learning: And any one, who is
not either a Child, or Worldly, or ignorant in Spiritual things? They have no
love for any but Sinners, they despise the Poor, they keep about their persons
Pimps, Debauchers of Women, Flatterers, Buffoons, Players, when they should
have wise and holy Men. The Revenues of the Church are given, not to the
Servants of God, but to those of the Devil, to Debauchers of Women, to
Adulterers, Gamesters, Hunters, Flatterers, and such like Men. And hence it is,
that the House of God is become Tributary to the Devil. Matthew Paris, I
remember, speaking in his History, of the corruption and wickedness of the
Clergy, says, It was risen to so infamous a height, the Devil sent them
Letters of Thanks, because of the extraordinary service they did him, in
sending Souls to Hell in greater Troops than ever came thither before. You may
find large accounts of, and complaints against their notorious wickedness in
the Writings of Nic. de Clemang. and others. Several of the Popish Writers do
acknowledge, their Debauchery and Wickedness was such, as did necessitate the
people to seek after a Reformation. And truly (says Meceray) the extreme
Ignorance of the Clergy, many of them scarce able to read; the scandalons Lives
of the Pastors, most of them Concubinaries, Drunkards, and Userers; and their
extreme negligence gave him (viz. Luther) a fair advantage to persuade the
people, that the Religion they taught, was corrupt, since their Lives and
Examples were so bad.

A second thing which very much awakened the Princes and People, and prepared
them to cast off and renounce the Romish Trumpery, was the Pope's, Bishop's,
and other Ecclesiastical Officers most enormious prostituting those very things
wherein they pretended to place very much of their Religion, and by which they
pretended to impart to the people the Merits of Jesus Christ, and of the
Saints. For Leo the Tenth having a mind to raise great Sums of Money to
satisfy his own profuse humor, and make large Provisions for his Kindred,
sent abroad his Agents through the Empire, but especially in Germany, to sell
the pardon of Sins publicly, under pretense to build the Church of St. Peter's
at Rome. The Sellers of these Indulgencies, did prostitute them at the
strangest rate imaginable; for they would sell them for any thing wherewith
they might satisfy their Lusts. They would play them away at Taverns; at a
Game at Dice, they would Per lustra and popinas quotidie sine pudore in aleae
lusum, ususque turplssuhos potestatem extratendi animas functo^um ex igne
expiatorio profundebant. In Aug. Thuam. Hist. l. p. 13. vide Mezenrah; Ann.
1517.
stake a Man against so much Money, the Pardon of his sins, or a power to
deliver Souls out of Purgatiry.

And when this was complained of, and wrote against by Luther, the Pope sent
his Bull to confirm these Indulgencies, asserting his power to give and divulge
them in this manner. By the power of the Keys given to St. Peter and his
Successors, the Bishops of Rome, had a right to pardon the Faithful all the
guilt and punishment of their Actual Sins; to wit, the guilt, by means of the
Sacrament of Penance; and the temporal Punishment by means of Indulgencies,
whether in this life, or in Purgatory: and that by those Indulgencies, he could
apply to the Living and the Dead, the superabundance of the Merits of Jesus
Christ and the Saints, either by way of Absolution, or by way of Suffrage. So
that the Living and the Dead participating of those Indulgencies, were
delivered from the punishment that the Divine Justice would inflict on them for
their Actual Sins.

But Luther's contending this point with the Romish Agents, put him and others
on a more strict Inquiry into other Corruptions in that Church: by which means
Light broke forth daily with more power, to the full satisfaction of very many,
that there was an absolute necessity of a Reformation. And the Agents being not
able to contest the matter fairly with Luther, Eccius and others being quite
worsted and baffled in their arguings, Sylvester Prierias positively insisted
on the Pope's authority, acknowledging Sleid. Com. lib. 1. An. 15. Qnicunque
non innititur doctrinae Romanae Ecclesie, ac Romani Pontificis tam quam regulae
fidei infallibili, aqua etiam sacra Scriptura ^obur trabit and authoritatem,
est Haeriticus.
the Scriptures did not warrant those Indulgencies, but that the Pope did,
whose authority, he asserted, was above the Scriptures. And thus he brought
that point on the stage, which upon examination, appearing to be a mere cheat
and gross untruth, the people hastened to embrace the Sufficiency of the
Scripture, and that the Holy Scriptures were the only Rule God had appointed
Christians to guide themselves by in all matters of Religion, in opposition to
the Pope's pretended authority.

This, of the Pope's authority, being the point, for which both Head and
Members of that Church were mainly concerned, and which supports and keeps all
the other corruptions in that Church, in life, when the vanity and
ungroundedness, the absurdity and wickedness of that claim came to be exposed
and laid open to the World, the Interest of that Church did very mueh sink, and
the authority of Scripture was much advanced amongst people. So that the Pope,
notwithstanding all his Letters and Stratagems to destroy Luther, and hinder
the spreading of that Light which was now broken forth, could not effect his
design; but knowledge increased every day, and the authority of the Scripture
was much insisted on, to the great damage of the Pope and his Adherents.

It Is true, the Pope by his Letters and Nuncio's, did prevail with the
Emperor, and some of the Princes of Germany, to make an Edict, Mouns. Clauddef
of the Reformation, part 3d.
when they were assembled at Worms, which forbad Luther Fire and Water, and the
commerce of all the World; it extended also to all his Favorers and Followers,
and Accomplices: but the more violent the Pope and and his people were against
Luther, and the greater stir they kept with the Princes to see the Edict of
Worms strictly executed, the greater number of Friends God raised up for Luther
and his Followers.

For the Princes assembled at Nuremberg, declared they could not put the Pope's
Bull, nor the Edict of Worms in execution, without involving themselves in
great dangers, and that the generality of the people were so sensible how
matters stood, having their eyes opened by the writings of the Lutherans, that
if they should execute those Sentences, the people would believe they were only
made to overthrow the Truth of the Gospel, and to maintain and defend their
evil abuses and impieties, etc. And having drawn up this their Answer in form
of an Edict, they sent their grievances to the Pope, to the number of an
hundred Articles, which they called, Centum Gravamina.

After this, another Assembly of the Princes published another declaration in
form of an Imperial Edict, which extremely provoked the Pope and all his
Creatures. Upon this the Pope complained to the Emperor by Letters; and to
animate him the more, he persuaded him that that was a manifest breach of his
Authority, and a form and design to withdraw themselves entirely from his
Obedience: the Emperor is hereby prevailed with to concern himself in the
matter; and accordingly, writes very preremptorily to the Princes, requiring
them to execute the Edict of (...), and make void that of Nuremberg. And this
brings me to to the very Rise of the Name Protestant; an Account of which I
will give you in the englished words of a Foreign Divine, who has very
faithfully collected his Relation out of the most celebrated and authentic
Historians who have writ the Affairs of those Times. His Account is thus.

In the Month of April, in the Year 1529, an Assembly of the Princes and other
States of Germany was held at Spire; whether Pope Clement did not sail to send
a Nuncio: the first thing they did there, M. Clauddes. of the Reform. part 3d.
page, 51. etc.
was to reject the Assembly at the City of Strasburgh, under pretense that it
had abolished the use of the Mass, without waiting for the Imperial Diet. This
violent procedure was quickly after followed by a Decree, that Ferdinand
Archduke of Austria, and some other Princes who took part with the Court of
Rome made, and whom the Emperor had expressly chozen for his Deputy
Commissioners. They ordained therefore in the first place, that those who till
then had observed the Edict of Worms, that is to say, who not only had not
received the Reformation, but who had persecuted it with all their might,
should for the future do the like, and force their Subjects to do the same: And
that as for those, in whose Countries those new Doctrines had been spread
abroad, provided they could not extirpate them, without putting themselves into
manifest danger of stirring up Troubles, it should be their part, at least, to
hinder any thing more from being Innovated, till the calling of a Council.
Secondly, They ordained, that above all things, the Doctrine which opposed the
Substantial Presence, should neither be propounded nor received by any in all
the compass of Germany, and that the Mass should not be abrogated. In the Third
place, they decreed, that they should not allow Preachers in any place to
explain the Gospel otherwise than by the Interpretation of the Fathers. In
fine, they ordained grievous penalties against the Printers and Booksellers who
should print or vend, for the future, the Books that contained that new
Doctrine.

The other Princes and States of the Empire beholding this manifest Oppression,
thought themselves bound to make an Act of Protestation to the contrary: They
Remonstrated therefore, that that new Decree contradicted that which had been
passed in the preceding Assembly, where every one was to be free in respect of
his Religion; that they did not pretend to hinder the other Princes and States
from enjoying that Liberty; but that on the contrary, they prayed God that He
would give them the knowledge of His Truth: That they could not, with a good
Conscience, approve of the Reason, for which they would allow them to retain
the Evangelical Doctrine, to wit, least they should fall into new Troubles; for
that would be to confess, that it would be good to renounce that Doctrine, if
it could be done without Tumult; which would be a criminal and wicked
Confession, and a tacit Denial of the Word of God. That as to the Mass, those
who had abolish't it, and who had re-established in its place the lawful use of
the Supper of our Lord, were led by the Institution of our Lord Jesus Christ.
That as for the Doctrine that opposed the Real Presence, they did not believe,
that they ought lightly to condemn those who held it, without hearing them; and
that proceeding was against Equity, especially in a matter of so great
consequence. In fine, that they could not consent to that Decree, offering the
Reasons of their carriage to the Emperor and all the World. That they did
appeal to a Free Council, and that in waiting for it, they would do nothing for
which they should justly deserve any blame. -- This Act of Protestation was
made at Spire, the 19th. of April, 1529. And from thence came the Name of
Protestants; Vnde Protestantium nomen quod ad omnes postea, qui eorum quae
perperum in religionem invecta sunt, emendationem amplecti se professi sunt,
obitque ab Ecclesia Romana defecere, dimanavit. Thuan. Hist. lib. 1. p. 26.
which has been since given to all those who have embraced the Reformation.

This is the true Account of the first Rise of this Name Protestant; which was
used by way of reproach by those who adhered to the Romish Corruptions, and
asserted the Pope's Authority above the Scripture, toward them who renounced
those Corruptions, Nomen per contemptum ab adversariis ob protestationem Spirae
impositum. D. Prideaux Lect. 9. de visibil. Eccles.
and protested against the Pope's Supremacy, and for the Sufficiency and sole
Authority of the Scripture.

And this Name has ever since been applied to, and appropriated by them who
have renounced Popish Corruptions, and especially, that great Fundamental
Article of the Supremacy, because of their contradiction to, and derogating
from the Holy Scriptures.

The best Historians, both Protestant and Popish, do confirm the Truth of this
Relation; and that all people have promiscuously past in all Countries under
the Name of Protestants, who have renounced the Pope's Authority, and that Body
or System of false Doctrines and superstitious Practices, which are maintained
and justified in the Romish Church, because of their contradiction unto
Scripture.

For the Name Protestant is a common Title to discriminate all those who
renounce and forsake the Romish Communion, because of its contradiction to the
Holy Scripture, from those who do own, and are of that Communion. But it was
not designed to descriminate one sort of people renouncing and protesting
against that Communion on the aforesaid Account, from others who agree in the
same Point. And therefore in every Age and Nation, other Names have been made
use of to discriminate Protestants one from another, according to the matter in
difference betwixt them.

True Protestantism then consists more especially in two Points.

First, Protesting against, and renouncing Popish Corruptions, and especially
all such Infallibility, Supremacy, and Authority as the Bishops of Rome have,
for some Ages, laid a claim to. It is the renouncing the thing it self, which
Protestantism chiefly respects; its reference to such a particular person, is
only accidental, by reason of his audacious and arrogant challenging that
Power. But Protestantism would be equally against the Claim, if that Bishop
should lay it down, and any other, either in France, or in any other Country,
should challenge it; or if it should be pretended to be lodged in any other
Man, or Body of Men.

Secondly, Protesting for the Sufficiency and Authority of the Scripture: That
the Holy Scripture is a safe and full Rule for the Instruction of us in all
things needful to be known or done in order to Eternal Life; and that nothing
ought to be admitted as an Article of Christian Faith; which cannot, by just
consequence, be proved by this Rule, according as the Church of England
expresses her self. Article 6.

In these two things Protestantism does consist; the denial and renouncing of
the Pope's arrogated Supremacy, and all those Superstructions which have no
foundation but that Authority; and the owning and adhering to the Scriptures,
as the only complete Rule of Religion: This is the great, fundamental, positive
Principle in Protestantism. For Protestantism does not take away an andue,
boundless Power and Authority from the Pope, and conser it on another person.
It ascribes indeed to the Supreme Power in every Nation, what belongs to the
same, according to the constitution of the Government; protesting against all
foreign and every unjust pretense and claim, to the prejudice of the rightful
Owner. And it asserts the only right of the Scripture to be the Rule that every
Supreme Power on Earth should observe in restoring and reforming Religion, as
occasions are offered, by reason of the Decays or Corruptions which may have
prevailed.

The Bible, I say, the Bible only is the Religion of Protestants, whatsoever
else Chilling worth 's Safe way to Salvation. page 375.
they Believe besides it, and the plain irrefragable, indubitable Consequences
of it; well may they hold it as a matter of Opinion; but as matter of Faith and
Religion, neither can they, with coherence to their own grounds, Believe it
themselves, nor require the Belief of it of others, without most high and
Schismatical Presumption. And now, seeing Protestantism does mainly, or rather,
only consist in asserting the Holy Scriptures to be the Rule, the only Rule, by
which all Christians are to govern and manage themselves in all matters of
Religion. So that no Doctrine is to be owned as an Article of Faith, on any
account, but what has very plain warant and sound evidence from the
Scriptures; nor no instance of Religious Worship to be owned or submitted to,
as necessary; nor any thing to be entertained as a part of Religion, but what
the Scripture does appoint and warrant. It may not be altogether unuseful, to
inquire briefly, whether this Principle be really justifiable, or no? Or,
whether those who are called Protestants, on this Account, be truly in the
right, touching this matter? For, if we be right in this Point, then the great
Fundamental opposite Point of our Adversaries must needs have a slaw in it, and
cannot be solid and substantial; and consequently, all the particular Doctrines
and Practices, which have their whole being and Dependence on that Authority,
must necessarily expire, and give up the Ghost.

Now much might be offered to evince, that Protestants have very good ground to
rest assured, that they are not mistaken in this matter: but I will only offer
these few considerations; which being well considered and improved, may suffice
to satisfy any unprejudiced and imp^^tial honest meaning person, that
Protestantism is not a ^^mersome precarious thing, but is really accompanied
with the greatest evidence and certainty any Persuasion can justly pretend unto.

First, It is universally acknowledged, by all who profess themselves
Christians, that the Holy Scriptures, viz. those Books contained in the Old and
New Testament, as received by Protestants, are the Word of God, and were
written at the appointment of God, for the constant Use and Benefit of his
Church and People, by Persons Divinely Inspired for that purpose.

Secondly, Supposing (but not granting) that those Scriptures do not contain
the whole Revelation God has made of his Mind and Will, for the constant,
perpetual, and obliging Use of his Church; yet it is most evident, that these
Scriptures are a safe and most certain Rule in Matters of Religion, so far as
they do extend. They are a certain Rule touching those matters of which they do
treat, and so far as they do treat of them.

So that there can be no just pretense of a Divine Revelation for any Doctrines
or Practices which are inconsistent with, or contradictory to what God has
declared in these Scriptures: Because the Divine Veracity and Truth, which is
Essential to the Deity, cannot permit, that God should contradict himself. All
that can be pretended, with reference to this matter, is, that God may make
more Declarations of his Will; and either enlarge the Discoveries He has made
of his Will touching particulars already made known; or add Declarations of His
Mind concerning Matters which He does not at all discourse of in the
Scriptures. But it is not consistent with the Natural Notions of a Deity, not
with the Revelations God has made any way of Himself, that He should overthrow
the Truth of a Former Revelation by a Latter, or that Contradictions should be
reconcilable in His Will.

For any Man to affirm that a Divine Revelation may contradict any thing taught
in the Scriptures, whilst he professes these Scriptures are pure Divine
Revelations, is not only to involve himself in most obvious and horrid
Absurdities, but to contract upon himself, to burden and overwhelm himself
with the guilt of the most plain and unnatural Blasphemy against God. If any
thing that plainly contradicts the Scripture, can be a Divine Revelation, then
a Man may be indispensibly obliged to Believe, and not to Believe the same
thing; to do, and not to do the same work. And so Man will be brought under
such Circumstances, that whether he Believe, or do not Believe; whether he
Practice, or do not Practice, it will be the same thing, he will be equally
guilty. But certainly, if our Adversaries can pretend to Revelations which do
contradict the Scriptures, they cannot pretend to lay any Obligation on us to
comply with them in those Matters which the Scriptures do contradict; for we
have every jot as good Authority to Believe and Practice in direct
contradiction to them, as they have to Believe and Act in express contradiction
to us, though we should condescend to an impossible Supposition, viz. That a
Divine Revelation may contradict the Scriptures. Besides, they have no need or
occasion to trouble themselves to prevail with us to comply with them in their
Points; for (supposing their Revelations to be as they prerend) whether we
comply, or do not comply, the Case is just the same; for we are never the
better if we do comply with them; nor is our guilt and offense one jot the
more, if we do not comply. But if what they call Divine Revelations, be not
really so; and they will, notwithstanding, Believe or Act, or both, in
contradiction to the Scriptures, which are known, owned, and professed Divine
Revelations; let them seriously consider what is like to be the fruit of their
so doing. We have reason therefore to conclude, that all those Doctrines and
Practices which are inconsistent with, and do contradict what is declared in
the Holy Scripture, have not a Divine Original, but have their Rise from the
fountain of Falsehood and Untruth: And therefore we cannot be justly blamed, if
we protest against and reject such Notions and Practices; for we certainly have
a good Foundation and just Authority for every part of our Religion, which
Scripture does expressly and plainly warrant. And they must needs be at a great
loss for just Authority, as to those Points which expressly contradict the
Scripture, whatever may become of those Points amongst them, touching which,
they may conceive the Scripture is silent.

But lastly, If the Holy Scriptures we are speaking of, do contain the whole
and entire Revelation of the Mind and Will of God, which he has designed for
the constant and perpetual use of his Church and People, and do furnish People
with full Instructions and Directions in all Matters of Religion, then
Protestants have very good warrant to affirm and steadfastly adhere to this
Point, viz. That the Holy Scriptures are the only Rule we are to govern our
selves by in all Matters of Religion. And we are safe enough as to this part of
our main Principle; and cannot, with any justice, be reproached or blamed by
our Adversaries on this Account, till they can produce very good and
substantial evidence for some other Divine Revelation really distinct from
those we are discoursing of. But this is a task so hard for them to undertake,
so impossible for them to perform, that there is not one understanding person
in that Communion (I am persuaded) who dares adventure to engage in it. For it
will not serve the turn to talk honorably of Tradition in general, nor to make
a noise about Apostolical Traditions, without mentioning particular Traditions,
and proving them to be Divine Revelations, and that they are truly Apostolical,
and were by Divine Appointment set apart for the perpetual use of the Christian
Church. The Council of Trent speaks loud of Apostolical Traditions, and
advances them to the same degree with the Holy Scriptures, and appears so
resolved for these Traditions, that she makes them necessary to complete the
Scripture, in order unto its being a perfect Rule: but alas, her courage cooled
in a little time, for she dared only to talk extravagantly, and in excessive
terms of Tradition in General; she dared not to name particular Traditions,
which she would own and undertake to prove truly Apostolical, and of Divine and
constantly binding Authority to the Church. And since she thought it not
convenient to descend to particulars, I am of opinion, particular persons in
that Communion will not care to meddle in the matter, but rather choose to refer
it to another Council, when they can get one: because, if they should undertake
it, it must only be for our sakes; and those of that Communion cannot but know,
that nothing less will satisfy such cautious, reasonable people as Protestants
are, in a matter of this nature, than such evidence, as is very substantial and
proportionate to the thing to be proved. And could they produce ever so good
evidence for any particular they will call a Divine Revelation, or Apostolical
Tradition, it would be of no use to those of their own Church, who prefer
particular Humane Testimony, called by another Name, before all sort of proper
and suitable evidence. And after all their pains, though they could produce
satisfactory evidence (which I affirm to be utterly impossible in this case)
for some Tradition which would enforce some Point the Scriptures do not enforce
yet this would not do them any service, however it would weaken our Principle,
as touching the Perfect on of that Body of Divine Revelations we have: For
notwithstanding, we should, in obedience to a Divine Revelation, though roughly
proved and evidenced, concur and join with them in some Point we did not
embrace before; yet the difference betwixt them and us in that matter, would be
as great as before; there would still remain a formal difference betwixt us
touching this very particular; because, though we should Believe or Practice
the same thing, yet the formal Reason of Believing or Doing it, would be
totally different.

So that if any would attempt to produce substantial evidence for any
Revelation distinct from the Scriptures, their labor will be wholly useless,
with reference to their Church, unless they can produce a Revelation relating
to their Church, like that Law the flattering Courtiers of an Eastern Prince
told him they could find, when they were at a loss for a particular Law, to
warrant some particular Practice the Prince was inclined unto; though they knew
of no Law relating to what was proposed, yet there was a Law, that the Prince
might Command and do what he pleased. Such a Revelation our Adversaries must
produce, (Indeed, I am apprehensive, they Act in that Communion, as if they had
such a Revelation; but all the mischief is, they cannot produce valid proof for
it) or else they must be at the trouble of providing distinct Revelations for
the several Points in dispute, and distinct Evidence, unless they can make a
shift to crowd three or four of their Notions into a single Tradition, and so
make shorter work of it.

In short, the Protestants do affirm, That Divine Revelation is the only Rule
of Christian Religion: That the Holy Scriptures are confessedly Divine
Revelations: That these Holy Scriptures do contain all those Divine Revelations
God has appointed to be of perpetual standing, obliging Use to his Church and
People. We acknowledge, that were it possible for our Adversaries to produce
solid proof, that there is any Divine Revelation distinct from what these Holy
Scriptures do contain, which God has appointed to be of constant, perpetual,
binding Use to his Church, they might thereby invalidate our Principle, which
does affirm, that the Holy Scriptures are the Only Rule by which Christians are
to govern themselves in all Matters of Religion: But yet we affirm, their doing
this, would not really advantage their Cause; because the same Formal
difference would remain betwixt them and us after, as before; for though we
should be obliged, on their exhibiting such proof for some particular
Revelation, which should warrant and oblige to own and use some Doctrine or
Practice at present in dispute betwixt us; yet the agreement which would then
seem to be betwixt them and us, in that particular, would only be material, and
not formal; because we should then own the Doctrine or Practice, what is
enjoined, purely because taught and commanded by a Divine Revelation, thoroughly
evidenced: And they would own the Doctrine or Practice, the Duty enjoined,
purely because taught and commanded by a mere Humane Authority, which they are
pleased to name Infallible. And it will not be to any purpose, for them to
undertake a more quick dispatch in this matter, by talking of an Infallible
Judge, for he cannot be Judge and Rule too: There must be Divine Revelation,
which must be the Rule for their Infallible Judge to exercise and employ his
Infallible Judgment about. And seeing all their attempts to prove their
Infallible Judge by Scripture, have been very unfortunate, and without success.
I may take it for granted, when once they have agreed together, and found out
their Infallible Judge, their best proof that that Person, or Body of Men
(which ever they shall agree upon) is a Judge, and an Infallible Judge in
Matters of Religion, must be some new Revelation, or some old Tradition never
hitherto known to be a Divine Revelation; for we must have better proof than
any that has yet been offered on the behalf of any of their Traditions, before
we can entertain them as Divine Revelations. And when they have well proved
that Tradition, and its Divine Authority, which shall fix and settle their
Infallible Judge, they must still be at the trouble and pains to produce very
substantial proof for every other Tradition they will make a part of the
Christian Rule.

For the Authority of their Infallible Judge will not do here, because his
Infallibility does not reach to make, nor declare a Rule, but is purely
concerned about the true sense and meaning of an acknowledged Rule, when
Controversies do arise about the importance of any Expressions contained in
that Rule.

But besides all this, Protestants have such evidence, as does create certain
assurance, that the Holy Scriptures are fully Perfect, to instruct and direct
Believers in all matters of Religion, and do contain all those Divine
Revelations God has appointed to be of necessary and perpetual Use unto his
Church: greater evidence cannot be desired, than the express Witness,
Testimony, and Declaration of the unerring Spirit of the Faithful and True God.
And this we have most plainly, to the unavoidable and full Conviction of every
honest, piously disposed, ingenious, and unprejudiced Person, who really owns
and believes the Holy Scriptures are the Word of God: And this, you heard
before, is the professed Belief of all who profess themselves Christians. And
if such kind of evidence will not serve peoples turns, I must acknowledge, they
are of a temper I do not much care to deal with; for I must confess, I am no
preat admirer of booted blunderbus Apostles; nor do I think he makes any real
Proselites, who only dragoon's Men into a Persuasion: I never liked murdering
Men for Religion; nor persecuting Men, because their Consciences would not
stretch to every body's fancy. I think, whilst the Scriptures are
acknowledged, on all sides, to be Divine Revelations, the greatest and best
evidence we can have, in matters of Religion, is plain and express Scripture.
And if in all our Disputes with our Adversaries, we did strictly keep within
this compass, we should guard and maintain our owe Cause the better, and wound
our Adversaries Cause the more fatally: not but that I am very sensible, we
have Antiquity, the Fathers, the Primitive Writers, and the most General
Councils on our side, either expressly, or by way of silence; thereby certifying
us, that no such Points were known, or in question in those days.

But alas! by having ordinary recourse to the Fathers, etc. we mightily
gratify our Adversaries; for hereby they get out of the immediate reach of the
Sword of the Spirit: And all the Testimonies of Antiquity taken together, in
their own strength, will not do the thousandth part of that execution against a
Heresy, as one plain and express Scripture will. Besides, how often do we see,
that when the greatly Read and Learned, on both sides, do fall together by the
Ears over the Fathers, they lengthen the Dispute beyond measure; and not only
bewilder the Hearer or Reader, but even themselves too; that by the time they
are got half through the Dispute, they have well night forgot what it was they
began to dispute about.

And having slipped into this digression, I may even adventure to hint one
digression more, relating to the common way of managing Controversies with our
Adversaries, the Romanists. It may be, if it be well inquired into, it may
appear, that we do not ordinarily proceed in our Controversial Discourses with
them, in that free and ingenious manner we ought, but do too much limit and
straighten our selves. According to that little measure of apprehension I have,
it seems to me most expedient and most proper for us, in opposing our
Adversaries, to maintain Protestantism, or the Protestant Doctrines, both
really and professedly as such; and not to pinnion our selves, by pretending to
maintain them, as Taught or Owned by particular Communions. The Cause is a
common Cause; and the Arguments we can truly maintain it with, are common
Arguments; one Party is no more interested in them than another; nor do the
Matters in dispute amongst our selves, concern the Controversies betwixt us and
our Common Adversaries. Why should we so affect and hug our selves in our
private Notions, and particular Differences, as to please our selves with, or
at least, receive and keep up the unreasonable Remembrance of them. Indeed, I
do acknowledge the candor of our Adversaries, in that they have not improved
the advantage they might have taken, to have made some Tragical Appearances, by
falling upon us, with reference to this very matter, of undertaking to maintain
Protestant Doctrines, merely as owned by a particular Party: for what does this
properly import, but that we relinquish the Common Principle, and undertake,
only to maintain our Doctrines, not by the Scripture, as the General and Only
Rule of Christian Religion, but by the Scripture as limited and bounded by
those discriminating Terms and Instances, whereby we are distinguished from all
others, who take the Scripture to be the Only Rule in all Matters of Religion.
Now, will not this, if insisted on, make our task the harder, and the more
confound and perplex our Controversies? But would it not seem odd for a
Remonstrant, or a Contra-Remonstrant to defend Christianiry, or the particular
Doctrines of Christianity, against Jews or Heathens, purely as a Remonstrant,
or a Contra-Remonstrant? For what have their particular differences to do in
matters wherein they all agreed, and in maintaining of that, for which both
sides are equally concerned?

The main of the Controversy betwixt us and those of the Romish Communion, is
either, whether the Holy Scriptures be the Only Rule in all Matters of
Religion? Or, whether those particular Doctrines wherein they and we do differ,
have warrant from the Scriptures? And what need we, entreating on these points,
to interest any discriminating notions amongst our selves; As far as we do
agree, let us walk by the same Rule. Besides, by concerning our selves for
Protestantism, and Protestant Doctrines (even in opposition to our Adversaries)
in common, as fixing the Scriptures to be the Only Rule, and that our
particular Doctrine have plain warrant from the Scripture, and those we oppose,
are either contrary to the Scriptures, or have no warrant at all from thence,
we are excused from any obligation to trouble our selves with defending any
unwary, or less proper expressions, which may have slipped from particular
Parties, or particular Persons, in declaring their sense of particular
Doctrines; for whether they expressed themselves properly, or no; or whether
their opinion were right, or no, is not at all material to the Controversy
betwixt those of the Church of Rome and us. For if any Parties, or single
Persons, have declared their sense and opinions concerning any Doctrine, or
matter of Practice, either that their opinion does accord with Scripture, or it
does not: if it do, it is the Protestant Doctrine; if it do not, it is not a
Protestant Doctrine; and so it does not at all affect us; since we own, that
persons professing themselves Protestants, may mistake, as well as, we do
declare our assurance, that those who have been named Infallible, in another
Communion, have erred most grieviously. But this we affirm that so far as any
do keep strictly and closely to the Holy Scriptures, they cannot mistake. And
Protestants have no real concern to vindicate any Party, or Person, any further
than they do keep unto the Scripture.

But now to return from these digressions, unto what was said before, viz. That
Protestants have such evidence, as does create certain assurance, that the Holy
Scriptures are fully perfect, to instruct and direct Believers in all matters
of Religion, and do contain all those Divine Revelations God has appointed to
be of necessary and perpetual use unto his Church. I need not relate the whole
evidence that might be produced on this occasion. I will therefore content my
self with these two particulars, relating to this matter, which certainly must
sway powerfully with them who are under an influence which is truly Religious.

The first, is this:

1. That the Holy Spirit of God has expressly declared, that the Holy
Scriptures are complete and perfect to all the ends and purposes of Divine
Revelations. Hear how large and particular the Holy Spirit of God is, in
declaring the Fullness and Perfection of the Scriptures. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
And that from a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. All
Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man of God
may be Perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good Works.

2. The same Holy Spirit has solemnly devoted to the most dreadful Curse of
Almighty God, whomsoever shall be so arrogant and presumptuous, as to offer any
other Doctrine besides what the Holy Scriptures do teach, as a Divine
Revelation. Gal. 1. 8. But though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other
Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. Now if people will pretend to produce other Divine Revelations, which
God has appointed to be of perpetual use to his Church; either those must
invalidate these Holy Scriptures; or else these Holy Scriptures must invalidate
them; they cannot consist well together. If we will own and stick to the Holy
Scriptures, we must reject whatever additional Discoveries shall be produced;
because, the Spirit has, in these Scriptures, excluded them.

What has been discoursed concerning the evidence Protestants have for their
great and main Principle, may justly promt to take notice of two things.

1. That they who would hinder and discourage people from reading and studying
the Holy Scriptures, do give them just occasion to suspect, that they have none
of the honestest and most commendable designs to manage. We are very certain,
the Holy Prophets of God, the Lord Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, were Persons
beloved of God, and Persons who were greatly concerned for Peoples Spiritual
Welfare; and we are as certain, that these were very much, and in good earnest,
in pressing, exciting, and persuading the common sort of People to read and
study the Scriptures; they command them in the Name of God, to read and learn
the Scriptures, and those Revelations of the Mind of God, which were
communicated unto them; read Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12, 13. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9. John 5.
39. Col. 3. 16. Nay, does not the design and end for which God has made his
Will known, and caused it to be committed to Writing, manifest and prove our
Duty evidently enough? For what end has God given the Holy Scriptures unto his
Church and People? Are we not assured that the Scriptures were written for our
Learning, for our Instruction, for our Admonition? etc. And must we not read
them then? How will they answer these ends, if we must not consult them? Were
not the Scriptures written for our Learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures, might have Hope? Read and consider Romans 15. 4. Have
we not then too much ground to suspect, that those who would take, or keep our
Bibles from us, are Enemies to our Faith, Patience, Comfort, Hope, and
Happiness? Is not the Word of God that Sword of the Spirit, with which we are
to defend our selves, and worst our Spiritual Enemies? Ephesians. 6. 17. And now
what reason have we to take them for our Friends, who would lay us open, and
expose us Naked to the Assaults of Satan and his Instruments?

The Holy Penmen of the Scriptures did, by the direction of the Blessed Spirit,
commend People for applying themselves to the Holy Scriptures, and endeavoring
to improve in the knowledge of them. See Psalm. 1. 2. Act. 17. 11. Act. 18. 24.
2 Timothy 3. 15. And it is certain, that the People of God (of every rank and
condition) under the Old Testament Dispensation, were obliged by Especial
Appointment from God, to take care to read, and labor after a continual
Increase in the knowledge of the Scriptures. Now, can we imagine, that God
having given us a larger Discovery of his Mind, does dispense with our neglect
to search the Scriptures.

Can those who are against the Lay-Peoples reading of the Scripture, find any
Command of Christ, requiring them not to read the Scripture? Can they produce
any Condemnation or Censure from the Prophets, from Christ, or from his
Apostles, against those who shall read the Word of God? Or can they make it
appear, that any of these did ever commend People for their neglecting to read
the Scripture? If they cannot do any of all this, let their Pretenses and
Self-vindications touching this matter, be never so plausible, we may rest
assured, there is nothing solid and substantial in what they say; for there
cannot be any Reason against God. The more subtle and cunning their Pretenses
are, the worse Men they manifest themselves to be; because they abuse those
Abilities which should have been applied another way, and might, had they been
used aright, have been very serviceable to promote the Interest of Truth and
Holiness.

The most plausible Pretense they do produce for their prohibiting People the
common use of the Scripture, is, That the ordinary sort of People would be very
apt to abuse and wrest the Scriptures to their own Destruction, should they be
permitted to have free recourse unto them. But allowing, that People may wrest
the Scripture, and make some other use of it than they ought, this is not an
Inconvenience which will make null, and discharge Men from God's Command of
reading and searching the Scripture. You may, with as much reason, oblige Men
to forbear the use of wholesome Food, Meat and Drink, and starve themselves to
death, because some, by their Intemperance and Excess, do abuse wholesome Food,
and make it an occasion of dangerous Distempers and Diseases, yea, and Death it
self. You may as lawfully deprive People of their Corporal, as of their
Spiritual Food.

Besides, this very particular has been foreseen, and taken notice of, by the
Penmen of the Holy Scripture, if we interpret 2 Pet. 3. 16. according to the
usual acceptance of that place, by those who do allege it for their purpose,
as to this matter. And yet there is not one word there, to oblige People, on
that account, to desist from the reading of the Scriptures. The People may, and
ought to be warned to take heed how they read the Scriptures, and that they
avoid Errors, and pervert not the Word of God. But the Scriptures are not
therefore to be detained from them: God has not thought fit to provide such a
Remedy against peoples abusing his Word, as this is, of keeping it entirely
from them. Yea, this very Apostle does, as it were, in the next verses,
persuade them to the due and right study, and improvement of the Scriptures,
that they may avoid the Errors others do fall into, by abusing them, and may
increase in the knowledge of Christ.

It is undeniably evident, that this same Apostle does, in this same Epistle,
commend peoples reading of the Scriptures, and attending unto them. We have
also a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well, that ye take heed, as
unto a Light that shines in a dark place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star
arise in your Hearts. 2 Pet. 1. 19.

And, however it is common, to attribute the Rise of Errors to the common sort
of peoples having the free use of the Scriptures; yet, upon due examination, it
will be found, that the worst and most fatal Errous have sprung from, and been
advanced by them, who pretending to more Knowledge and Learning, and Abilities
than the rest of Mankind, have presumed to appropriate to themselves the entire
Custody or Interpretation of the Scriptures.

Nay, it is truly observed, by one who appears to have consulted Antiquity with
much care and diligence, That The Laity so well understood their Catholic
Balance. page 19.
Faith, that many times, they, by their sagacity, discerned the sly
Insinuations of Error, in the Sermons of their Unsound and Heretical Bishops;
and so occasioned them to be condemned by Synodical Sentences: and through the
radicated sense of Faith, would never be brought to any of the Alterations made
by any corrupt Councils; nor, would ever rest under their Prevarications, till
the Primitive Faith recovered, and vacated all those Synodical Prevarications;
as may be seen in all the Arian History; and particularly, the relation given,
of the vulgar Sagacity and Zeal, to detect and repress that Heresy in St.
Hierom against the Luciferians.

If this Notion, of keeping the Scriptures from the people, or of obliging the
People to understand the Scriptures no otherwise than those would interpret
them, who were arrogant enough to claim, and assume to themselves this
privilege, had entirely prevailed, when our Blessed Savior was on Earth, God
only knows, how much our Savior's Reputation might have suffered, even in
succeeding Generations. For, as these presumptuous Persons did pretend, that
the Key of the Scripture did hang only at their Girdle, so they refused to
acknowledge Christ was the Messiah, the Son of God, and they both accused him
as an Impostor, a Deceiver, an Ill Man; and charged and censured the People as
ignorant Persons, who did not understand the Law, little better than Heretics,
a cursed Generation: and all this was, because they did listen unto Christ,
follow Him, and Believe in Him; that is, did undertake to judge of Matters by
the Scripture; and to determine this was the Savior, the Messiah, etc.
prophesied of, and promised in the Scriptures. The Chief Priests, the Scribes,
the Pharisees, they were all against Christ, and would fain have persuaded the
People to have taken their Interpretation of the Scriptures, and to have pinned
their Faith on their Sleeves, and not undertake to judge for themselves in so
high and mysterious a Point as this, concerning the Messiah, was. They would
have persuaded them, that this Jesus was a very Cheat, and that all the things
he did, which won their admiration, were wrought by the Intimacy he had with,
and the Power he borrowed from the Prince of the Devils; and that the Messiah
must be quite of another Make from this same Jesus.

Now, what work would have been in the World, if none must have read and
understood the Scriptures in any other sense but what the Topping-Men, and
Chief Leaders of the Jewish Church, had assigned? What contempt do these
Monopolizers of Knowledge express against the People, who would not submit to
their Determinations? How angry were they, when any dared to declare how they
respected and admired Christ? Then came the Officers to the Chief Priests and
Pharisees, and they said unto them, Why have ye not brought him? The Officers
answered, never Man spoke like this Man: Then answered them the Pharisees, Are
ye also deceived? Have any of the Rulers or Pharisees believed on him? But this
People who knows not the Law, are Cursed. John 7. 45. to the 50th.

If People mean fairly and honestly, why do they desire to have Folks bred up
in Ignorance? Indeed, if the ordinary sort of People be well versed in the Holy
Scriptures, it will not be easy to impose upon them. Why cannot Men, that
would be Teachers now a days, be as open and plain as the Prophets, and as
Christ, and as his Apostles were? These came not to vent any counterfeit false
Wares, and therefore they were wiling the People should examine and try what
they taught them: They were for the People's reading and searching of the
Scriptures, and judging of the Doctrines which were taught them by those Holy
Scriptures, which had been delivered unto them. They came to deliver people out
of Darkness, not to keep them in, or lead them unto Darkness. And those who are
their true Successors and Followers, will do the like. If Men have no Notions
to scatter about, and persuade People to swallow and submit to, but what are
sound, and true, and good, and which are authorized by Jesus Christ, they will
have no occasion to be ashamed or afraid, that People should examine them by
the Scripture. None flee from the Light, but those whose Doctrines or Practices
will not bear the Light. Christ's Doctrines did accord very well with those
Divine Revelations those Jews had amongst them: But the Unscriptural Traditions
they had got amongst them, and our Savior's Doctrines, could not stand
together. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this
Word, it is because there is no Light in them. Isaiah 8. 20.

Secondly, Those who profess themselves Protestants, ought to take care, that
they be well fixed and settled in the Protestant Religion.

The Apostles often require their Followers and Disciples, and those they write
unto, to Stand fast in the Faith: 1 Cor. 16. 13. And to Contend earnestly for
the Faith once delivered to the Saints: Jude 3. And to Strive together for the
Faith of the Gospel: Phil. 1. 27. Now, by these and the like Expressions, which
you meet with in the Apostolic Writing, they plainly, first, warn them of the
danger there is, of Peoples Apostarizing from the True Faith and Religion of
Jesus Christ, after that they have made a Profession of the same. And secondly,
excite and stir those up, who make a Profession of the True Faith, to take care
that their Minds and Hearts may be thoroughly fixed and settled in the Faith,
least they should yield and waver, and decline, when Storms and Trials shall
arise, and their constancy shall be assaulted.

And, if there be but too much ground to fear, that many who make a Profession
of the Truth, will Apostatize, and forsake it, when they shall be called to
bear witness to it, in some Instances which are ungrateful to Flesh and Blood.
It highly concerns all, who at present profess True Christianity, to look well
to it, that they be so established and confirmed in what they profess, that if
a day of Trial should come, they may not loose their Crown, destroy their
Souls, or betray the Truth.

First, Those who do profess the True Religion, may afterward Apostatize from,
and relinquish it. And there is too great occasion to fear, that many, however
forward they appear in Profession, will do so, should they be tried in any
difficult and beloved Instances: I do not mean, that People who have long
habituated themselves to profess the Christian Religion, will easily be brought
to an open and avowed renouncing of the Name of Christianity; as though none
could be justly charged with Apostasy from the Truth, but those who can vye
with Julian for impudence, in contemning and trampling under foot the very Name
and Profession of the Son of God. The estate of those who proceed so far, is
beyond measure dreadful. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.

But there are two things, which the Scriptures more especially insist on, as
imported by People's Apostatizing from the True Faith, and which, People are
generally too prone unto; and both which are very displeasing unto, and greatly
provoking of God.

1. Departing from the Purity and Simplicity of the Faith of the Gospel,
espousing and embracing, together with those Doctrines, and Practices which
Christ has authorized in his Holy Scriptures, other Opinions and Practices,
which are destructive of the Truth and power of Religion. Christianity is as
really impaired and injured by evil mixtures, as by open professed opposition.
The Apostasy the Apostles spoke of, which was to accompany, or rather,
constitute that great Antichristian State, they foretell, would have such a
vast, and large, and durable Empire in the Christian World, seems plainly to be
of this kind. The great Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity should be
retained in outward Profession, but yet other Doctrines should be introduced,
and be so vehemently imposed, and insisted on, that thereby the main Essential
of Religion should be slighted, oppressed, and become in a great measure
useless. And way has been made for these Innovations, by first, forging some
gross Impostures, and counterfeiting some strange things, to which they have
given the Name of Miracles, and so unwary, ignorant People have been prevailed
with to entertain no better than Diabolical Delusions as Divine Instructions
and Commands: very agreeable to what the Apostle foretells of Antichrist's
coming; After the working of Satan with all Power, and Signs, and lying
Wonders: 2 These. 2. 9.

2. Altering the nature and use of many things which were Innovated, by the
pious Ancients, without any Divine Authority, and purely by the conduct of a
warm Zeal, and a devout Intention. Had no further progress been made in those
Instances, than those Ancients made, little prejudice would thence have
happened to Religion. But God is so jealous of his own Honor, that usually,
when People manifest they have an Opinion that God has not carefully enough
provided for his own Cause, and therefore they will guard and sense, and
provide more effectually for it; He blasts all those Devices, and suffers such
Humane Inventions to be occasions of more than ordinary trouble; and sometimes,
to be prosecuted so far, as to make a formal and mortal Opposition to the
Vitals of Religion.

3. Depressing the Offices and Devotional Duties of Religion with unreasonable
heaps of outward Formalities, and Ritual Observations; that so the Senses might
be superfluously carest; and by accomodating the Matters of Religion too much
to the Rules of Carnal Policy. By this means, inward Seriousness, and the
Spirituality of Religion, have been dispenc't with; and Peoples Minds have been
rendered lax and vain, aerie and garish. And having been thus inured for some
time to these mere Externals, which they have taken upon trust, they have at
last been so easy, as to content themselves with an Implicit Faith, and have
rather chose to swallow any thing that should be offered them, whole, than put
themselves to the trouble to enquire into its Nature, Rise, and Grounds.

4. Finding out ways to reconcile what they style Religion, to Men's Carnal
Lusts, and Natural Tempers and Constitutions; devising easier ways (as they
pretend) to Heaven, than any of the Saints in former Ages, were acquainted
with: devising new ways to satisfy for Sin, and undertaking to save Men's Souls
after they are dead in Sins.

Hence there is something Men call Religion, that must certainly please the
Careless, and (as some tell us) as certainly Save them. If you are melancholy,
and inclined to strictness and Corporal Mortifications, they will humor you in
that; they can provide you Pennances and Securities, which shall sufficiently
vex and macerate your Flesh. If you are soft and tender if you would have a
Jovial Religion, and would allow your selves in wantonness and excess, etc. and
yet not miscarry at last, they can fit you with Indulgencies and Pardons, and
will not question to send you safely to Heaven, by virtue of the Merits and
Righteousness of some of their Ancient Friends, who never had a Being in the
World; or, of others, who tho they might have a Being here on Earth, in all
probability, never got to Heaven themselves: I am sure, they never had
Righteousness enough of their own to carry them to Heaven, however it is grown
so bulky since they left it behind them, and has crept into the Church's
Treasury. But the Apostle acquaints us, that Antichrist will come with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish: 2 These. 2. 10.

S^condly, Declining from their Love to, and Zeal for the Faith, growing cold
and indifferent concerning the Faith; when People have not that affection and
concern for the Faith, with which they seemed at first to entertain and welcome
it. See Rev. 2. 4, 5.

People are too prone thus to Apostatize from the True Faith, after that they
have made a Profession of it: and if Matters be well considered, there is not
much ground to wonder it should be so: For,

1. People do too ordinarily make a Profession of the Faith, upon unsuitable
Motives and Principles: not because they understand it, and have their
Consciences convinced of its truth and excellency; but merely because it is the
fashion and custom of the People where they live, to make such a Profession;
or, it is a Profession that has got into repute; or, upon some other such mean
and fickle Account. Men that have no sound Principles, will ever be for that
Profession which is uppermost, and is attended with most Pomp and Pleasure,
etc. Christ had Followers in abundance, whilst he fed them with Loaves, but
how did they fall off, and slink away, when they failed of their Expectations.
Joh. 6. 26.

2. Multitudes content themselves with a mere notional knowledge in Religion,
and take no due care to digest Truths, and turn the Principles of Religion into
solid Nourishment: Now the Doctrines of Religion, if they do not sink down into
our Hearts, if they have not a powerful efficacy on our Affections, if they do
not put us invincibly upon such a Course of Life, as bears some proportion with
their nature and tendency, they have no fast hold on us, they will soon
evaporate, we shall easily part with them. Luke 6. 49. Let the Food we eat, be
never so good and wholesome for the kind, if we do not digest it, if our
Stomachs do not turn it into good Chyle and Nutriment, it will soon become
nauseous, and the least provocation will make us vomit it up again.

3. God does often, in just Judgment, leave those to be hurried away by an evil
Spirit of Delusion and Impiety, who having long enjoyed the means for their
instruction and settlement in the True Faith, have made no careful improvement
of the same, for those ends. God ordinarily suffers such to be led away by
Satan and his lying Emissaries, into Opinions drametrically opposite to the
plainest Truths, as well as to those vile affections which prompt to all
uncleanness, and practices which are inconvenient, even according to the
dictates of natural Light. Such are a ready and self-prepared prey to him,
whose coming is after the workings of Satan, etc. 2 These. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.

4. Over-loading Ecclesiastical Offices with Worldly Revenues, Temporal Power
and Dignities, has contributed very much to the prejudice of Christianity: Too
true did that voice prove, This day is poison poured into the Church. These
things are powerful baits, and strong temptations to ambitious, covetuous,
domineering Persons. Those who have such Offices so dressed up and beautined, to
confer and bestow, need not doubt, but they shall find Advocates enough, for
their own particular Opinions and Ways, though never so Erroneous. And when
Errors and Superstitions are backed with Power, Greatness, Wealth, etc. Oh,
what multitudes will they draw after them! Besides, when those who have not a
mighty concern for the Interests of real Religion, are too much advanced in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, and raised above themselves, it too usually falls out,
that an arbitrary Imperiousness starts up, and prevails, and then things of no
great moment, and for which Christ and his Apostles thought not fit to engage
their Authority, or lay any stress of Religion on, get into their heads, and
must needs be made terms of Christian Communion, that they may be sure their
Authority is acknowledged. What Contests and Divisions have been raised and
created by this means? What Heats and Animosities have been this way
occasioned? Hereby Differences have been carried to such heights, that at last
Religion it self is even lost in the Quarrels commenc't about its Vestments and
Trappings. How have People's zeal or fury about things, called Indifferent,
extirpated or quenched all serious and due concernment for the true Interests
of Religion! It Is to be feared, that hence there is occasioned an indifferency
in the minds of multitudes, touching the great Substantials of Religion, which
does surpass the Indifferency of the things themselves, for which we have so
desperately contended. The love of Worldly Grandeur carried Demas away from the
Faith, 2 Timothy 4. 10. And over much concernedness for little Extra-Religious
Matters, gave the Apostle ground to suspect, that those who were so affected,
would not be so honest, firm, and faithful to the Faith of the Gospel, as good
Christians ought to be: Observe how he expostulates with them, and lays down
the grounds of his fears touching them. Gal. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12.

5. God permits Afflictions, Persecutions, and Sufferings to be brought on them
who profess his Truth, not only to try the Graces of the Faithful, and to make
their Graces appear more illustrious by their eminent exercise; but that
Hypocrites and mere Formalists, who have no real love for his Truths, nor give
any hearty assent unto them, may be discovered, and have their disguises taken
away. In times of peace and quiet, and whilst the true Religion is on the
thriving hand in the World, many pretend to it, who too much resemble Erasmus's
Good Christian, who appeared a very zealous Professor, he would always have a
New Testament hanging at his Girdle, on one side; but then he must have a
Bottle of good Sack hanging on the other side.

As long as the True Faith has outward Honors, Preferment, Carnal Pleasures,
and Ease accompanying it, it will not want Followers and Attendants: but when
Storms and Persecutions do arise, and it is separated from these external
Allurements, they will soon shake hands with Religion, and court whatsoever
shall be dressed up in its former Robes. Such as espouse the True Religion, not
for its native Excellency, but for its gorgeous Attire, and great Dowry in this
World, will in all probability, when Persecutions arise, part with their Faith
rather than their Pleasures, Wealth, and Ease; they will sooner throw away
their Bibles rather than their Bottles. 1 John 2. 19. Mat. 13. 20, 21.

Now, if there be such danger of people's Apostatizing from the True Faith,
after they have made a profession of it, it must certainly very importantly
concern all who profess the Protestant Religion, that is, True Christianity, as
taught and delivered in the Holy Scriptures, and as purged and reformed by the
guidance and direction of this Divine Rule, from all those Errors and
Corruptions which have, either through people's heedlessness, crept into the
profession of Christianity, or, through design, have been slily ushered into
it, or, by imperiousness, have been forced upon it: I say, it very highly
concerns them to take care, that their Minds and Hearts be so fixed and settled
in the Faith of the Gospel, that they may never be removed from their
Constancy, that they may not be as Children tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of Doctrine, by the slight of Men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. Ephesians. 4. 14.

It should therefore be our care to get our Minds furnished with clear distinct
Notions of those Truths in which the Scriptures do instruct people: It is not
enough, that we can talk over, in a general way, the Doctrines of Religion; we
ought to labor for an explicit knowledge of Divine Revelations; so that we
may be able to prove and confirm every part of our Profession by express and
clear Scriptures; 1 Pet. 3. 15. The Ignorant Man will be always wavering. Yea,
we should strive to get the Truths we profese and understand, very strongly
indeared unto our Hearts, so as to prefer them above all Worldly and Carnal
Interests; and to have our Affections, yea, our whole Souls brought under their
Power and Influence, their Government and Sovereignty: our Souls should so
cleave unto them, they should be so precious and dear unto us, that neither
Frowns nor Smiles, Promises nor Threats, may make any unhappy impression on us;
but the more blustering any Storms may be, which can arise, the deeper root we
may take, and grow the more firm and stable. Phil. 1. 27, 28. For,

1. We must expect to meet with Trials and Sufferings for the Faith of the
Gospel, which will overwhelm and ruin us, if we be not well provided against
them. Our Passage to Glory, is through many Tribulations. We have many and
various Enemies, who will mischief us, and obstruct us all they can, who will
do their utmost to prevail with us, both by fair and foul means, to make
shipwreck both of Faith and a good Conscience: We are not only exposed to the
malice, rage, and spite of absurd and unreasonable Men, but to the craft and
fury too of those infernal Fiends, who prompt and excite their carnal and
earthly Tools and Instruments, to vent and vomit forth their rancour and spleen
against the True Faith and its Professors. See Ephesians. 6. 12, 13. 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9.
Rev. 2. 10. If you be not well fixed in the Truth, how can you expect to hold
out, when temptations and sufferings shall come? When you shall be in danger of
loosing Estate, Liberty, all that is dear to you in the World, yea, Life it
self, for your Religion? Did not the House built upon the Sand fall, when the
Rain descended, and the Winds blew, and beat upon it? Mat. 7. 26, 27.

2. Apostasy from the True Faith is a very heinous provoking sin: is not this
to offer God the utmost affront we can, and in effect, to say all manner of
evil of him? Do we not hereby charge him with being the greatest Impostor that
ever was? Is not this to throw the foulest dirt that is possible upon Religion;
yea, openly to avow, that Satan and his drudgery are much better, more ligible
than Christ and his most Holy Faith? That God is not to be trusted, and that
his Religion is not what he represents it? O what abominable, what innumerable,
what monstrous wickednesses are bred in the womb of Apostasy! And what direful
consequences and fruits may those expect, who thus affront, and incense the
Almighty God against themselves! He will not have a gracious regard for such:
He will cast off, and punish severely, all those that cast him off, and deal
treacherously with Him. The Just shall live by Faith, but if any Man draw back,
my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. Heb. 10. 38. The Lord Jesus Christ will
reject them, and be ashamed of them, when he shall appear in all his Glory.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and
sinful Generation of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes
in the Glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels. Mark 8. 38. Though you set no
value on Christ's Love at present; and care for no more, but that you may have
the Countenance of great Persons, and enjoy the Pleasures and Wealth of the
World; yet remember, that it will not be long, before ye shall have other
apprehensions of things than now you have: It will not be long, before you
shall perceive all these things you prefer before the Faith of the Gospel, to
be very empty, and void of all satisfaction, and full of torment and horror:
when Christ shall appear in Glory, with his Holy Angels, all these things will
fail you: and how you will howl and roar, and complain then? What tears will
you then shed? How will you curse your Apostasy, and all that helped it forward?
And now, when your Case is thus helpless, thus dreadful, and all your
Comforters are gone, the Lord Jesus and his Mercy will fail you too; he will
send you to them, whose favor you preferred before his, who will tremble and
quake as much as you; and to your Wealth, which will then disappear; and to
your beloved Pleasures, which will then be bitterer than Gall and Wormwood: you
must only expect to behold his frowns, and to feel the terrible discoveries of
his insupportable displeasure: you can expect no favor at his Hands. See Prove.
1. 24. to the end. 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. Nay, you have no good ground to hope you
shall prosper in any of those designs you intend to drive forward by, or under
your Apostasy. God does very often notably blast such projects; He causes some
remarkable and very fatal Curse to accompany those who relinquish his Cause and
Truth. What was Judas the better for his thirty pieces of Silver? What a sorry
Plaster was this for a wounded Conscience? What a poor comfort to a justly
despairing Soul? What a fearful end have they ordinarily come to, who have
forsaken Christ and the Gospel for Preferment, Wealth, or any Carnal Interests?

3. The more we are confirmed in the Faith, the greater measure of inward
Comsort we may confidently look for, if we should be called to suffer for the
Truth. God will not leave such comfortless, they shall have experience of his
gracious, refreshing Presence and Supports. The Disciples, when publicly
disgraced and whipped, they went away rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to
suffer for the Name of Christ. See Acts 5. 41. 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4, 5.

4. You will hereby be in a capacity of doing others eminent service, by your
Instruction, and Counsel, and Example. It is a great mercy not to cumber the
World, not to live uselessly and unprofitably, to do real good Services to
people in our Generation: nay, more, you will hereby be in a capacity of doing
much to retrieve the Credit and Honor of Religion; which has indeed been
horridly betrayed, and prostituted by Hypocrites, and wicked pretenders to it.

5. The Promise of God is only to those who stand fast, who do persevere and
overcome. A Profession, be it never so good and Orthodox for the matter of it,
will turn to no good and comfortable account to particular Persons, unless they
faithfully adhere to, and persist therein. To them who by patient continuance
in well doing, seek for Glory, Honor, Immortality, and Eternal Life. Romans 2.
7. To him than overcomes, will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in
the midst of the Paradise of God. Rev. 2. 7. Rev. 2. 5. He that overcomes
shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son. Rev.
21. 7.

These, and considerations of the like nature, which will easily occur unto
you, should make some impression on you. Have you had your Bibles so long, and
means of Instruction, so much above all others, who are of the contrary
Persuasion; and what, will you now throw away your Bibles, as being imperfect?
Will you hood-wink your selves, or be content to be led blindfold, by Guides
that either cannot, or will not see? Are you weary of the glorious Light of the
Gospel? What sort of people are they in St. Paul's Judgment, who dislike the
glorious Light of the Gospel? 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. Can you now at last be contented
with the poor Glowworm light of simple Tradition; or, an uncertain wavering of
Ignis fatuus, which certainly leads all who foolishly resign up themselves to
its conduct, out of the true way into very hazardous Inconveniences? Quit you
like Men, yea, quit you like Christians; labor and strive to get your Minds
and Hearts justly fixed in the Religion you profess. Be not so soft and easy,
be not so foolish and inconsiderable, be not so unreasonable, so distracted, so
irreligious, as to suffer your selves to be so frighted out of your Religion,
or slattered and collogued, cheated, and childishly allured out of it; nor yet
to be so jeared and laughed, and lampooned out of it; and then you will be pretty
safe: for their Arguments and Reasonings (if you are wise) will never do you
hurt.

The Religion you profess, contains all in it that is necessary, yea, that can
be really useful to any Man, in order unto his having a safe and sure conduct
to Heaven; and, why should any Man desire to go further? None of the Apostles,
none of the ancient Martyrs, dared either to die for, or teach any other
Doctrines than what your Religion does comprize. And what! will it not content
you to keep pace with them? Must you needs exceed and outstrip them? Take need,
the more ambitious, proud, and presumptuous you are, the less safe you are.
Lucifer and his Comrades had the most dreadful and unhappiest fall that ever
Creatures had; and it may be, to be wise above, or (if you like the Phrase
better) to be Religious beyond the Scripture, may in the end, prove to have a
great Affinity with that they were guilty of. And if so, the punishment of that
fault, must bear some proportion with the other. I would cherish as much
charity, with reference to those who manifest any pious Sentiments, in the
Persuasion contrary to ours, as is possible. But yet I must needs say, that no
solid proof has ever yet been produced, that any Persons ever yet suffered
death comfortably for any of their peculiar and proper Doctrines taken
abstractedly from those which we justly profess, and was accepted with God for
so doing. But we have Instances enough, of those who have joyfully laid down
their Lives for the Doctrines we profess, abstractedly from all those wherein
they differ from us; that is, those which they have added to the Scriptures,
and the suffering, and bearing witness to the Truths we own and profess, have
been of great account with God. Should the worst you can imagine follow on your
firm adhering to the Faith you profess, viz. That you shall be persecuted and
suffer for it; yet this should not startle nor discompose you. That is but a
sorry Religion, that is not worth suffering for. There has been more Blood
cheerfully parted with, more Tortures joyfully endured for the Religion you
profess, than for any, it may be, for all other Causes in the World. If you are
called to suffer on this Account, your Cause is so good, you need not be afraid
of any Enemies terrors, you have no occasion to be troubled. 1 Pet. 3. 14. The
Comfort is unexpressible, which you may warrantably expect. The Holy Spirit is
promised to be a Comforter, more especially, to those who are persecuted, and
who suffer for this Religion. Joh. 16. 7. What glorious Rewards are there for
you in Heaven? The more like you are to Christ in his Sufferings, the more you
shall resemble him in Glory. Romans 8. 17. Mat. 5. 11, 12. Alas! consider matters
well, though the worst should come to the worst. Shall you loose your Estates,
your Wealth, your Houses, your Friends, your Relations, yea, your Lives? And
what then! What are these to your Souls! What are these to Eternal Glory! These
are poor, mean, uncertain, perishing things at best these may be taken away
from you on other Accounts; you may have all these, and yet no Comfort. But you
may be exercised, (will you say) with cruel Usages, with Tortures impossible,
according to Humane Judgment, to be born with any patience. Be it so, make the
worst you can of it, they cannot be answerable, for vehemence and horror, to
the Torments in Hell; they cannot lie in the Balance with the Glory and Joy of
Heaven. Romans 8. 18. Be they never so great, one smile from Christ will render
you insensible of the pian. How many, upon the Racks, and in Flames, for this
Religion, have publicly declared and manifested they felt no pain? And have
you such numerous examples and presidents, take heart then, and go on as they
did, joyfully in the strengrh of you God. How many have ventured all, and
sustained all, both in former Ages, and in this present Age, in a neighboring
Country, with astonishing Joy, for this self same Religion? But Oh! what will
you loose, and what must you suffer, if you wickedly depart from your God, and
renounce his Truth? Would you be in Judas his despair, or sustain the horror
Spira was filled with, for Worldly Favor and Preferment? Would you be willing,
for ease and pleasure here, to be the object of God's heaviest displeasure for
ever? To be shut out of Heaven, to be continually followed with God's Curse? To
be a perpetual Companion of Devils, and the worst Sinners? To lie roaring and
howling, to all Eternity, in unquenable flames? In a word, consider how the
Faith you profess, is the Faith which God Almighty has taught and appointed,
which the Lord Jesus has born witness unto, and sealed with his Blood, which
the Apostles preached to the World, and suffered for; the Faith which has been
justified and confirmed by multitudes of most real and undeniable Miracles; a
Faith that is pure and peaceable, and tends most entirely to propagate and
increase all that is truly excellent and praiseworthy amongst Men; a Faith
which God has taken care of in all Ages of the Christian World, and which
assures its sincere Professors of things incomprehensibly great and glorious
hereafter, and fills them with unspeakable peace and comfort at present, amidst
all the Suffering they can be exposed to, on its account: a Faith God has
wonderfully freed from the Corruptions which were formerly mixed with it, in
these Nations; and for which, He has often and even miraculously appeared, in
discovering and blasting the projects, the designs, and the attempts of its
most subtle and unreconcileable Enemies: a Faith your Ancestors, after mature
consideration, prized above all their worldly Interests, and Lives: a Faith,
they took a great deal of care and pains to have transmitted to you pure and
undefiled: a Faith, which brought with it multitudes of outward Blessings; and
which occasioned these Nations to be eased of a Yoke, which all the
Inhabitants, who had ingenious sense, complained often of, and groaned under: a
Faith you cannot part with, but in all probability, you will again involve your
selves in Calamities and Miseries, like to those out of which your Predecessors
strove with all their might to extricate themselves. Have you an ambition now,
to expose your selves and your Posterity to all the mischief and evil, which
people of the adverse persuasion, have been known industrious and unwearied to
bring upon those they look upon as Heretics? Are you resolved to pull down
with your own hands, upon your selves, all the sad and direful Plagues which
are reserved to be inflicted, in the next World, on them who perfidiously
betray the Faith of the Gospel, and wickedly Apostatize from the True Religion?
If not, then take care, and look well to your selves, and see that you be fixed
and confirmed in the Protestant Religion. And therefore,

1. Be sure you be built upon the true Foundation. Take heed you profess not
the True Faith, merely because it is owned by any Society of some particular
extrinsical denomination: any particular Church may fall. There is a Body of
Men now in the World, who assume to themselves a very glorious Title; and yet,
when a just enquiry is made, and the largest allowances Charity can prompt to,
are yielded them, that Society can only pass for a very corrupt part of the
Christian Church: and yet the ancient Inhabitants of that place where the Head
of this Society has fixed his See, were a people, in St. Paul's time, so
hearty in, and true to the Doctrines of Christ, their Faith was spoken of
throughout all the World. Romans 1. 8. Where are any tracts and footsteps now, of
those Churches you read of in the Revelations? And yet God never forsakes any,
till they first forsake him. There has been, I fear there is still, altogether
a fault amongst us, that we are immoderately concerned for the credit and
outward grandeur of particular Parties; and Christians are respected, not for
their being Christians, but for their espousing some distinguishing Notions and
Characters of Man's devising. I am persuaded, God will utterly overthrow, at
least, mightily abase Men's affections to, and zeal for all Party-making
Notions amongst Christians, before he will raise his Church to that prosperous,
flourishing State prophesied of, and promised in the Scriptures. There must be
more Love, and Charity, and Unanimity amongst Christians. Christianity will
endure to the End of the World: but as for all the Modes and Fashions of Man's
devising, wherewith any do dress up the Profession of Christianity, these may
all fall to the Earth, as the Inventers of them have fallen, or will fall. Mat.
16. 18. Gal. 6. 15. The True Foundation you should be built upon, is that of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the Chief Cornerstone.
Ephesians. 2. 20. Therefore,

2. Embrace nothing as an Article of Faith, or part of Religion, but what the
Holy Scriptures are express, or very clear concerning. You have in these
Scriptures all that is necessary to any Man's Salvation. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17. Joh.
20. 13. Believe no Man, nor no Society of Men in these Cases, further than the
Scriptures do warrant what they teach. Act. 17. 11. Isai. 8. 20.

3. Be not extremely hot and zealous about any thing, but what the purity of
Faith, and power of Godliness are really concerned in. Good Men and Orthodox
Christians may have different apprehensions about Matters of small moment,
without much prejudice to their own Souls, or the common Faith, provided these
Differences be managed without uncharitableness and unchristian violence: But
too much heat and violence about things, diverts from the weighty matters of
God's Laws, and Religion soon sensibly decays. Phil. 3. 16. Gal. 6. 16. Tit. 3.
9.

4. Expect and prepare for Trials. Christ has dealt plainly and openly with
us: In the World ye shall have Troubles. See Mat. 16. 24. Learn to resign up
your selves, and live in expectation of Sufferings. Read 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13.

5. Be earnest in Prayer, that your Hearts and Souls may have an inward, real,
spiritual, affectionate sense of the Truth and Importance of the Doctrines of
Christianity. 1 Cor. 2. 12, 13, 14.

6. Study the Holy Scriptures diligently, and make them your daily delight.
Psalm. 1. 2. Psalm. 119. 97, 98.

7. Make a good Improvement of the plain, faithful Ministry of the Word,
whilst you can enjoy it: you know not what Times may come. 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.

8. Take heed of Self-confidence, and depend wholly on thy Savior.

9. Learn to be expert in using every part of the Christian Armor. Ephesians. 6. 13.
etc.

10. Watch your selves carefully, and your Enemies too. 2 Pet. 3. 17.

11. Take a due care that your Faith may effectually influence you to all
Holiness of Life and Conversation. That Man is in a great preparation to
renounce his Faith, that has prostituted his Conscience, and is regardless how
he lives. 1 Timothy 1. 19.

Read, consider, and improve what is offered unto you, and the God of all
Grace, who has called us to his Eternal Glory, by Christ Jesus, after that we
have suffered a while, make you Perfect, etc. 1 Pet. 5. 10.

FINIS.

