CARENT NIHILO CARI DEO
Hen: Do: Carry Baro de Leppington Comes Monmouthensis, et Honmi: Ord: Balnia
Eques.
portrait Guil: Faithorne fe:



I RAGGVAGLI DI PARNASSO: OR ADVERTISEMENTS FROM PARNASSUS; IN TWO CENTVRIES.
WITH THE POLITIC TOVCH-STONE.

WRITTEN ORIGINALLY IN ITALIAN By that Famous ROMAN, TRAFANO BOCALINI; And now
Put into ENGLISH By the Right Honorable, HENRY EARL of MONMOUTH.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Prince's Arms in St Paul's
Churchyard, and Thomas Heath in Russel Street, near the Piazza of
Covent Garden, 1656.

THE TRANSLATORS EPISTLE TO HIS COUNTRYMEN THE READERS.
THe Spaniard Mendosa may seem to have reason on his side, when he says,

El Ambition de la Emprenta es una Colpa que no basta arrepentirse:

Ambition to be in Print, is a fault past repentance. Which he goes about to
make good, by asserting, that,

Una dia es siempre Maestro del otro; y contra lo que si scribe oy, estara
Manana quien sabe mas:

One day is Master of another, and whatsoever is written to day, there will be
somebody who will know more to morrow. And this he likewise seeks to prove,
saying,

Y quien no supo menos Air?

And who knew not less yesterday? But all this is but a seeming truth, and
nullum simile est idem. For, as for his first Position; If Knowledge be the
thing of this World which is most to be aspired unto, (as certainly it is) to
impart this Knowledge unto others, is so far from being a fault, as it is
rather a great piece of charity, which is truly said to cover a great many
faults. Does not our Savior say, No man lights a Candle to set it under a
Bushel? And if monopolizing any earthly commodity, be an adjudged grievance; to
monopolize Learning, is questionless the worst of monopolies. In the next
place, what he brings for proof of this his position, may receive this answer:
That if nothing should be written to day, there would but few know more to
morrow. And so likewise for answer to his question of our yesterdaies
knowledge, it would be as much as that of this day, had nothing been either
said or done yesterday. But alas! I am not so happy as to be concerned herein;
who not having any thing of mine own worthy of my Countrymen, do but present
them with that in English, which was written many years ago in Italian; and
part whereof (though not above the fourth part, and some of that but in part
also) has been formerly Printed in our Language by some others, who may
peradventure have forborne publishing the rest of the Ragualia's, or
Advertisements, which you have fully and faithfully here laid down before you;
as not thinking them all so highly seasoned, nor so full of salt, as those
which they have picked out, and which belike made more for their then present
purpose. But as for my part, I must confess, that after having at the desire of
some friends, fallen upon this Translation, I found so much Gusto in it, and
not any thing that without injury to my Author, I thought I could leave out; as
I shall believe them to be of a queasie and depraved stomach, who shall not find
enough therein to please their palats: For my Author is an Ambodexter, plays
rarely well at the Back-Sword, gives sometimes very home and sharp Stockadoes;
and in fine, lays about him hard on all sides, without any fear (Marry I
cannot say as usually it follows) or Wit: For believe me, you will find no lack
of that in him, but sufficient to please all Parties, howsoever they stand
affected. And having said this, I leave him to your further perusal, hoping
that the more you read him, the better you will like him, as did, and does,

Your Compatriot, MONMOUTH.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST CENTURY OF ADVERTISEMENTS.
ADVERT. 1. THe Society of Politicians open a Warehouse in Pernassus, wherein
are sold diverse sorts of Merchandise, very useful for the virtuous living of
those that are Learned. 1 Advert. 2. The usual Guard of Pernassus having taken
a Poetaster, who had been banished Pernassus, upon pain of death, found a pair
of Cards in his Pocket; which when Apollo saw, he gave order that he should
read the Game of Trump in the public Schools. 4 Advert. 3. Apollo having
notice how Henry the fourth, that Potent King of France, was most wickedly
assassinated, ordered for the indemnity of his beloved French, that powerful
succor should be sent from Arcadia into France. 5 Advert. 4. Whilst Michel
Angelo Buonaroti was copying forth the ilfavoured forefront of Anneus Seneca's
House, he was asked by Pierius Valeriano, wherefore he did so? And Buonaroti
gives him the reason. 7 Advert. 5. The contention which arose between many
Learned men, touching which is the best Political Law, which the most
praiseworthy Order in the flourishing Commonwealth of Venice, is decided, and
fully ended by the very Venetian Liberty, which with the joint agreement of all
the Learned men, was chosen Umpire. 8 Advert. 6. A learned Laconick is severely
punished by the Laconick Senate, for not having used requisite brevity in his
discourse. 14 Advert. 7. The Censors of Learning do severely punish one of
their Associates, who in his more mature years, seemed to be pleased with
Italian Poetry. 15 Advert. 8. Apuleius his Golden Ass, and Plautus his
Asinaria, complain to Apollo of their Masters great severity, and receive no
very pleasing answer. ib. Advert. 9. A Summary of what the Learned in Sciences
have sowed and reaped. 16 Advert. 10. Menante comes into the Politicians
Warehouse, and by the Merchandises which the Learned buy there, he studies how
to know the quality of their Wits. 17 Advert 11. The excellent virtue of
loyalty and faithfulness being secretly departed from Pernassus, Apollo, when
he knew where she had hid her self, sent the Muses, Melpomene and Thalia, to
persuade her to return. 21 Advert. 12. In the General Diet of the Learned,
appointed by Apollo to be held in Helicon, his Majesty, contrary to all men's
expectations, decrees Eternity to the name of Vicenzo Pinti, called in the
Court of Rome, the Knight of the Lute. 22 Advert. 13. John Francisco Peranda
with much ado gets leave of Apollo to be admitted into Pernassus, and despises
Jerolomo Fracastoro's proffer, who would have restored him to his eyesight,
which he had lost. 23 Advert. 14. The Italian Academies send Commissioners into
Pernassus to obtain some remedy from Apollo for their corruptions; and find the
business impossible to be effected. 25 Advert. 15. Anneus Seneca being accused
before Apollo of two foul Vices which were commonly found in all the Sects of
Moral Philosophers, does excellently well defend his own Cause, and the like of
his Associates. 26 Advert. 16. Ambassadors are sent from the College of
Gardners, to Apollo, to obtain some Instrument from him, whereby they might
without any cost or charge, cleanse their Gardens of all improfit able herbs,
and are laughed at by his Majesty. 27 Advert. 17. A doubt arising upon the truth
of an usual saying, That a man must eat a peck of salt with another, before he
can perfectly know him. Apollo makes the point be argued in a general Assembly
of Learned men, which he causes to be called for that purpose. 28 Advert. 18.
The Hircanians send Ambassadors to Apollo, to be resolved by his Majesty in the
Important Article, Whether it be lawful for the people to kill a Tyrant? 29
Advert. 19. Nero the Emperor, for a very singular commendation given him by
Cornelius Tacitus, rewards him with a gift of 25 Mules laden with Crowns of
Gold. 30 Advert. 20. The Vertuosi visit the chief Church in Pernassus, and beg
of God an important favor. 31 Advert. 21. Apollo, to encourage Senators of
Free Countries, to cultivate Liberty, without affecting Tyranny, causes an
exceeding woeful spectacle to be shown in Melpomene's Amphitheatre. 32 Advert.
22. The Inthroned cademians, having admitted the chief she-Poets, or Poetesses
into Pernassus, Apollo commands that they be taken from thence. 34 Advert. 23.
Justus Lipsius being solemnly admitted into Pernassus, the next day after his
entrance, did, contrary to all men's expectation, accuse Tacitus for being
impious, and reaps but little credit thereby. ib. Advert 24. A mournful day in
Pernassus, in commemoration of the unhappy Introduction of the Grace-Cup. 40
Advert. 25. The principal Monarchies abiding in Pernassus, ask the Illustrious
Venetian Liberty, by what means she obtains the benefit of so exquisite
secrecy, and such exact obedience from her Nobility? And received from her
their desired satisfaction. 41 Advert. 26 Francis the first, that Potent King
of France, meeting the Lady Philosophy naked, proffered her his Royal Mantle;
which would not be accepted. 43 Advert. 27. Apollo complains bitterly of the
muses, for that they inspire many mean wits with Poetical fury; and they defend
themselves excellently well. 44 Advert. 28. Torquato Tasso presents Apollo with
his Poem of Giurusalemme Liberata, or Godfrey of Bullen; For which Lodovico
Castelvetro and Aristotle, are severely reprehended by his Majesty. 45 Advert.
29. Cornelius Tacitus is chosen Prince of Lesbos; whither being come his
success proves not good. 47 Advert. 30. Apollo being aware of the great
disorder occasioned amongst men by the flight of Fidelity; By assistance of the
Muses, and of the sublimest heroic virtues, procures her return to Fernassus.
51 Advert. 31. In the time of Carneval, the Vertuosi in Pernassus run Races,
an^ make other demonstrations of mirth and jollity. 52 Advert. 32. The Militia
of Ianisaries, seeing one of their soldiers ill rewarded, mutiny in the
Ottoman Monarchy, and are by Apollo quieted. 56 Advert. 33. Apollo f^ees Carlo
Sigonio, and Dionigi Atanigi, the first being accused of Ingratitude by Pietro
Vittorio, and the other by Hanibal Caro. 58 Advert. 34. Publius Terentius being
by Order from Giasone del Maino, an Urban Praetor, charged with Fornication, is
by Apollo freed, with much derision to the Praetor. 60 Advert. 35. Public
Audience is given by Apollo, wherein by wise answers, he decide* many affairs
of his Vertuosi. 61 Advert. 36. Harpocrates being found by Apollo to be
ignorant, is driven out of Pernassus. 73 Advert. 37. A Learned Roman desires a
Receipt from Apollo, to make him forget certain great injuries which he had
received at a great Prince his Court. His Majesty gives him some of the water
of Lethe to drink; but with bad succes. 74 Advert. 38. The Duke of Laconia is
accused before Apollo to have Idolatrized a Favorite of his, for having
advanced a faithful Secretary to the highest State-preferments; and he defends
his cause excellen^ly well. 75 Advert. 39. The people of the Island of
Mitilene, their Prince being dead without issue, argue whether it will be
better for them to choose a new Prince, or to set up Liberty in their Country.
78 Advert. 40. James Creyton, a Scotchman, having incenst the Vertuosi in
Pernassus, by a proud defiance, was so shamed by them through a bitter jest, as
without ending the dispute, they forced him to forgo Pernassus. 82 Advert. 41.
After strict examination of such as were to be chosen, the List of Governors is
filled up in Pernassus. 83 Advert. 42. Argus makes proffer of himself to the
Duke of Venice, to guard the Virginity of their Illustrious Commonwealth; and
his offer is not acc^pted. 88 Advert. 43. The Florentines in their Pastime
called the Calcio, admit of a spruce ^orreign Courtier, who wins the Prize. ib.
Advert. 44. Batista Platina being bastinadoed by Agustino Niso, complains to
Apollo (little to his reputation) of the injury received 90 Advert. 45. Apollo
knowing what mischief overmuch riches causes to Poets, exhorts the magnanimous
King of France, Francis the first, to moderate his profuse liberality which he
used toward them. 91 Advert. 46. Apollo having found out the first Inventor of
Guns, as he is about to punish him severe^y for his fault therein committed;
the Artificer defends himself very well. 92 Advert. 47. The Roman Monarchy
desire to be resolved by Cornelius Tacitus in a Politic Doubt; and receive
full satisfaction therein by Melibeus, the Mantuan Shepherd, who was casually
there. 94 Advert. 48. The Vertuosi of Pernassus, in the Assembly of Focide,
decide the mystery of an Host; and find the keeping of an Inn to be a Noble
Heroic Virtue. 97 Advert. 49. A Literato severely punished for saying that
Duels were somet^ necessary. 98 Advert. 50. The ^ukes, Marquisses, and other
Titulati of Pernassus, complain grievously to Apollo, that their honorable
Title of Excellency, should be given to Doctors of Law and Physic. ib. Advert.
51, (...) Marquess who caused his Genealogy to be made by Scipio Ammerati,
found himself so ill dealt with by him, as he re-demands the reward he gave
him. 101 Advert. 52. A dispute arising amongst the Vertuosi, touching the truth
of certain sayings and speeches of wisemen, their true meanings were argued and
resolved in the General Diet celebrated in Helicon. 102 Advert. 53. Apollo at
last grants admittance into Pernassus to Francisco Sforza, Duke of Millan,
which he had long denied to do, upon a hard condition, which h^ accepted of.
105 Advert 54 A dangerous contention which arose amongst the Pedagogs in
Pernassus, upon a very slight occasion, is appeased by Apollo. 107 Advert. 55.
For remedy of many disorders which are found in History, a General Assembly of
Historians being summoned, Apollo publishes a severe Edict against them, and
many Historians are reprehended for their errors. 107 Advert. 56. Apollo, to
secure the Rivers of his State from Piracy, makes Bernardo Capello General of
the Ionick Sea, an gives him excellent direct^ons. 112 Advert. 57. The Prince
of Epire's first son being born* he is thereat so afflicted, as he forbids that
any shows of joy be made for it in his State. 113 Advert. 58. Apollo erects a
new Tribunal in Pernassus, for the punishment of flatterers; but succeeds very
unfortunately therein. 114 Advert. 59. Apollo being very far in love with
Torquato Tasso's good conditions, creates him Prince-Poet, and Lord
High-Constable of Italian Poetry. 116 Advert. 60. A Literato desires of Apollo,
the Art of Memory, for which he is laughed at by his Majesty. 118 Advert. 61
Juven^l refuses a challenge given him by Francisco Berni, to contend with him
in Satirical Poetry. 119 Advert. 62. Domitio Corbulone being severely
prosecuted by the Quarantia Criminale (a Venetian Magistracy, consisting of
forty men) for some words spoken by him in his Government of Pindo, which were
formerly declared by Apollo's public Edict, to be Tyrannical; is at last
ac^uitted with much praise. 121 Advert. 63. The Chair of private Tranquillity
being void by Diogenes the Cynicks promotion to a higher degree, Apollo offers
it to the famous ^hilosopher Crates; who refuses it. 122 Advert. 64. Many
people having wasted themselves in keeping great Tables, and going gloriously
attired* desire their Princes to make a Pragmatical Law for the moderation of
such expenses; but obtain not their suit. 123 Advert. 64. Johannes Bodinus
presents Apollo with his six Books of his Commonwealth; wherein it being found
that he approves of Liberty of Conscience, he is sentenced to be burned. 124
Advert. 65. Apollo punishes a Poet severely, for having been so desperate as
to blaspheme. 129 Advert. 66. The Vertuosi of Pernassus visit the Temple of
Divine Providence, whom they thank for the great charity which she has shown
to mankind 130 Advert. 67. The most excellent Paolo Peruta, by order from
Apollo, declares in the public Politic Schools, what the genuine
signification is, of that Precept in Policy, That to Reign securely, the
people must be kept under. ib. Advert. 68. A Noble born Laconick Senator,
having committed a great fault, the Duke of Laconia thinks it wisdom to pass by
it. 132 Advert. 69. Andrea Alciati finding himself injuriously persecuted* in
his place of Magistracy, flies for help to Apollo, but finds none. 133 Advert.
70. ^he Lady Victoria Colonna begs of Apollo in name of all the Feminine Sex,
that such married men as are Adulterers, may suffer the like infamy as unchaste
wives do. 135 Advert. 71. Caesar having taxed Marcus Brutus of ingratitude, in a
full Assembly of great Personages, they challenge one another. 136 Advert. 72.
Certain subjects desire their Princes that the infinite multitude of Laws which
they live under, may be reduced to a lesser number; and that the Governors of
Provinces may be forbidden to publish every day new Proclamations. 139 Advert.
73. The Vertuosi of Italy beg of Apollo* that Philosophy may be treated on in
the Italian Tongue, and are denied their request. 141 Advert. 74. Apollo shows
unto his Literati the true meaning of the Latin Sentence, Homo longus, raro
sapiens, A tall man is seldom wise. Advert. 75. The Ruota di Parnasso having
decided a Point in difference between the Military men, and the Literation the
Military men's behalf, are aware of their error, and withdraw their Sentence.
143 Advert. 76. Aristotle being besieged in his Countrey-House by many Princes,
is by them forced to revoke his Definition of a Tyrant. 144 Advert. 77. By
Order from Apollo, a general Reformation of the world is published by the seven
Wise men of Greece, and by the other Literati. 146 Advert. 78. Apollo hearing
of the happy alliance of the two illustrious daughters of Charles Emanuel with
the two Noble Princes of Mantua and Modena, commands that extraordinary
demonstrations of joy be made thro^ghout his whole Dominions. 162 Advert 79.
The ancient Commonwealth of Rome, and the Modern Vene^ian Liberty, argue
together, what the true rewards of honor be, by which well ordered
Commonwealths do acknowledge the worth of their well-deserving Senators. 164
Advert. 80. The people of Lesbos, after Cornelius Tacitus ran away from them,
choose Anna Momorancy, by Apollos appointment, for their Prince. 167 Advert 81.
The excellent B^lognian Physician, Jovanni Zecca, sels in Pernassus the true
Antidote again^ the French Pox. 168 Advert. 82. The Literati of Parnassus do
with great solemnity, celebrate the Holy day dedicated to the laudable
Lawrel-Leaves. 169 Advert. 83. Apollo having highly commended the King of
Spains Decree, That no Advocates nor Proctor should go into the Indies: The
Doctors of Law quarrel grievously with his Majesty for it. 171 Advert. 84. The
chiefest Literati of Pernassus desire Apollo that Tacitus may re-compose those
Books of his Annals and Histories which are lost. 172 Advert. 85. Apollo being
advertised that ignorant men took up arms against Learning, puts himself in
posture to defend his Ver^uosi. 173 Advert. 86. Justus Lipsius, to make amends
for his fault in having accused Tacitus, is so intent thereupon, as he is
accused before Apollo to have idolatrized him; for which, after a seigned
punishment, he is at last praised and admired by his Majesty. 175 Advert. 87.
The Queen of Italy being much entreated by her chiefest Princes, and by
Apollo's self to pardon the injuries done by those Italian Commanders who took
up arms against her, in assistance of Foreign Nations* denies to do it. 171
Advert. 88. The whole generation of sheep, send their public Ambassadors to
Apollo, by whom they make their desires known, that they may be and to have
sharp teeth, and long horns, and their desire is laughed at by his Majesty. 173
Advert. 89. Nicholas Machiavel being banished Pernassus upon pain of death, was
found hidden in a friends Library, for which his former sentence of being
burned was executed. 175 Advert. 90. Apollo visits the Prisons, and in his
visitation dispatches the causes of many Literati accused of sundry faults, and
imprisoned for debt. 177 Advert. 91. A great Prince in discharge of a Vow that
he had made, carries a rich Vessel to the Temple; which the Priest receiving
with show of great sadness; the Prince desires the reason thereof; and receives
satisfaction. 188 Advert. 92. Apollo forbids the Shepherds of Arcadia to fatten
hogs any more; and being earnestly entreated to revoke that his Decree, denies
it. 189 Advert 93. It being observed that Pero Trasea, in company of his son in
Law Elvidius Priseo, frequented the houses of the chiefest Poetesses of
Pernassus; he is severely reprehended for it by Apollo ib. Advert. 94. A chief
Senator of Poland, whilst he corrects another Senator, who is a friend of his,
is made aware that he himself is he who goes astray, and needs amendment. 191
Advert. 95. A controversy arising between the Governors of Pindo, and of
Libetro, in point of Jurisdiction: Apollo punishes them both. 192 Advert. 96.
Apollo sentenceth Hanibal Caro to pay his forfeited security, for the wounds
which he gave Castelvetro. 193 Advert. 97. Dante Aligieri being assaulted by
night in his Countreyhouse, and ill used by some disguised Vertuosi, is
relieved by the great French Ronsard. 194 Advert. 98. All the Princes of the
world beseech Apollo that he will insert into their people the love of their
Country. 195 Advert. 99. Apollo makes a general hunting of Pismires and
Tortoises, as being both of them beasts of evil example to mankind. 196 Advert.
100. Apollo refuses to receive a Censure presented him by a Literato, which
was made upon the Poem of an Italian Vertuosi.
A TABLE Of the CONTENTS of the Second CENTURY of ADVERTISEMENTS.
ADVERT. 1. THe Province of Phosides, does by her Ambassadors complain to
Apollo, that his Majesty's Officers do not any whit observe their privileges;
and are not only not listened to in what they do say; but receive a harsh
answer. 199 Advert. 2. Apollo makes use of the unfortunate Count St Paul, to
frighten the Nobility in Kingdoms from rebelling against their natural Lords,
at the pressure of foreign Princes. 200 Advert 3. Great Euclid, for having
distasted some powerful men, is cruelly beaten by their Bravoes. 201 Advert.
4. In a Duel which happened between an Italian Poet, and a Vertuosi of Spain, the
Spaniard being wounded to death, did so gallant an action before he expired, as
Apollo gave order that he should be solemnly buried at the public charge.
ibid. Advert. 5. Apollo having used great diligence to come by any of the Idols
of Princes, proceeds with severity against one, who fell in^ the Judges power.
203 Advert. 6. All the Monarchies of the world, affrighted at the overgreat
power and successful proceedings of the German Commonwealths, consult in a
general Diet, how to keep themselves from being in time oppressed by them 205
Advert. 7 The people of Phosides, treating how they might rise in Rebellion, by
reason of the Relation which their Ambassadors made unto them, who were
formerly sent to Apollo, to pray hat their privileges might be observed: the
remedy fittest to be applied to such a disorder, is discussed in his Majesty's
Council. 219 Adver. 8. A great controversy arising in point of precedence,
between the Prince of Bisagnano, and Dr. Juliano Corbelli of St Marino. Apollo
refers the consideration thereof to the Congregation of Ceremonies, by which it
is decided. 220 Advert. 9. Apollo publishes a very severe Edict against some
Literati, who under a cloak of feigned picty, cover downright avarice. 221
Advert. 10. The City Praetor, or chief Justice of Pernassus, complains bitterly
before Apollo of the Triumviri; a Magistracy newly instituted by his Majesty,
that in an Edict of theirs published against Minius, and other Ministers of
Princes obscenities, they have violated his Jurisdiction. 222 Advert. 11. The
Inhabitants of Phocides fall into open rebellion, by reason that the
Privileges of their Country ^re not observed by Apollo's Officers; they are
pacified by a Senator, and send new Ambassadors to his Majesty. 223 Advert. 12.
Whilst some Poets paralleld the greatness of Rome with that of Naples, a
dangerous dispute arose between them; Apollo, to the end that his Vertuosi
might know what to say and believe in a business of such importance, commits
the cause to the Rota of Pernassus, who decide it. 226 Advert. 13. Theodoricus,
that famous King of Italy, having ofttimes pressed very much to be admitted into
Pernassus, is a ways denied by Apollo, for a very important reason. 227
Advert. 14. Apollo, according to his usual custom of the first day of every
month, hears the Petitions of such as desire to be admitted into Pernassus. 228
Advert. 15. At a public meeting, Force (contrary to the custom of the Plebeian
Court) pretending to take place of Reputation; that beautiful Lady, with
excellent resolution, finds a remedy for her reputation, which was in great
hazard. 246 Advert. 16. Giovan Francisco Pico, Count of Mirandola, that he
might the more quietly attend his studies, entreats Monsignor Dino da Mugello,
Auditor of the Exchequer in Pernassus, that the Reformers, by reason of the too
great noise which they always make in their profession, may be removed further
from his neighborhood; and is not heard in his desire. 247 Advert. 17. Tacitus
being excluded from out of the most famous Commonwealths of Europe, makes a
grievous complaint to Apollo; and is by them with much honor received again,
and much made of. 249 Advert 18. The blindman of Forli, that famous Italian
Mountebank, being, to the wonder of all the Senate of Vertuosi, admitted by
Apollo into Pernassus, is by his Majesty put upon an employment of importance.
250 Advert. 19. Luigi Alemanni having in an elegant Oration set forth the
praises of the French Nation, repented that his action afterward, and desired
leave of Apollo, to make his Recantation; but was not permitted so to do. 252
Advert. 20. Corbulone having with much honor ended his prefixed time of
Government in Pindo, a Patent to continue the same Jurisdiction for one year
longer, is graciously sent him by Apollo; which he refuses to accept of. 253
Advert. 21 Sebastian Veneri, Duke of Venice, after his admittance into
Pernassus, desires Apollo that he may have the precedence given him before
Hereditary Kings and Monarchs; and obtains a favorable Decree from his Majesty
254 Advert. 22. Apollo being greatly moved to compassion, by seeing a poor
soldier, who had lost both his hands in the Wars, go a begging, does sharply
reprehend Princes for their ingratitude to Military men. 256 Advert. 23. Apollo
greatly compassionating the lamentable shipwreck which his Vertuosi make in
great Princes Courts, to secure their Navigation, commands some of the chief
Literati of his State, to make a Card whereby men may sail by land. 257 Advert.
24. Ariadeno Barbarossa being driven by a sudden storm, splits upon the Scogli
Cursolari, and Maturino Romagasso, Captain of the Guard of the Gulf of Lepanto,
endeavors his escape, when he might have taken him prisoner. 262 Advert. 25.
Epictetus, a Stoic Philosopher, who finding his Sect to grow much deformed,
asks leave of Apollo to ground a new Sect of Reformed Stoics; and is rather
reprehended by his Majesty, then commended. 263 Advert. 26. The Nobility of the
Commonwealth of Achaia, not being able any longer to endure the insolency of
the Commons, who Governed the State, send Ambassadors to Apollo, to obtain a
Prince, who may Govern them; and receive a gracious answer. 265 Advert. 27.
Apollo having for a just cause removed Gulielmo Budeo from the Lord Treasures
place, confers the aforesaid place upon Diego Covarruvia, a Noble Spanish
Literato, and Dean of the College of the Grand Sages of this Court, though he
was much gainsaid therein by the French Monarchy. 266 Advert. 28. Monsieur
Jovanni de la Casa having presented Apollo with his most useful Galateo, meets
with great difficulties in many Nations, in having it observed. 269 Advert. 29.
Apollo finding that wicked men, by making use of the sword of Justice to injure
honest men, do make his Tribunals become very hateful, to remedy so great a
disorder, institutes a Committee of the greatest subjects of this State; but
has but bad success therein. 272 Advert. 30. Marcus Brutus desires Lucius
Brutus, to show him the perfections of the Conspiracy which he so happily
brought to pass against the Tarquins; and the Imperfections of that Conspiracy
which he so miserably executed upon Caesar. And receives desired satisfaction
from him. 273 Advert. 31. Marcus Cato having, to the infinite dislike of
Princes, writ the word Libera underneath the Motto, Pugna pro Patria, which was
set upon his Gate, is commanded by Apollo to put it out. 275 Advert. 32.
Socrates being found dead in the morning on his bed, Apollo uses all possible
diligence to learn the true reason of so sudden a death. 276 Advert. 33. The
Hereditary Princes in Parnassus, do very much press Apollo, that the Emperor
Tiberius may be removed from their Classis, and placed in that of Tyrants; and
he defends his cause victoriously before his Majesty. 277 Advert. 34.
Hippocrates having advised Apollo how to prevent the frequent deaths of sick
folks, occasioned through the ignorance of Physicians, and proving unfortunate
in that his advice, is in great danger of being severely punished by his
Majesty. 282 Advert. 35. Francisco Mauro, a Noble Italian Poet, having married
the most virtuous Lady, Laura Terecino, is soon after jealous of her, and kills
her. 284 Advert. 36. Thais, that famous Curtizan of the Comic Poets, is at
last, though after much debate, admitted into Pernassus; who, much to Apollo's
satisfaction, tells what good she hopes to bring to his Court. 286 Advert. 37.
The Ambassadors of the Province of Marca being sent to this Court, in a public
Audience, complain unto his Majesty of an unfortunate affair which has befalne
his Inhabitants of that Province; for which Apollo provides sufficient remedy,
with singular demonstration of true love and affection. 289 Advert. 38.
Gonzalvo Ferrante Cordova, desires Apollo that the Title of Magno, or Great,
may be confirmed unto him; and instead of being granted his request, rece^ves a
very u satisfactory answer. 290 Advert. 39. Many of the French Nobility entreat
their Monarchy, that according as the Nobility of Commonwealths do, it may be
lawful for them to use Merchandising; and are by her shamefully denied. 293
Advert. 40. The Honorable Title of Messere being fallen into a miserable
condition, is shamefully driven out of the Kingdom of Naples; and not being
received into Rome (as it is thought it should be) for its last refuge has its
recourse to Apollo, who assigns it a very satisfactory abode. 295 Advert. 41.
The Censors of Pernassus, having by order from Apollo, published a rigorous
Edict against Hypocrites, are forced to moderate it by reason of a weighty
particular discovered unto them by Plato. 296 Advert. 42. The Immense bulk of
the Ottoman Empire, which was thought by the wise men to be everlasting, does
now of it self so destroy it self, as it threatens present ruin. 297 Advert.
43. The Prince of Helicon desires by an Ambassador of his, from Apollo, the
privilege of ordaining birthright amongst the Nobles of his State; which his
Majesty denies to grant. 298 Advert. 44. The Duke of Alva being accused of
cruelty, for having with exquisite deligence caused two of the prime subjects
of his new Principality of Achaia, to be imprisoned, slain, and afterward
secretly buried in their very prisons, defends himself stoutly before Apollo.
301 Advert. 45. A chief subject of the Province of Macedonia, being hired by
the Prince of Epire at a great salary, when he came to know the right cause why
that Pension was given him, does magnanimously refuse it. 303 Advert. 46. The
tenth of June is observed as a sad and mournful day in Pernassus, in memory of
the unfortunate loss of the Decads of Titus Livy. 304 Advert. 47. Apollo having
appointed Hospitals to every Nation, for their fools, puts down that of
Florence, by reason of the few fools that are found amongst the Florentines,
and adds the revenue thereof to the Lombards Hospital, which by reason of the
greater number of fools that flock thither, was run far in Arrears. 305 Advert.
48. Apollo's Sea-Captains, having in one of their Assemblies made many useful
Decrees for their Militia, his Majesty orders that they be made known to
Courtiers, and commands the punctual observancy of them. 306 Advert. 49.
Natalis Comes, an Historian, is severely punished by Apollo, for having said
somewhat in an Assembly of the Literati, which did hainously offend his
Majesty. 307 Advert. 50. The chief Monarchies of Europe and Asia, which now
reside in Pernassus, fall sick at one and the same instant, and not being to be
cured by Esculapius, Hippocrates, or any other able Physician, they are
restored to their health by a skilful Farrier. ib. Advert. 51. The Achaians
being much incensed against the Duke of Alva, for his cruel proceeding against
their two Chieftains, take up arms, and drive him out of their State. 309
Advert. 52. An Italian Gentleman, for having lost much blood in the service of
a great Prince, is honored by him with a Noble Order of Knighthood, who being
but slightly esteemed of by those of his own Country, asks Apollo by what
reasons he may satisfy those his deriders, that he was the more richly
rewarded, in that he was paid in honor, and not in Gold or Silver. 311 Advert.
53. Apollo finding that his having allowed the use of the 80 part of one grain
of hypocrisy to his Vertuosi, had wrought very bad effects, does not only
recall that his favor by public Edict, but thunders out exceeding severe
punishments against hypocrites. 312 Advert. 54. Guiccardine having spoken many
things prejudicial to the reputation of the Marquess of Piscara, in an Assembly
of diverse Vertuosi, that renowned Commander does sufficiently justify himself
before Apollo. 314 Advert. 55. The Duke of Alva being accused of cruelty, for
having with exquisite diligence caused two of the prime subjects of his new
Principality of Achaia, to be imprisoned, slain, and afterward secretly buried
in their very prisons, defends himself stoutly before Apollo. 301 Advert. 55.
Giovan Francisco Pico, not being able to reconcile the differences between
Plato and Aristotle, Apollo commands those two great Philosophers to end the
business in a public Disputation; and being therein obeyed, they do not
notwithstanding part friends. 319 Advert. 56. Gonsalvo Ferrante Cordua, not
having obtained the confirmation of his desired Title of Magnus, from the
reverend College of Historians, demands another place in Pernassus of Apollo,
from whence he is likewise excluded. 321 Advert. 57. A Barque loaded with
inventors of new grievances running shipwreck upon the shore of Lepanto, his
Majesty treats them well, though he do greatly abominate such like men. 323
Advert. 58. By Letters intercepted, which were sent by an express from some
Princes to the Lake of Avernus, people come to know that the enmities which are
seen to reign in the Nations of the world, are occasioned by the cunning of
their Princes. 324 Advert. 59. The Prince of the Laconicks Nephew, b^ing after
his Uncles death; to return to a private Fortune, shows no well composed mind
in making so dangerous a passage. 326 Advert. 60. Antonio Perez of Aragon,
having presented Apollo with his Book of Relations, his Majesty does not only
refuse to receive it: but commands it to be presently burned. 328 Advert. 61.
Apollo, to afford pastime to his Literati, makes two useful Scenes be
represented upon Melpomene's Theater: in one of which he shows the lesser
Princes with what wariness they ought to preserve themselves from a greater
Potentate; and in the other, lets Senators of Republics know how ill advised
they are, who through partiality, side with a subject of their own faction, who
notoriously aims at Tyranny. 329 Advert. 62. Lewis de la Tremoglia, a Noble
French Baron, renounceth his Nobility; and all the privileges which he thereby
enjoyed, in presence of the Monarchy of France. 332 Advert. 63. Don Ferrante
Gonsaga being Governor of Corinthus, is exhorted by Domitio Corbulone, severely
to resent a great excess, committed by a chief personage of that City: which
Counsel Gonsaga wisely refutes. 333 Advert. 64. The Prince of Macedon accuses
the Nobility of Athens of Treason before Apollo, who are freed from that
imputation, by his Majesty's Council of War. 335 Advert. 65. A Shopkeeper is
condemned to the Galleys at the very instant that he was seized on by the
Sergeants, not being so much as examined. 3^7 Advert. 66. Bernardino Rota, a
famous Neapolitan Poet, being greatly beloved by the Vertuosi of all
professions in Pernassus, is accused before Apollo, for having purchased so
general a good liking by some ill means. 338 Advert. 67. A Carpenter being
cudgeled somewhat severely for having uttered certain insolent words against
the most noble Scaliger, to his greater calamity, complains first of him to the
Lord chief Justice, and afterward appeals to Apollo. 339 Advert. 68. The great
Emperor Maximilian the first, having said in a great Assembly of the chiefest
Princes of this State, that the Mohammedan Religion was nothing but Policy,
proves by excellent reasons to the very teeth of the Ottoman Monarchy, who
complained hainously thereof to Apollo, that he had said nothing but truth. 341
Advert. 69. Anneus Seneca, after having read Moral Philosophy in the public
Schools of Pernassus, obtains a Writ of Ease from Apollo; and being desirous to
endow the Philosophy-School with a rich Revenue, is not suffered by his Majesty
so to do. 345 Advert. 70. Diego Covarruvia, after having for a short space
exercised the place of his Majesty's chief Treasurer, betakes himself to the
Stoics Sect. 346 Advert. 71. Cornelius Tacitus being imprisoned at the
complaint of some great Princes, for having made some Politic Spectacles,
which were very prejudicious to their Government, is freed by Apollo. 347
Advert. 72. Many Carriers, who contrary to the Laws, brought great store of
Beans into Pernassus, are taken prisoners by the scouts. 349 Advert. 73. Seneca
having bought great store of Poultrey in a Countrey-house of his, which lies in
the Gnides Territories, those people come to the true reason of that his
forestalling the Market. 350 Advert. 74. The Grandchild to the Prince of the
Laconicks, asks counsel of Apollo, what course he should take to live with
reputation in Laconia. 351 Advert. 75. Isabella of Aragon, Duchess of Milan,
being continually prosecuted by adverse Fortune, is brought to a very unhappy
condition in the City of Ephesus. 352 Advert. 76. Many of the Literati who do
much apprehend the severity of the Reformation, which by order from Apollo, is
now in Treaty in Pernassus, do seditiously rise in rebellion against the
Reformers; and his Majesty appeaseth the tumult by applying a fitting remedy.
353 Advert. 77. Many Princes believing that the disorder of their Courts, which
were abandoned by Courtiers, proceeded from the injurious speeches used by
Caesar Caparoli, in his Chapter Della Corte, desire Apollo that it may be
remedied, and obtain their desire. 357 Adve^t. 78. Learned Seneca, seeing that
his late Reformation of his former too splendid way of living, was ill taken by
the Universality of Pernassus, distributes his immense riches in a work which
was greatly commended by all men. 358 Advert. 79. Some Princes of Pernassus,
having spent a great mass of wealth n a stinking sort of Merchaudize, and
having thereby incurred great debts, are forced to confess themselves
Bankrupts, and to leave Pernassus. 359 Advert. 80. Certain prime Politicians of
Pernassus pray the Ottoman Monarchy to tell them the true reason why she makes
short war with her enemies, and are by her satisfied. 361 Advert. 81. The
Vertuosi of Pernassus, after having paid in the accustomed Donative of a
million of conceits to his Majesty's Treasurer, according to their wont, ask a
favor of him. 363 Advert. 82. The Arcadians being up in arms against their
Prince for certain new Taxes imposed upon them, he wisely appeaseth them by
delivering up unto them, him who had persuaded him thereunto. 364 Advert. 83.
Marcus Portius Cato, whilst he reprehends Salustius Crispus for flattering the
Emperor Tiberius, is severely taxed by him for beingtoo obstinate. 366 Advert.
84. Apollo having by a new Edict inhibited Poets to make use of any fabulous
creature in their Verses, at the fervent entreaties of the Poets, his Majesty
revokes the said Edict. 368 Advert. 85. Giovangirolimo Aquaviva, having
overcome a very great difficulty, is with much honor admitted into Pernassus.
369 Advert. 86. The Duke of Laconia, to revenge himself by way of Law, upon a
chief Senator of State, for some private distastes that he had taken at him,
commanded Fleminio Cartaro, his Judge of Assize, to proceed severely against
him upon some heads which he would give him and he denies to obey him. 371
Advert. 87. Some Princes of this State having presented Apollo with a Book of
the Reason of State, the Vertuosi of Pernassus not approving of the definition
of State therein given, publish a new one, which was very much displeasing to
those Princes. 372 Advert. 88. Marcantonio Moreto desires Apollo that he may
have leave to make an Oration in the public Schools of Pernassus, in the
praise of the ^lemency of the most glorious King of France, Henry the fourth;
but is denied it. 375 Advert. 89. A Literato presents Apollo with an Oration
made by him in praise of the present Age; which is laid aside by his Majesty,
as not grounded upon truth. 377 Advert. 90. Christopher Columbus, and other
famous discoverers of the new world, desire Apollo that Immortality may be
aecreed them for their noble daring; but are denied it. 378 Advert. 91.
Sigismond King of Polonia, prefers a Paladine to the prime dignities of his
Kingdom, who proving persidious, the Polack Nobility, thinking the public
reputation was concerned in this private Palatines misdemeanor, revenge
themselves severely upon him. 382 Advert. 92. Apollo having a notorious
hypocrite in his hands, punishes him severely. 383 Advert. 93. Apuleius his
Ass having given his Master two kicks in the breast, is severely punished by
him. 384 Advert. 94. Paulus Jovius presents Apollo with his most elegant
Histories, which give full satisfaction to his Majesty and the College of
Vertuosi; and notwithstanding some opposition that is made, he is admitted with
great applause into Pernassus. 386 Advert. 95. A very famous Literato, who was
imprisoned by the Judges of Assise for being a pratler, is freed by Apollo, as
not guilty of such a crime. 388 Advert. 96. Philip the second, King of Spain,
being offended at what the Duke of Alva had told Apollo, concerning his
Government of Flanders, whilst he seeks to revenge himself upon that his
Minister of State, is sent for by Apollo, who was acquainted with what had
past, and is by him pacified. 389 Advert. 97. Pompey the great having invited
many noble Lords of Rome to be present at the dedication of the magnificent
Theater which he had built in Pernassus, they refuse to come. 391 Advert. 98.
Peter Aretine being again assaulted, Apollo, in respect of the lewd conditions
of that Satirical vicious Poet, commanded that no process should be made upon
that Riot. ib. Advert. 99. Apollo having received news by an express Poet,
whereas he was much rejoiced, communicates it to his Literati with great
Iubile. 392 Advert. 100. A more then usual sweet Odor issuing from the Delphick
Library, Apollo goes himself in person thither to discover the miracle, and
soon finds the occasion of so great a novelty. 394
A TABLE of the CONTENTS of the POLITIC TOUCHSTONE.
Why the Neapolitans are so strangely oppressed, and hardly treated by the
Spaniards. 395 Genua excuses her freedom in Pernassus. 396 The Spanish Monarchy
complains that her falsehoods are discovered. 398 The Spanish Monarchy comes to
Pernassus, and desires Apollo to be cured of an Issue; but is dismissed by the
Politic Physicians. 400 A Secretary of Monsieur de Guise is punished for
having spoken amiss. 405 The Spaniards endeavor the getting of Savioneda, but
in vain. ib. Sir Tho. Moore, an Englishman, asks Apollo when Heresies will
cease. 406 The French desire Apollo that he will teach them the true Spanish
Perfume for Gloves. ibid. The Spanish Monarchy goes to the Oracle of Delphos,
to know whether she shall ever obtain the Universal Monarchy of the whole
world; and receives a negative answer. 407 Philip the second, King of Spain,
after some dispute concerning his Title, enters in great state into Pernassus.
409 All Princes, Commonwealths, and States, are justly weighed in the scales by
Lorenzo de Medici. 410 Why the Monarchy of Spain withdrew her self into her
Palace. 417 The Duke of Alva being arrived at Pernassus, in complementing with
Prospero Colonna, he falls to cuffs with him about Titles, whereof he had
defrauded the Colonnesi. 418 Boccace is assassina^ed by Salviati. 422 The
Sicilian Ambassadors cannot obtain audience from Apollo; but are disgracefully
driven away by his Majesty. ib. Sigismondo Battori has learn the Latin
Tongue. 424 The French are freed out of the mad men's Hospital by the Spaniards.
425 Some for examples sake are made a spectacle to the people. ib. A discovery
made, that the Spanish Officers are wholly concerned in their own profits. 426
Maximilian the Emperor is advertised of the tumults sprung up amongst his sons.
427 The Dogs in the Indies are grown Wolves. ib. The Spanish Monarchy visits
the Queen of Italy, and there pass between them Complements full of kindness.
429 The Monarchy of Spain throws her Physician out of the window. 430 The
Cardinal of Toledo's Summa is not admitted into the Library of Pernassus. 431
Almansor, that was King of the Moors, meeting with the Kingdom of Naples, they
two fall a weeping, and rehearse their miseries brought upon them by the
oppression of the Spaniards. 432 The Conte di Fuentes is admitted into
Pernassus. 437 All the States of the world are censured in Pernassus for their
errors. 439 The Spanish Monarchy invites the Cardinal of Toledo to be Secretary
of State: who refuses: and why. 450 Apollo detesteth the means that are
recommended to him, for getting of moneys. 451
THE FIRST INFORMATION.
The Society of Politicians open a Warehouse in Parnassus, Wherein are sold
diverse sorts of Merchandise, very useful for the virtuous living of those that
are Learned.

THe Business so many Months in Agitation between the Society of Politicians,
and the Ministri Camerali, touching the opening of a Public Ware house in
Parnassus, with large Privileges for Politicians, was the last Week fully
concluded; and they yesterday made a Glorious Show in the Piazza, of all such
things as men stand most in need of: Wherefore Menante thinks not much to
acquaint you here with the chiefest of them, firmly believing, that all gallant
men will be pleased with the notice thereof.

In the first place, great store of Stuffing, or Bombast, not prized by the
meaner sort of men, but highly esteemed by understanding Courtiers, is sold in
this Warehouse: For those of great capacity, know that the shavings of those
finest Clothes which wise men weave with the superfine Wool of forbearance,
serves to stuff up the Pack-Saddles of Slavery, to the end that they may sit
the more easily upon the backs of those wretched Courtiers, and not gall their
lean sides so horribly, as the sides of some are seen to be, who though they be
known to detest labor, are persuaded notwithstanding to go to Court, with
assured hopes of spending their time there merrily, and to command others,
though they themselves serve. It is very observable, that some young men,
though they live at home in the. Fathers houses, have bought good store of this
precious Stuffing, to bolster up some small Pack saddles, which they make use of
in private houses, to the end that they may not come like raw Colts unto the
Court, and that when they shall first undergo that weighty Pack-saddle of Court
servitude, they may not commit those senceless absurdities, which cause the
Court Colt-breakers, to lash them with bitter distastes, the better to inure
them to that toilsom slavery.

There is likewise sold in the same Warehouse, store of Pensils, which are
very excellent for those Princes, who upon urgent occasions are forced to paint
white for black unto the people: And although this be a Merchandise proper
only for Princes, yet do these false Cheaters provide themselves thereof, who
setting their best leg forward, mind only mocking and cosenage, and to feed the
silly multitude with fair words, and foul deeds.

They have also abundance of Spectacles, very wonderful, and of great use:
Some of them serve to give light to those libidinous men, who amidst their
goatish lusts, grow so short sighted, as they cannot discern between honor and
shame, not know a friend from an enemy, a mere stranger from a Kinsman, nor any
thing else to which respect ought to be given. So great is the riddance which
these Politicians make of these kind of Spectacles, as it is evidently known
that few men see well in carnal affairs.

There are other Spectacles of a clear contrary operation, which keep men from
seeing the light; and the Politicians affirm, that though they be generally
good for all men, yet are they particularly more useful for Courtiers, then
those which enlarge the sight. For many loathsome things present themselves
often to the sight of worthy men; upon which, if you shall turn your back, you
may peradventure draw upon you the ill will of Potent men; and to behold them,
is to martyrize ones self. He who upon such an occasion puts a pair of these
miraculous Spectacles upon his nose, shall thereby free himself from the
trouble of seeing the naucious things of this wicked and corrupted world, and
shall make the foolish rabble believe that he eyes them very accuratly.

Others serve to preserve the sight of unworthy men, who the very day that they
have received any new dignity, lean toward ingratitude. The Masters of the
Warehouse say that they are made of the tenacious memory of benefits received,
and past friendships.

But very miraculous is the workmanship of those Spectacles which make Fleas
appear to be Elephants, and Pigmies Giants; these are greedily bought up by
great Personages, who putting them upon the noses of unfortunate Courtiers, do
thereby work such an alteration in the eyesight of those wretches, as, if
their Lord do but lay his hand upon their shoulders, or do but cast an
artificial smile upon them, they take it as acceptably as a reward of 500
hundred Crowns a year.

But the Spectacles lately invented in Flanders, are bought at the dearest
rates by men of highest rank, which they give to their Servants, thereby making
rewards and dignities appear near unto them, which their sight cannot reach
unto, and which peradventure they shall never arrive at as long as they live.

There are sold Moreover in the same Shop (but at a very dear rate) Humane
Eyes, which are of admirable use; for it is not to be believed how much men
better their own affairs, when they look upon them with the eyes of other men.
Nay the very Politicians themselves affirm, that a man cannot arrive at that so
excellent virtue so much endeavored by great men, of Nosce te ipsum by any
other instrument better then by these.

There are certain Compasses also sold in the same Shop, not made of Silver,
Brass, or steel, but of the purest interest of unspotted reputation, which is
to be found in point of honor; and they are exceeding good to measure a man's
own actions by: For it is known by experience, that Compasses made of the base
materials of Capriciousness, and of sole Interest, prove not just to those who
in all their affairs desire to draw parallel lines. These Compasses are
excellently good for those who know how to use them exactly, to take the just
latitude of those ditches which other men out of honor are forced to leap
clean over, so to keep from falling into the midst, and from burying themselves
shamefully in the mire of Indiscretion. Nor can Scapethrifts who have but the
purse of a private man, yet will spend like a Prince, learn the requisite
virtue of cutting their Coats according to their cloth, by any instrument
better then by this. They do likewise sell Mathematical Instruments, used by
Surveyors, which are very necessary perfectly to deliniate those with whom one
has to treat in great affairs, or to impart important secrets.

The same Shop vents likewise great store of certain Iron Instruments, not
unlike such as are used by Surgeans and Tooth-drawers; and they serve to
enlarge the jaws of unfortunate Courtiers, who being to make virtue of
necessity, are oft-times forced to swallow down great Pompions, instead of
little Mastick Pills.

They have likewise great store of Besoms, made of Circumspection, which the
wariest Courtiers make provision of, diligently to cleanse the stairs both
morning and evening, from those dangerous beans scattered thereupon by such
malignant people, who delighting more in spoiling other men's affairs, then in
accommodating their own, practice nothing but how to break the neck of
reputation of men of honor.

There you may likewise have (but at the weight of Gold) very fine Ink, which
being well made use of upon paper, by the labor of learned Writers, serves to
imbalm and perfume the dead bodies of virtuous men; whereas the bodies of the
ignorant cast forth a horrible stench, and are soon turned to ashes: and by
this Ink only are the names of learned men eternized in memory, when the like
of the ignorant, perish as soon as their eyes are closed: A Balsom certainly of
more then humane virtue, since those who anoint themselves therewith, live
after death, and parting only with their body from the world, abide there
eternally in the memory of their Writings.

These Politicians enrich themselves likewise much by an Oil which they sell,
which has sundry times been experimented to be good for the strengthening of
Courtiers stomachs, to the end, that without weakening the complexion of
Patients, these unfortunate people may cheerfully digest the bitter distastes
which they are so often enforced to swallow down at Court.

There is likewise sold in little Glass Viols (of which Menante, who writes
these things, had the good fortune to come by some very cheap) odoriferous
humane sweat, very admirable to perfume those, who by the fragrancy of the
Musk, and Civet of their honorable labors, desire to appear amongst the
learned with pen in hand.

The same Shop vents much Pa^te-royal, very good to sharpen the appetite of
certain obstinate Stoics, to the end that they may greedily swallow down the
loathsome things of this world; which, though they nauseate others very much,
and go absolutely against the stomachs of good men; yet some, that they may not
draw upon them the displeasure of powerful men, and so disorder their own
affairs, are forced to seem very desirous of them, and to hunger after them.

There are moreover in this Shop many Boxes of perfumed Comfeits, very good to
sweeten the breath of such Councellers, Secretaries, and Senators, as are bound
to suffer their secrets to putrify in their bodies.

In a room apart, they sell Horse. Trammels, made of Iron of maturity, which
though they be abhorred by some foolish people, as Instruments fit for Beasts,
yet advized men have purchased them so much credit, as they are bought at dear
rates by those forward and precipitate Wits, who strangely apprehending the
juditious maturity of the weekly Carrier, delight in speedily dispatching their
affairs by the Post.

But there is no Merchandise in this Warehouse which sels better, then certain
Fans, not made of the Feathers of Ostriches or Peacocks, or any other better
colored Bird, but of Herbs and Flowers; and because Andrew Matthiolo, the
Delfick Herbarist, found out amongst those Flowers and Herbs, the Infernal
Wolfebane, the wary Vertuosi of Parnassus have clearly discovered, that those
mysterious Fans serve not to cool ones self in the heat of Summer, but to
drive those troublesome flies from ones nose, which some unadvised men
endeavoring to chase away violently with a Dagger, have shamefully cut their
own noses.

The Second ADVERTISEMENT.
The usual Guard of Parnassus having taken a Poetaster, who had been banished
Parnassus, upon pain of death, found a Pair of Cards in his Pocket; which when
Apollo saw, he gave order that he should read the Game of Trump in the public
Schools.

TO the end that the ignorant sort of people, by their sottishness of soul, may
not profane the virtuous Habitations of Parnassus, Apollo sent many years ago
for two Companies of Riming Poets from Sicily, who were very fortunate in their
Meeter, and had their conceits at their fingers ends, whose Office was to
scour the Country, and keep the fields free. These some eight days ago took
a Poetaster prisoner, who was banished from Parnassus upon forfeiture of life
if he should ever return thither; and who, though he were interdicted the use
of Books, or exercise of Pen, yet he was seen every day, in despite of Apollo,
and in Scorn of the Sovereign Muses, to defile paper with Verses, and even to
pretend to the sublime name of Poet. The misdements of this fellow were much
aggravated by a pair of Cards, which the Sergeants, whilst they were searching
him, found in his pocket; which, as conducing only to vice, are capitally
condemned: They being therefore forthwith brought to Apollo, he was strangely
astonished at the bruitishness of the invention found out by vicious men, to
spend their time, and waste their reputation and means: but his Majesty did
much more wonder, when he understood that the foolishness of these men was
arived at that height, that they called that play, which is done in so very
great earnest, and that they thought it a delight, sport, and pastime, to
hazard that money which is purchased with so much labor, and which serves for
so many things, as without it, Aristotle would be thought ignorant by the
modern world, and Alexander the Great, a Plebeian. Apollo asked this man, what
Game he used to play most at? Who answering, Trump; Apollo commanded him to
play at it; which when he had done, Apollo penetrating into the deep mysteries
thereof, cried out, That the Game of Trump, was the true Court-Philosophy; a
Science necessary for all men to learn, who would not live blockishly. And
appearing much displeased at the affront done this man, he first honored him
with the name of Vertuoso; and then causing him to be set at liberty, he
commanded the Beadles, that the next morning a particular College should be
opened, where, with the Sallary of 500 Crowns a year, for the general good,
this rare man might read the most excellent Game of Trump; and commanded upon
great penalty, that the Platonicks, Peripateticks, and all other the Moral
Philosophers, and Vertuosi of Parnassus, should learn so requisite a Science;
and that they might not forget it, he ordered them to study that Game one hour
every day; and though the learneder sort thought it very strange that it should
be possible to gather any thing that was advantageous for the life of man, from
a base Game, used only in Alehouses; yet knowing that his Majesty did never
command any thing which made not for the bettering of his Vertuosi, they so
willingly obeyed him, as that School was much frequented. But when the Learned
found out the deep Mysteries, the hidden secrets, and the admirable cunning of
the excellent Game of Trump, they extolled his Majesty's Judgment, even to the
eighth heaven, celebrating and magnifying every where, that neither Philosophy,
nor Poetry, nor Astrology, nor any of the other most esteemed Sciences, but
only the miraculous Game of Trump, did teach (and more particularly, such as
had business in Court) the most important secret, that every the least Trump,
did take all the best Coat-Cards.

The Third ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo having notice how Henry the fourth, that Potent King of France, was
most wickedly Assassinated, ordered for the indemnity of his beloved French,
that powerful Succor should be sent from Arcadia into France.

ON the two and twentieth of this present Month, late at night; Apollo heard
by an express Post, sent with all speed from the University of Paris, the sad
news of the murder committed upon the glorious King of France, Henry the
fourth; which news did so afflict his Majesty, as in testimony of his inward
grief, he presently veiled his face with a thick dark cloud, from which for
three whole days he showred down great store of tears: And all the Letterati,
both Spaniards, English, Flemmish, Germans, and Italians, did with abundance of
tears, bewail the unfortunate mischance of so great a King. It must not be
here forgot that Apollo amidst his deepest sighs, was heard to break forth
into these words, That the world was come to the point of being ready to return
to its first Principles, since the wicked perfidiousness of some was grown to
that height of impiety, as they would expose their lives to the Hangmans hands,
rather to purchase bad, than good Fame.

Two days after the Posts arival, solemn Obsequies were ordered for so mighty
a Monarch; so as not only all Parnassus was covered with blacks, but every of
the Letterati put on his long mourning Weed. And to show to all the sacred
College of the Vertuosi, that the Father of Learning was departed this world,
the Mecenas of the Vertuosi, and the very Muses themselves, did with disheveled
hair, assist at the Obsequies in widowy apparel: A piece of sorrow not seen in
Parnassus since the death of Octavianus Augustus. The Learned of all the
Colleges, and several Sects of Philosophers, made above two hundred mournful
Orations; and yet of all the virtues of so great a King, his more then humane
Valor was only praised; and it is very true, that by reason of the many sighs of
the Vertuosi, the Orators were scarce heard: So as Apollo esteeming it a piece
of cruelty to rub the sore of so bitter a wound by continual remembrance, as
was done by Scollership, throughout the whole world, he commanded that the
Obsequies of so magnanimous a King, should be no farther proceeded in, since
such, and so great was the loss, as, lest the world might live in perpetual
affliction, men should strive soon to forget it: and so much the rather, for
that the Heroic Virtues of this invincible King, were arived at such a height
of Eminency, as they stood no more in need of being praised by men. And for
that the noble Kingdom of France may vie and weigh even with Greece it self in
point of Learning (as is clearly testified by the Delfick Library, so fully
fraught with infinite Labors of the French Vertuosi) for the Indemnity of
that flourishing Kingdom, so dear unto his Majesty. And for the better safety of
his beloved French, Apollo commanded that 60000 Pack-Horses should immediately
be sent from Arcadia into France: Some of the Vertuosi wondered much at this his
Majesty's resolution, and told him, that France, which was furnished with so
numerous and so noble a Cavalry, as that she did not only nor know nor fear
danger, but did so far despise it, as that she went in quest thereof even by
night, with the Lanthorn of her undaunted heart, that having with her
invincible Sword won so famous a Kingdom, she would be so well able to maintain
her self in this her present misfortune, as not to stand in need of Arcadian
Pack-Horses.

To this Apollo answered. That his beloved French in this their Modern
calamity, and for the better security of their flourishing Kingdom, needed no
armed Cavalry; but that since the peace and quiet of the Kingdom did chiefly
depend upon the unity of their Natives, that this peace and unity could not be
better come by, by any other means, then by the perpetual remembrance of the
miserable wasting of their Country, cruel sacking of their Cities, of the woeful
loss they had undergon, not only of means, but of reputation in their last 40
years civil wars; and that nothing was so good to put them still in mind of
these so sad afflictions, as these Pack-horses, which by instinct of nature,
did detest passing a second time by the same way, wherein formerly they had run
hazard of breakng their necks.

The Fourth ADVERTISEMENT.
Whilst Michel Angelo Buonaroti was coppying forth the ilfavoured forefront of
Anneus Seneca's House, he was asked by Pierius Valeriano, wherefore he did so?
And Buonaroti gives him this reason,

ALthough the habitation of Anneus Seneca, for pleasantness of situation,
beautiful Gardens, abundance of fresh and clear waters, multitude of Lodgings,
good both for Summer and Winter, and for all other exquisite delights which may
be imagined for humane accommodation, may compare in all points to Neros famous
house of Gold, yet the forefront thereof is like the rotten rack of a Carriers
Stable: Yet did the famous Michel Angelo Buonaroti draw out the design thereof
the other day; which when Pierius Valeriano, as he was passing by, saw, he
wondered very much, that so famous an Architecter should mispend his time in
drawing so loathsome a thing; which made him ask Buonaroti, what singular thing
he could see in that Frontispiece, which deserved the Pensil of so famous a man
as himself? To which, as the same Pierius told me, he answered in these words;
Sir, The skilful do so clearly discern in this Front which appears to you so
ugly, all the rules of Dorick, Tomick, Corinthian Architecture, and of Composts
which are, and yet appear not, as by the opinion of Vitruvius himself, it ought
to be added as the eight, to the seven Wonders of the world. My most virtuous
Iohnghirollimo Aquaviva, Duke of Atri, commanded me to draw this copy which you
see, and told me, he intends to send it to Naples, to some of the Barons there,
who are his good friends, and who being besotted with the vanity of seeming to
be more then what they are, have very much need ocularly to discover in the
workmanship of this forefront, how wise men govern their affairs, who are, and
do not appear.

The fifth ADVERTISEMENT.
The Contention which arose between many learned men, touching which is the
best Political law, which the most praiseworthy Order in the flourishing
Commonwealth of Venice, is decided, and fully ended by the very Venetian
liberty, which with the joint agreement of all the learned men, was chosen
Umpire.

THe gallant Dispute which arose some six days ago between some Letterati of
the State, deserves to be written; who whilst they were discoursing of the
famous Order, gallant Laws, and other rare Institutions, which maintain the
Illustrious Republic of Venice in so great luster, there arose variety of
Opinions between them which deserved the greatest commendation: and for that
every one of these Vertuosie defended their own Opinion as the best; to the end
that so great a difference might be quietly decided, they joined unanimously in
this resolution; that they would all of them personally appear before the most
Illustrious Venetian Liberty, to whom they would first make known their several
senses, and would afterward acquiesce in her judgment. This was then made
known to that Illustrious Lady, who was gratiosluy pleased to give those
Vertuosi what satisfaction they desired.

Peter Crenitus spoke first, and said: That since it was agreed upon by all
men, that all sublunary things, are first born, grow, and increase afterward,
and in process of time decay; it seemed very strange to him, that only the
Commonwealth of Venice, was seen still to flourish the more, the elder it grew;
and that the Laws, Orders, and wholesome Institutions, which after a
relaxation, are at last quite forgotten in other Principallities, were known to
increase in vigor, and exactness, and to be more diligently, and readily
observed only in Venice: which was the cause that in the Venetian Commonwealth
those reformations of Government, those reassumings of State were never seen,
which with infinite tumults the Roman and Florentine Commonwealths had so often
used: it being the peculiar virtue of the Venetian Senate, to perpetuate her
self in her flourishing liberty, by the punctual observance of her ancient
laws; and that those defects not being seen in Venice, which as it appears
other Potentates know not how to shun; and that all diligence though never so
exquisite, does soon terminate in that supine negligence, which bereaves all
Principalities both of liberty and life, he thought he might assuredly affirm
that thorough such wisdom, the Republic of Venice should last as long as the
world did.

Next spoke Angelo Politiano, saying; That he admired the wise Venetian
Commonwealth, for what Peter Crinito had related, and for a thousand other most
excellent orders: but that he thought it to be a very rare thing, that an
Aristocratical Commonwealth, the true foundation whereof was held by the most
understanding Writers upon Commonwealths, to consist in the parity of means
amongst the Nobility; could be so long maintained in so much peace and
greatness, in that disproportionable inequality of riches which was apparently
seen in the Venetian Nobility; in which though there were the two so hazardous
extremes of immense wealth, and great poverty, yet that defect did not appear
in Venice, which humane laws seem not able to inhibit, that the rich should
trample upon the poor, who though they did greatly envy the fortune of the
wealthy, yet either by reason of the immense charity which reigns in all the
Venetian Nobility toward the public liberty, or that the very great riches of
those that possessed them were not made use of to the injury of inferiors; the
poor as well as the wealthy did live peacefully and modestly together in that
happy Country.

After Politiano spoke Pierio Valeriano, and said, that the only miracle which
was to be wondered at in the Venetian Commonwealth, was the rare and miraculous
situation of her Metrapolitan City, from which he thought that the Venetians,
ought immediately to acknowledge the great benefit of their glorious liberty,
as that which has still preserved them from the forces of many foreign
Princes, who have endeavored to put upon them the chain of servitude.

Then said Julius Scalager, that the stupendiousness of the Venetian liberty,
which filled the whole world with wonder, was, that the very Nobility which sat
at the Healm, did not only patiently pay the ancient grievous taxes of the
public Treasury, but with incredible readiness did often times impose new ones
upon themselves, which were afterward rigorously exacted by the receivers: and
that it had been often seen that the Noble Venetians, upon any urgent occasion
of the Commonwealth, rather then to lay any new impositions upon the people,
would open their own Coffers; and did this in so ample a manner, and with so
strange alacrity for the public liberty, as this action deserved the
pre-eminence over all the miracles which were observed to be in the fortunate
Venetian freedom; as that which made it appear clearly to the whole world,
that they were fully endued with that excellent quality which does eternise
Republics, of having their Nobility so hugely in love with living free, as
they did cheerfully prefer the public interest before their own profit.

Next said Bernardo Tasso, that he had lived long in Venice, where he found
nothing to be more wondered at, then to see those very noble Venetians, who did
so much delight in pleasures, pastimes and Idleness, govern the public affairs
with such gallantry, as they seemed to others to be men of exemplary lives, and
Lords born to perpetual labor.

When Tasso had done, Francisco Berny according to his wonted pleasantness,
which did much delight the Venetian liberty, said; That the rarest and most
admirable thing, that great wits were to admire in the State of Venice, was
that all the Channels of that City being full of Gudgins, the Venetian Senators
did notwithstanding take so few of them, as they were deservedly held by all
Nations to be the salt of the earth.

Then Sabilico followed, and said, that whilst he writ the Venetian History,
having diligently observed the excellent institutions of that glorious liberty,
he found nothing more to wonder at therein, then that the public Treasury
should be so faithfully managed, even by needy Senators; as to have their hands
greased with one penny of St. Marks, was held by the Nobility not only to be a
capital excess, but great infamy.

Iaccopo Sanazzarro said then, that it appeared strange to him in the Venetian
Commonwealth, that there being many of the Nobility but of mean fortunes, they
did notwithstanding with incredible patience tolerate their private miseries,
not so much as in a thought, coveting the mass of public wealth, by those
seditious Frumentary, and Agrarian Laws, with which the famous Commonwealth of
Rome was so much vexed by her Citizens; and that it was a thing praise worthy,
and to be wondered at, to see that in Venice, the poor Nobleman strove only
through virtue and worth to comfort himself amidst his miseries; studdying to
make himself worthy to be employed by his Country in advantageous employments;
which made that virtue, worth and honesty, served instead of a rich Patrimony
to the poor Noble Venetian.

Iovanni Ioviano Pontano added, that all that had been said was very
miraculous; but that the greatest thing which he had always observed in the
Venetian Liberty was, that the immense wealth, which some of the Nobility
possessed, did not puff them up with pride and vain glory, as many were seen to
be in other Commonwealths; that therefore it was a rare custom in Venice, that
such Senators who were as rich as Princes, knew how to live at home in their
own houses like private Citizens, and did not differ at all in the Piazza's
from the poorest men. And that the Venetians only know how to separate the
evils of ambition and pride, and the being attended by multitudes of the meaner
sort of Citizens, from great riches, which the famous Roman liberty either
could not, or would not prohibit in Caesar, in Pompey, and in many other
wealthy Senators.

When Pontano had ended his discourse, the Commendador Hannibal Caro said, that
above all other stupendous things in the Commonwealth of Venice, he had
always much admired to see the mighty Prince of so famous a liberty, observed
with so much obsequiousness, reverence, Kinglike Majesty, and Citizen
Authority; and that the coherence of so great veneration, with limited
Authority, the long extent of the Prince his Empire, with modesty, was a temper
not known to the wisdom of the ancient Legislators of former Republics, and
which was happily practiced only by the Venetian Senate.

Bartolomeo Cavalcanti replied next, that as Pontano had observed it for a
great rarity in the Venetian Commonwealth, that store of wealth did not make
rich Senators wise, so was it a much greater portent to see, that the orders of
that excelse liberty, the sacred laws of that eternal Commonwealth were such,
as even the chiefest Places, did not fasten any thing of ambition or pride to
them who did exercise them with great authority; a particularity the more
worthy of observation; for that the like was never seen in whatsoever other
Principallity, or well constituted Commonwealth, as being a thing which did
directly oppugn nature. And that when he was in Venice, he did not admire the
rich Treasure of St. Mark, the Arsenal, the grand Cannale, with the stately
Palaces of the Cornari, Grimani, Foscari, and other magnificent buildings,
built at vast expense in that miraculous City, wonders only obvious to the eye
of ordinary men; but that it appeared marvelous to him to see Signior
Sebastiano Vinieri, lately General of so powerful a Fleet, so famous for the
glorious Naval Victory which he obtained against the Turks, to return a private
man to Venice, and to walk the Piazza with that decent Modesty, as he appeared
not to differ in any thing from those Senators who never stird from the City;
and that it was a singular thing, that in the Venetian Commonwealth, the Nobles
thereof could behave themselves so modestly and civilly at home, who when they
were employed abroad in important Magistracy, and great commands, could with
splendid and Princely liberality make themselves known to the world, not to be
barely Citizens of a well regulated Republic, but men born to command those
who were descended from Royal blood; and that therefore he believed that there
was no Nation in the world that knew better how to obey modestly, and command
gallantly, then the Venetian Nobility: A thing so true, that whereas in other
states, they were forced for the honor of their public Magistrates to put
their Senators in mind with what magnificency of spirit they should make good
the Majesty of their public employments; the Venetian Senate had several times
been necessitated to make severe Laws to inhibit those who did exercise any
authority or jurisdiction out of the City, the using of any splendid
Magnificency.

Thus said Cavalcanti, when Flavio Biondo added; That when he was in Venice, he
was much amazed to see, that in a mere Aristocrasie, the Citizens and Plebeains
lived with such satisfaction in that happy Country, as that for many months
that he tarried there, he could never discern whether the public Venetian
Liberty was better beloved, and held dearer by the Nobility which commanded, or
by the bare common sort of Citizens who obeyed.

Then followed Paulus Iovius, who said, that not only to himself, but to many
great Princes, with whom he had discoursed at large of the miraculous
Government of the State of Venice, it seemed very strange that the Senate of
that Commonwealth studied nothing more then peace, and yet with great vigilance
and asseduity did perpetually prepare for War; and that Armed Peace was only
seen in the flourishing Venetian State.

Iovius was followed by John Bocatchio, who said, that the true Salt which
preserved the Venetian Liberty from the putrefaction and corruption of all
abuse, was that Supreme Queen of all Laws, that excellent Institution, so
inviolably observed by her, that neither the greatness of Parentage, abundance
of wealth, nor the merits of Forefathers were considered in the preferment of
Senators to high places, but the sole worth of him who pretended to the
Magistracy, was weighed: whence it was that there was many vicious and ignorant
Gentlemen of Venice, but only the most virtuous and well-deserving commanded,
and governed with that wisdom which was known to all the world.

But Leonardo Aretine, after having much commended Bocatchios opinion, added,
that the excellent custom of the State of Venice, in not conferring places upon
her Nobility by skips and leaps, but by degrees and gradation, was that sound
Basis whereon the greatness and eternity of such Liberty was grounded; and that
it was an excellent rule, that whatsoever Noble man would arive at the Supreme
Dignities, he must even from his youth begin at the meanest Magistracies: A
wholesome custom which produces the important effect of maintaining that true
and essential equality amongst the Nobles of an Aristocracy, which makes
Liberty long-lived: For with those that understand State Affairs, the parity of
wealth is not that which equals Senators in a Commonwealth; but the making all
the Nobles march on toward the grandeur of the highest Dignities, beginning at
the meanest Employments. A Law well worthy the Venetian Wisdom; which because
the ancient Roman Commonwealth did want, her Liberty was but short-lived, and
yet was still molested with dangerous infirmities, and tumultuous
insurrections. For the base abuse of giving the Consulship of a Free Country,
and the chief places in the Army, to Pompey and Caesar, and other rich Subjects
in the prime of their youth, was no better then to deal with them rather like
men born of Royal blood, like Lords and Masters of their Countries Liberty,
then like Senators of a well regulated Republic. For since it is a certain
truth, that that is a well ordered Commonwealth, where the hopes of some yet
higher dignity remains, even to the worthyest Senators, and men of great merit,
which may serve for sharp spurs to such as are ambitious of glory, to make them
make haste in the straight path of Virtue, that they may the sooner arive at
the Gole of the desired Magistracy; what greater preferment remained to be
hoped for in their age, by Caesar and Pompey, who in their youth obtained from
the Commonwealth of Rome, not without much imprudency, the highest honors, and
supremest dignities, then that absolute Tyrannical Power, to which Caesar
openly, and Pompey more cunningly did afterward aspire? A great
mis-government, and from which the famous Roman Liberty might presage her death.

Though the most glorious Venetian Liberty gave great signs that she was very
well pleased with Aratines opinion, she notwithstanding commanded the remainder
of the Vertuosi, to speak theirs. Then thus began Benedetto Varchi; My
Republic of Florence, which never had the luck to work peace and union between
her noble Families, and that mutual love which does perpetuate the liberty of
Commonwealths, was at last compelled to fall into servitude. Wherefore this
appears to me to be the rarest of humane Miracles, that a noble Venetian,
though never so highly offended by the murder of his children, and in his own
person, being more violently wrought upon by his fervent charity toward the
freedom of his Country, then frighted by the rigor of Magistrates, can with a
free soul put on the hard resolution of forgiving his enemy (at that very
instant) the injury which he has received. Certainly a most admirable
resolution, and so much the more worthy of wonder, as that it is evidently
seen, that the noble Venetian knows how to trust the Senate willingly with the
revenge of any injury he can receive, when sensual men are very loath to remit
the like into the hands of God, from whom we receive all that we have of good.

Thus said Varchi, when Lodovico Dolci added, That if that were true, which is
confessed by all men, that the rarest and most considerable virtue in a Prince,
was to be able with ease, and without any danger, to disarm his Captain
General, and to receive perfect obedience from him, even then when he knew he
was sent for back by an incensed Prince, and one who did much suspect his
Loyalty; his opinion was, that of all other things which the rest had mentioned
of rare in the State of Venice, this was to be preferred, That she did not only
with great ease, disarm her Captain Generals at Sea; but that when her chiefest
Ministers knew that the Senate was highly displeased with them, and that
therefore they were sure to be severely punished: though they were absent well
armed, and in great command, if it should so happen that they should be sent
for by the State, they would with great readiness obey, and laying down their
Arms, and Authority of Chief Magistrates, hasten to Venice to receive Judgment
from their friends and kin^ed, though it might cost them their lives. The
examples whereof had been so often seen in Venice in his time, as it had filled
the whole world with wonder. That therefore he thought he might justly say he
should be much injured, if the so great Authority of the State of Venice, the
so great submission, obedience, and unheard of charity of the Venetian Nobility
to the Public Liberty, were not preferred before all those admirable Laws, and
excellent Institutions, which others had spoken of before him.

The most S^ene Venetian Liberty, which without replying any one word to these
Vertuosi, had heard all these her so many lawdable Customs, and her so many
miraculous Prerogatives, said to Lodovico ^olci, that what he had said, was
very considerable; but that it was a benefit which the Ottaman Emperors
likewise enjoyed, but that she acknowledged all her Grandesta from one only
Prerogative, which she was exactly Mistress of, and wherein she knew she did
excel all Principalities, and all Commonwealths, as well past as present;
which had not yet been touched upon by any of those Vertuosi.

Then said Dionigi Antonigi, That the greatest wonder, and which ought to be
praised even to the skies, was, To see that the dreadful Tribunal of the
Council of Ten, and the Supreme Magistracy of the State-Inquisitors, could with
three Balleting Balls, easily bury alive any Caesar or Pompey, which began to
discover himself in that well-governed State.

Attonigi had no sooner spoke his opinion, but Ierolimo Mercuriali added, That
whilst he exercised his charge of reading in the so famous Schools of Physic
in Padua, it happened that some Plebeians in Venice, being gone according to
their custom, to the Seaside to sollace themselves with some young Courtisans
which they had carried along with them, they were so beaten by some Noble
Venetians, as the former betaking themselves unto their swords, slew one of the
others, and handled the rest but ill. For which fault, being sent for by the
Judges, those Plebeians, although they saw all the Judges in the power of the
offended Nobility, yet they hoped so much in the uprightness of the Senate, and
in the exact Justice of the Tribunals for offenses, as they stuck not to make
their appearance, and go to Prison: Nor were they deceived in their opinion;
for the Judges finding by the defense which they made, how they had been
molested by those Noble Venetians, they were as innocent, set at liberty, to
the eternal glory of the incorrupt Venetian Justice. And that it was a prodigy
not formerly seen, and which could not be believed, but by those that practiced
it, that the Noble man, though of powerful Parentage, famous for his riches,
and of great Authority through the honors he had received in the Commonwealth,
the Citizen proved the harder adversary in pleading, than the Noble man. And
that if the Politic Precept written by great men, was true, That Aristocrasies
never died when the young Nobility used Modesty, and the Tribunals maintained
equal Justice, he could not see when the most happy Venetian Liberty, which was
so severe in punishing the licentiousness of her Nobles, and so exquisitly just
in her Tribunals, should ever have an end.

Learned Ermolao Barbaro would be the last that spoke, who said; That Tyranny
being then introduced in free Countries, when the most important secrets of
Commonwealths was communicated but to a few Senators, the excellent Venetian
Liberty, to shun splitting upon so dangerous a Rock, communicated secrets, and
had the most important business of her State discust in the Supreme Magistracy
of the Pregadi: Wherein were above 250 Senators, and that it seemed very
strange to him, that the Commonwealth of Venice could find that secrecy in so
great a number of Senators, which Princes did often in vain endeavor with such
diligence, and through such liberal gifts, in one sole Secretary, and a couple
of Councellers.

Then did the most excellent Lady of the Venetian Liberty rest her hand upon
Ermolao Barbaro's shoulder, and said unto him; You have found out that precious
Jewel, which I so much glory in, and for which I deserve to be envied by all
the world; for secrecy is no less necessary for the well governing of States,
then good council.

The Sixth ADVERTISEMENT:
A Learned Laconick is severely punished by the Laconick Senate, for not having
used requisite brevity in his discourse.

THat unluckie Laconick Letterato, who expressed that in three words, which was
judged by the Laconick Senate, might have been said in two, and which was
reputed a more then Capital fault, by those Laconicks who are more penurious of
words, then courteous men are of pence; after eight months long and teadious
imprisonment, received his sentence five days ago; which was, That he should
read only once over the War of Pisa, written by Guicchardino; the Laconick
read over the first leaf with much agony; but so horribly teadious did that
rabble of discourse appear to him, as the unfortunate wretch threw himself down
before his Judges feet, who had sentenced him, and earnestly entreated them
that they would condemn him to row in the Galleys during life, that they would
immure him between two Walls, and that for mercies sake they would flea him
alive; for to read those endless discourses, those so teadious Councels, those
empty Harangues made at the taking in of a Pigeon-house, was a punishment which
surpast all the bitter pains of childbirth, and all the most cruel deaths that
ever the pittiless Perillus could think upon, at the instance of the most cruel
Tyrants.

The Seventh ADVERTISEMENT.
The Censors of Learning do severely punish one of their Associates, who in his
more mature years, seemed to be pleased with Italian Poetry.

A Vertuoso was taken yesterday by the Marshals belonging to the Court of the
Censors of Learning, who was found with his spectacles on his nose, reading
some Italian Poetry; and this morning early, by order from Apollo, he received
three sound lashes with a cord first, and was afterward told, that being, as he
was, of the age of 55 years, he should learn to apply himself to graver
studies, and leave the reading of those Madrigals, Songs, and Sonnets, to be
idly spent by those spruce Youngsters, in whom those things were tolerated,
which were severely punished in old men.

The Eighth. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apuleius his Golden Ass, and Plantus his Assinaria, complain to Apollo of
their Masters great severity, and receive no very pleasing answer.

THe eight of this present month, Apuleius his glorious Golden Ass, and the
famous Assinaria of Plantus, appeared before Apollos Majesty; to whom in the
name of all sorts of Pack-Horses, they jointly said, That if those creatures
deserved to be better treated, which were of little charge, and much use, they
had more reason to complain of their Masters, than any other beasts; for though
by their perpetual labor, they bore the greatest weight in their Masters
house, both by day and night; and for their food were contented with a little
course grass and water, and made it a Holy day when they got but a little bran;
yet they were so indiscreetly dealt withal through their Masters ingratitude
and cruelty, as that miserable beasts that they were, they became the spectacle
of all brutish usage; and that since they could not mollify their Masters
cruelty by humble prostrating of their service, they did in all submission
beseech his Majesty, to the end that some bounds, though not utter period,
might be put to their Ass like sufferings, he would vouchsafe to command their
Masters to use more gratitude, atleast more humanity to so meritorious beasts.

To which Apollo answered, That the severity used by Masters to their
Pack-Horses, for which they so much complained, arose not from their Masters
cruelty, since there was none that hated the profit of his own Patrimony; but
that it was occasioned through the great sloathfulness, and monstrous dullness
of the Pack-Horses: For which their Masters were forced by store of bastenadoes
to egg them on to do that which they had not spirit enough to do by any
vivacity of their own wit: And that they who would judge aright of the
cruelties used to any whosoever, must not regard so much his genius, who uses
severity, as the parties condition who complains of ill usage.

The Ninth ADVERTISEMENT.
A Sommary of what the Learned in Sciences have sowed and reaped.

THe Harvest is already over, and the whole increase of this year is brought by
the Possessers thereof into their Grainaries; which though it has been
various, according to the nature of the grounds, and condition of seed, which
has been thereupon sown; yet the Harvest may be said in general, to be
penurious. Since by the public calamity of mankind, peoples wits are become
steril and barren, as well as is the air and earth. Those who have sowed the
study of the Law, have usually had a great increase, and many are much enriched
thereby, particularly those who have cultivated the fields in the Common Pleas;
their Harvest is so plentiful, as it yields fifty for one. Greater things have
been seen in the fruitful fields of the Courts at Rome, where particularly
Silvestro Aldobrandini, and Markantonio Borghese, two Roman Advocates, each of
whose sons were Popes, having sowed the study of the Law with much cost, and
infinite labor, and watered it with their sweat, have filled their Granaries
with rich treasure, and their sons who have practiced the same Husbandry, have
thereby purchased Principalities for their Families, and Divine Dignities for
themselves.

Those who have sowed the study of Physic, have likewise had a good harvest;
but not to be compared with that of the Law; for it gives only twelve for one.
The Plowers of Poetry have seen their fields make a beautiful show in the
Spring of their age, and had great reason to expect a rich harvest; but when in
the beginning of July, the season of earing began, they saw their sweat and
labors dissolve all into leaves and flowers; so as having labored in vain,
the Poets find themselves pil'd and pol'd, not having meat to eat: Wherefore
this sort of Husbandry, as being more for appearance then profit, is almost
given over: But little Greek has been sown, there being in these times but
small vent thereof; which may peradventure be occasioned because the bread
which is made of such grain, although it has formerly been the daily food of a
numerous Nation, it seems notwithstanding that it proves hard of digestion to
the squeasie stomachs of modern weak-wits. Hence it is that some of the more
Learned sort have only sowed so much thereof in their Gardens as will serve for
their household expense, and rather not to appear ignorant, than to seem
learned; and to maintain Seed, but not to make Merchandise thereof. The Seed of
Hebrew is almost quite lost; for it being no longer in use, there are but very
few that sow any; and certainly it redounds much to the general shame of all
men, that this tongue is not ambitiously aspired unto, since God by his
speaking in that Language, has given it so great reputation.

The Husbandmen of Philosophy have even lost their seed; and therefore the
world is about to give over such Merchandise, as that which requires the
fruitful fields of subtle wits, and infinite study to make it grow and come
to maturity; and since it yields but little fruit, and but very few buyers of
that little, to intend it, is to loose the Principal. They who have sowed good
turns (contrary to the opinion of many) have had a most plentiful harvest: and
certainly such seed is as precious as wonderful: For, of many bushels-full
thereof, if one only grain spring up and prosper, it yields so abundant an
increase to the Husbandman, as it makes him rich. It is true, that only
magnanimous minds, and men of great liberality, attend the most noble Husbandry
of sowing Benefits; for the costive avaricious men, whose greediness is such,
as they would reap before they sow, dare not venture to throw that seed upon
the ground, which they see is for the most part lost. Those who have sown
threats and injurious words, have reaped great store of actual offenses; the
sowers of curses, reap great store of maledictions. Those likewise who have
sown tribulation, have reaped so plentiful a harvest of Thorns, as they have
filled their Granaries therewithal, even up to the top, for their own use, and
from those that shall descend from them, even to the sixtieth generation.

The Tenth ADVERTISEMENT.
Menante comes into the Politians Warehouse, and by the Merchandises which the
Learned buy there, he studies how to know the quality of their Wits.

TO make an exact judgment of every man's genius, it is very behooffull to
frequent those places where virtuous exercises are used, and those Shops
wherein vicious things are sold, and to observe them that frequent them. For
Libraries serve as well to make known the lovers of Learning, as living
riotously denotes out Gamsters, or Cooks Shops Gluttons; nor is there a better
way to discover vain men, then to frequent Barbers shops often, and to observe
who those Ganemedes are, who those Narcissi, who having the patience to sit two
hours under the Barbers hands, will be trimmed with such exquisite diligence, as
they spend more time in turning up their beard, then a fair Lady does in
dressing her head: they think that every hair which stands out of order, will
make them appear so many foul fiends when they are in company. Menante
therefore, who is very well acquainted with this piece of skill, entertains
himself often in the aforesaid Warehouse opened in Parnassus, by the College
of Politicians, the which he does, that he may come to know the genius of many
of this Court, by the qualities of Ware which they buy there, that he may
afterward give a more exact account thereof to his friends and acquaintance.

Three days since John Baptista Sanga, a famous Secretary in the Court of
Rome, happened into this the Politicians Shop, who asked one of the young men
if they had any Cole to sell, or no? He was answered, yes: and straightway some
Cole was showed him; which when the Courtier saw, he agreed upon the price, and
bought forty load thereof. Menante wondered to see the Courtier buy so great a
quantity of Cole, which he knew was very disproportionable for him, who kept
but one servant; and being very well acquainted with this Sanga, he with great
confidence asked him, why, having none but himself and servant in the house, he
made so great provision of Cole? To the which Sanga freely answered, that he
burnt no wood in his Kitchen. Menante then asked him whether he did it for that
he found it cheaper to burn Cole? To the which Sanga freely answered; That
living in the Court, he was forced to measure his affairs by the surplusage of
his reputation, not by sparing money; and that he hated wood-fires because they
made a great smoke, and but little live coals; and that the burning of cole was
very good for those that did not love their porredg should smell of smoke; and
that he did not desire that the quality of his victuals should be judged of by
those hounds which are only good at smelling out what men do by the smoke of
his Kitchin-Chimney, but by the copious adorning of his Table.

Next to Sanga, Epictetus entered the Shop, a Philosopher, who for the
excellency of his soul, is of high esteem in Parnassus; and therefore very well
known, admired, and observed by Menante. This man desired the Foremen of the
Shop that they would show him all the sorts of Furs, or fur'd Garments that
they had; and immediately they brought unto him many Minerver skins, Sables,
and other very precious Furs; which notwithstanding this Philosopher liked not;
and therefore told a very spruce Politician who looked to the venting of Wares,
that the skins they showed were too glorious, and therefore not for his
purpose; but that he desired some such Furr as they wore, who would appear to
be good men. When the Politician knew what Epictetus would be at, he led him
into a Room apart from the Warehouse, from whence he came out not long after,
clad in a Lizards skin, lined with Lambskins. And Epictetus having put the
Lizards skin inward and the Lambskin outward, Menante ran after him, and told
him he had put his Garment on the wrong side outward. But he was much amazed,
when that wise Philosopher, after having smiled a little at him, answered, It
may be my Menante, that you know how to put on Spanish Buskins, but not how to
wear these skins: This Robe is worn as you see, the Lizards skin must be worn
inward; I should never attain the end of my intents, if any one hair thereof
appear without.

Menante then returned into the Shop, where he found a great Prince, who
desired to be shown some Ramaivoli da Ministrare: And because they showed only
four, he desired them to bring all they had in the shop; which was forthwith
done. The Prince drew then from out his bosom a lift of all his servants names,
which were in all 320. and first did exactly examine the condition of every
several Courtier, and according to their deserts, bought for every one of them
a particular Ramaivoli; very great ones were chosen for those of great deserts,
and much lesser for the rest; and Menante observed it for a great rarity, that
the Ramaivoli of some ancient Courtiers, and old servants, who despising the
Prince his service had behaved themselves negligently in their several places,
were very little. Certainly a singular piece of justice, to measure a Courtiers
merits more by the assiduety of his service, then by the length of time which
he has been at Court. Menante, who wondered much at the bestowing of so many
Ramaivoli, told that Prince, to whom he ought particular service, that in the
Courts of other great Princes, he had observed that Cooks made use of one only;
wherewith, not with many scruples, but at their own discretion, they did dish
up their porredg. Then said the Prince unto Menante, Friend, I my self have
observed that way of proceeding which you speak of, till now; but with very bad
consequence: For having made use of very unequal dishes in serving out porredg
to my Courtiers, and giving it out to them only as I liked, I have unwisely
kindled in them a fire of such jealousy, rancor, and hatred, as they mist but
a little of utterly undoing me and my State: A fault which has made me see
clearly, that a Prince who will have faithful servants, and careful Officers,
must resolve to be just in his ministering unto them: For Courtiers greedily
longing to taste of the porredg of their Princes favor, when they see their
fellows porrenger run over with fat, and their own empty and lean, they turn
the love which they ought to bear unto their Master, into hatred, their
observance into disrespect, their service into disservice; and grow the more
incenst against their Lords, for that they impute the so unequal dishing up of
their porredg, more to want of love, ingratitude, and partiality, then to
inconsiderateness. And in such like injustice, they complain more of the
scarcity of their Masters good graces, then of their own small pittance. And to
pretend that a Courtier, whose legs his Prince shall cut off with the sword of
disgraces, should speedily run to do him service, is as great a piece of folly,
as is theirs who intending to make their horse run the faster, hold in his
bridle.

This Prince was no sooner gone out of the shop, but another man entered, who
desired that he might see some Clokes which would hang to the ground, for he
was to buy such a one. Forthwith diverse were brought unto him, which he could
not dislike, neither for color nor cloth; only they were all of them too
short. This man was of somewhat a low stature; and that those Clokes should
prove too short for him, which were long enough to reach to the heels of the
talest size of men, seemed strange to Menante. Wherefore coming up to this
stranger, he asked him who he was, and of what profession? To which the other
freely answered, that he was a Sicilian; and that having built and finished two
Galleys at his own charge, he meant to put to Sea with them, and gain by
Freebooting; but because he knew that trade was very hateful to the world, and
but of small reputation to him that used it, he would provide himself of a long
Cloak, that he might cover his intention, and the Interest which moved him to
take up that occupation; and that his pretense might be thought to be, that he
had taken it up only to fight against the ignorant, and such as hated Learning.
When Menante had heard this, he boldly said to the Sicilian, that he did but
lose his labor, for that all the Gloath made in England, was not sufficient to
make such long Clokes for Pirates, but that two handfuls and a half of Thieves
Legs would still be seen.

Soon after a Vertuosi came into the Shop, who desired to see some yard wands,
whereof many were presently showed him; one of which he seemed to like; and as
he was about to pay for it, his servant told him that he needed not to be at
that expense, for he had a very just yard at home. To which his Master
answered, that the yard which he had at home, was just enough for himself; but
that in measuring others, he clearly saw that it was needful to use foreign
yards; for having had some occasion of measuring the stomach of forreiners with
the yard wand of simplicity, and of the candor of his own soul, he found he was
much mistaken.

Afterward Menante saw Lorenzo Gambara, a famous Briscian Poet, enter the
Shop, who seeing a beautiful Indian Parret sitting upon a bench, seemed so
delighted to hear her speak, as he asked her price; and was told that it would
be 150 Crowns. Gambara, who if he could have made his bargen well, might have
had the Parret much cheaper, said he did not dislike the price; but the
mischief was, he had not so much ready money; wherefore instead of ready money,
he would give them the Bed he lay on, the Curtains, and other Furniture of his
House, to be prized by two indifferent men. And the bargain being soon accepted
of by those of the Shop, Gambara took the Parret to carry her home. Which when
Menante saw, he was much scandalized at the Poets so rash resolution, having
till then, taken him for a man of good understanding; and therefore pitying his
simplicity, he asked him why he, who by the clothes he wore, seemed not to have
money to cast away, should out of an humor of having a Parret, not only
foolishly bereave himself of his household stuff, but even of his very bed, the
only repose for bodily labor, and the labor of the mind. To which he
answered, Know my good friend, that to purchase so precious a Jewel as this
Parret, I would not only deprive my self of all my worldly wealth, but I would
sell my self to my skin, and become a slave in the Galleys, rather then miss
her. I am a Lombard born, given to the usual defect of those of my Nation, of
having a free tongue, and a clear heart; Noble virtues in former times, but now
great faults, and which have caused much harm in Courts, and elsewhere, which I
hope to amend by buying this precious bird; which will teach me the virtue
which is unknown to us Lombards, and but too well known and practiced by other
Nations, of suppressing the true sense of the soul, and of speaking only such
words as please others, and which are got without book.

The Eleventh ADVERTISEMENT.
The excellent Virtue of Loyalty and Faithfulness being secretly departed from
Parnassus, Apollo, when he knew where she had hid her self, sent the Muses,
Melpomene and Thalia, to persuade her to return.

THe Noble Palace of Fidelity, which was formerly frequented by Princes, chief
Officers, and abundance of the Senators of the most famous Commonwealths, is of
late so little frequented, as it appears to be the house of desolation: In so
much, as on the 18 of this present month, the abode of so excellent a Virtue
was seen to be shut up: Which, as soon as Apollo heard of, he commanded that
the Gates should be broken open, and that Fidelities self should be asked the
reason of so great a novelty. His Majesty's command was forthwith obeyed; and
the house was found to be totally void of Inhabitants. Which when the Vertuosi
heard, they put on mourning weeds, sprinkled themselves over with ashes, and
made other demonstrations of true sorrow; and Apollo in particular was so much
grieved, and those very effects of inward sorrow were discerned in him, which
he showed when the sad and memorable accident happened of his son Phaeton. And
his Majesty very well knowing that all humane Government would be quite
overthrown, when the firm foundation of Fidelity which sustains, so great a
building should fail, he immediately caused Proclamations to be every where
made, wherein he granted even to the ignorant sort of people, and to all others
that were incapable of the noble Prerogative of living with honor in the memory
of men, a hundred years of immortality, to be given to whosoever should find
out where so renowned a Virtue had hid her self. And he gave Letters Patents
for the making good his word, out of the Bank of Homer, Virgil, Livie, and of
wealthy Tacetus, all of them chief Merchants in Parnassus, who by their
precious Ink, do use the noble Traffic of eternizing peoples names in the
memory of other men. The largeness of the reward, invited many to go in search
of her; and much diligence being used in the pursuit, The Royal Majesty of
Fidelity was found in the Dog-Kennel of that famous Hunter Acteon, and the
beautiful Adonis. This so strange news was quickly brought to Apollo, who
immediately dispatched away the two Learned Muses, Melpomene and Thalia, with
charge to bring her from that place so unworthy of her presence, and to
re-conduct her to her wonted habitation; but all was in vain, for that famous
Princess bitterly bewailing her own unfortunate condition; Say (said she) you
Divine Goddesses, to my Lord Apollo, that fraud who has ever been my capital
enemy, has at last got the victory, in the dispute which has been perpetually
had between her and me, and that base self-interest, which in these unfortunate
times does tyrannize over the souls in all the best Nations, has banished me
from out the heart of man, which was formerly wholly mine. Let his Majesty
likewise know, that the whole world is so sunk in the mud of filthy pollution,
as that Fidelity which has been always resolute to serve her Prince
honorably, even to the effusion of her last drop of blood, and to the emission
of her utmost spirits, and which was formerly so admired and coveted, is now
accounted a foolish and vain ostentation; and tell him, That to have a
fradulent soul, full fraught with perfideousness, and ready to use all
execrable infidelity, thereby the better to fit ones self to the time, place,
and person, is now a days cried up for wisdom, sagacity, and wariness of wit;
and unfortunate I, nautiated to see such approbrious things, was forced to put
on the resolution you see, to live amongst these dogs, amongst which I now
fully find that faithfulness toward their Masters, which I have always so much
labored to ingraff in the self-interessed and perfidious heart of man.

The Twelfth ADVERTISMENT.
In the General Diet ^f the Learned, appointed by Apollo to be held in Helicon,
his Majesty, contrary to all men's expectations, decrees Eternity to the name of
Vincenzo Pinti, called in the Court of Rome, the Knight of the Lute.

It Is four months since Apollo intimated the holding of the general Diet of the
Learned, on the eight of the present at Helicon; where all the Poet-Princes,
the Nobility and Burgesses of the Vertuosies Universities, being met together
early in the morning in the great Hall, his Majesty sat under his Cloth of
State, of transplendent Eternity, environed by the most Illustrious Muses. And
because Apollo had given notice in his Edicts, whereby he specified the calling
of the Diet, that he had done it to give Eternity to the name of a Vertuoso
whom he would propound unto them. Diverse were the opinions of the Learned,
touching who it should be that he would nominate; but the most general opinion
pitched upon Iustus Lipius, a Flemish Gentleman, whose Writings filled Parnassus
with such fragrancy, as they had provoked in all the Vertuosi, rather a
ravenous desire of devouring them, then an appetite to taste them. Others said,
that when the public entry should be made, and audience given in the great
Hall, Eternity should be given to the most famous name of the most Illustrious
and virtuous Cardinal Serafino Olivieri, the Prince of Modern Scholars, who
being lately come to the Confines of Parnassus, was met with unaccustomed
demonstrations of honor, by most of the Vertuosi, who wondered that a man who
had been employed all his lifetime in the laborious charge of the Rota Romana,
the Court of Exchequer, could come to the exact knowledge of Divinity and
Philosophy, that he should be the prime Lawyer of his time, a famous
Mathematician, able Astrologer, and as well verst in the Greek as Latin
Tongue; and that which made the wonder greater, was, that a Prelat so skillful
in so many Sciences, so full of virtues, should die a learner; for thinking
that he knew but little, he in his eightieth year of age began to learn the
Arabic Tongue. The reputation of so noble a Personage was increased by his
famous Library, the which was yet more famous, for having a Master more learned
then all his Books; whilst the reverend College of Vertuosi stood expecting,
which of these two so famous men should be named, Apollo propounded Vincenzo
Pinti, called in the Court of Rome, the Knight of the Lute, for his excellent
skill on that Instrument. The Vertuosi were so astonished at the election of so
base a person, as they in all humility told his Majesty, that they would
willingly obey his commands, but that they only desired to put his Majesty in
mind that his most faithful College of Vertuosi, were unwilling to admit of a
Fiddler into their Society. To this Apollo answered, That he foresaw that the
College would wonder at this his choice, yet wished them willingly to decree
Immortality to this man, for he knew how to command what was necessary, though
it appeared strange to them: the business was then carried by a secret
scrutiny, and Eternity was favorably decreed to the name of the Knight of the
Lute, who was forthwith brought into the College of the Vertuosi, by the
Masters of the Pegasean Ceremony. Then said Apollo to the Knight; You Vincenzo,
are the first of your Profession that was ever admitted into this learned
College; an honor reserved only for those who by their perpetual pains taking,
are come by the knowledge of Learning; but the present necessity of your person
has forced us to take this resolution: See therefore that you teach both
Princes and private men the necessary art of tuning Lutes, wherein many are so
ignorant, as they break the strings by scruing them up too high; and some
humorous fantastical mad wits are more particularly recommended to you, and
which I am certain you will meet withal, who being obstinately resolved to
make the great Base strings act the part of Trebles, they do so strangely
stretch them, as though they be very great and strong, yet they break them, and
quite ruin the Lutes.

The Thirteenth ADVERTISEMENT.
John Francisco Peranda with much ado gets leave of Apollo to be admitted into
Parnassus, and despises Jerolomo Fracasto^o's p^ffer, who would have restored
him to his eyesight, which he had lost.

THough it be many years since Signior John Francisco Perando did much solicit
his Majesty that he might be admitted into Parnassus, and that he used great
means to obtain his request, yet Apollo would never give way thereunto; for
since he brought nothing into Parnassus but a volumn of his Letters, his
Majesty, who is much nauceared with such Compos^urs, said that he was resolved
rather to throw the greatest part of the infinite volumns of Letters which were
in the Library, out of it, then add one new one to it. For nothing but writings
of Invention, and Nocturnal Labors being received into the Delfick Library,
the innumerable volumns of Letters that were there were but troublesome, and
took up a great deal of room. And that all men being full of ambition and vain
glory, and the manner of Modern writing being reduced to the naked speaking
what they think, without any artifice, and that there be but few men who want
business, and who cannot write, the easy admittance of every one that writes
Letters, into Parnassus, would occasion so great an inconvenience, as every
one, though never so meanly learned, would print great volumns of his own
Letters, only to make the miseries and base affairs of his own house known: An
error of the greater consequence, for that immortality is not sold at so cheap
a rate in Parnassus: And that to these so many respects, it was yet further
added, That it was discovered many had been so ambitiously presumptious, as to
publish false Letters written to such a King, or such a great Prince, whom they
had never seen, nor had ever had any business with them; a falsehood the more
worthy consideration, for that in all true Letters, the vivacity of an unlooked
for conceit, sprang from the reallity of the fact, was that which was admired;
whereas feigned Letters were always full of affectation, a thing so much
abhorred by good wits. The noble Caitaneans, did notwithstanding so much favor
this their servant, as they overcame all these difficulties; moreover they made
it appear to his Majesty, that of all Letters that had been yet printed,
Peranda's deserved the first place. Wherefore Apollo, by reason of this
testimony, and for that there were many of Peranda's Letters appertaining to
History, which would be very acceptable to all the Vertuosi, he granted his
request, and gave him the first place amongst all the Italian Secretaries. And
though in honoring this Vertuoso, Apollo (according to his custom) had respect
only to his merits, there were notwithstanding some lavish tongues which durst
affirm, that this was done in favor to the Illustrious Cardinal Henry Caietan,
a Prince who for the magnificency of his Works, for his undaunted courage, his
laudable customs, candid genius, purity of soul, and for all the most excellent
gifts of Nature wherewith he was richly adorned, is usually called his
Majesty's best beloved.

It must not be forgotten, that when (according to custom) all the Vertuosi
were permitted to pass their censures upon Perandas writings, Claudeus
Ptolomeus said that they deserved to be corrected, because there were many
words in them which were not Tuscan. But the Censurer bad Ptolomeus hold his
peace, for that in learned writing, the Ingenious Vertuosi noted the
conceptions, and that they were only malignant Pedants who censured words. And
Peranda having lost his eyesight some years before his death, Ierollomo
Fracastoro proferred to restore him to his sight again; which if he should
effect, Peranda promised him 500 crowns for his Cure. The Physician being then
to do his work, Peranda was set down in a chair, and asked the Physician
whether all things were in readiness wherewith to restore his eyesight? The
Physician said there was nothing wanting, for he had all his Instruments and
Plasters. These things which you have named, said Peranda, do but little import
toward giving me that comfort which I desire by my eye sight: Tell me, how
goes the world? Even as it did, said the Physician, when you fell blind. If it
be so, replies Peranda, I will not lay out my money in recovery of that
eyesight which I willingly lost that I might not see the present world drowned
in those inormious and hateful loathsomnesses, which do so much nauceate good
men's eyes.

The Fourteenth ADVERTISEMENT.
The Italian Academies send Commissioners into Parnassus to obtain some remedy
from Apollo for their corruptions; and find the business impossible to be
effected.

THe Commissioners sent to this Court from the Italian Academies, had not
audience till the twentieth of the present month; at which time they told his
Majesty, that the fundamental Principles of all Academies being excellently
good and virtuous, the Scholars were at first very studious, and diligent in
their disputations, and all other learned exercises; but that this so ardent
desire of knowledge did with time so cool in them, as also those virtuous
exercises; that whereas at first Academies were frequented by private men, and
held in great reputation by Princes; in process of time they grew so forsaken
and despised, as they had often, to the great discouragement of Learning, been
inhibited; as proving rather prejudicial, than advantageous. And that though
many remedies had been applied to this evil, yet none of them had procured the
desired operation: Wherefore the Italian Academies being much devoted to his
Majesty, were forced to have recourse to him, whom they did humbly beseech
that he would be pleased to give them some preservative Medicine against so
great corruption. These Commissioners were very graciously received, and
listened to by Apollo, who recommended the business to the Reformers of
Learning: To whom when the Commissioners came, they found them so employed in
the important business which they are perpetually troubled with, di far delle
sancie fuse, with making much of nothing, as that they excused themselves, as
not being then at leisure to attend that business. Wherefore the Commissioners
returned again to Apollo, who referred them to the Regio Collateral; where the
Academies demands were often disputed and discust; and yesterday they had for
their last answer, That all those Gentlemen after much debate and proposals,
were at last resolved that the saying was true, that Omnia orta occidunt, and
aucta senes^unt. Wherefore it was impossible to prevent, but that a pair of
shoes, how neat and spruce soever they were at the first, should in process of
time become torn and ilfavoured. That therefore the lovers of Learning should
be very diligent, in suddenly suppressing whatsoever Academy had swarved too
far from the good Rules of its first Institution, and at the same time found
new ones, to the end that the world (little to the credit of the Vertuosi)
might not be full of unprofitable Academies, but might always enjoy the
benefit which it receives from good ones.

The Fifteenth ADVERTISEMENT.
Anneus Seneca being accused before Apollo of two foul Vices which were
commonly found in all the Sects of Moral Philosophers; does excellently well
defend his own Cause, and the like of his Associates.

THe last night, to the infinite wonder of all the Vertuosi in Parnassus,
Anneus Seneca, that Prince of Moral Philosophers, and one so well beloved by
his Majesty, was made prisoner; various were the discourses which so great a
novelty occasioned. Some thought that it might be, for that his Majesty would
have him give a very particular account to the world, by what Philosphical
precepts he had in so short a time of his serving Nero, gotten the worth of
seven millions and a half, by which so great riches, he had cast so foul a
shame upon that poverty, and upon that moderation of mind, which in his
writings he had made so particular profession of. A thing so much the more
scandalous, as by the testimony of many Historians, it plainly appeared he had
been a frequent cheater of Legacies, which he had fowlly extorted from wealthy
men. Others said that he was imprisoned for the Adultery which some will not
stick to say he committed with Agrepina; and many were of opinion that it was
for having been cause of the Pysonian Conspiracy against Nero, wherein it was
firmly held that Seneca had not only a hand, but that he had so fowlly given
himself over to ambition, as after so great a fault committed, he had suffered
himself to be persuaded he might become Emperor. Nor were there wanting those
who constantly affirmed that Apollo was exceeding angly with this Philosopher,
for that Nero himself had confessed that the wicked Paracide which he had
committed, was not only done by Sencca's knowledge, but by his persuasion, not
out of any love he bore to his Master, but to make him commit so horrid a
wickedness, that he might ascertain his own so unexhaustable riches which he
had accumulated to his own shame, and his Masters prejudice. But after his
examination, Seneca found, that not only he, but all his fellow moral
Philosophers were accused for having very much scandalized all men by two fowl
vices which they are given unto above above all other men, to wit, of being
revengefull, and ungrateful. It Is said that Seneca acknowledged these
accusations to be true, but that he, nor the rest of moral Philosophers, ought
not to be blamed for what was laid to their charge, since even thereby their
goodness did manifestly appear; for good men never offend any; and
consequently, since they gave no occasion of being injured, it ought not to be
held strange, if they were more mindful of injuries received, then other men,
it being common amongst men, that they know not how to pardon injuries, who
best know they never deserved them. And that likewise for ingratitude which
moral Philosophers were daily seen to use toward their benefactors, it was no
blockishness in them, as was every where affirmed by their illwillers, but that
therein the candor and great goodness of their souls, was clearly discerned:
For moral Philosophers being guided in all their actions by their very cautious
souls, did know by the instinct of Nature that all the good and graces which
they in this world did receive from men, did proceed from the all-powerful hand
of God; it was therefore no wonder that they did not own them from men.

The Sixteenth ADVERTISEMENT.
Ambassadors are sent from the College of Gardners, to Apollo, to obtain some
Instrument from him, whereby they might without any cost or charge, cleanse
their Gardens of all improfitable herbs, and are laughed at by his Majesty.

AMbassadors from all the Gardners of the world, are come to this Court, who
have acquainted his Majesty, that were it either from the bad conditions of
their seed, the naughtiness of the soil, or from the evil celestial
influences, so great abundance of weeds grew up in their Gardens, as not being
any longer able to undergo the charges they were at in weeding them out, and
of cleansing their Gardens, they should be forced either to give them over, or
else to inhaunce the price of their Pompions, Cabiges, and other herbs, unless
his Majesty would help them to some Instrument, by means whereof they might
not be at such excessive charge in keeping their Gardens: His Majesty did much
wonder at this the Gardners foolish request, and being full of indignation,
answered their Ambassadors, that they should tell those that sent them, that
they should use their accustomed manual Instruments, their spades and mathooks,
for no better could be found, nor wished for, and cease from demanding such
impertinent things.

The Ambassadors did then courageously reply, that they made this request,
being moved thereunto by the great benefit which they saw his Majesty had been
pleased to grant to Princes, who to purge their States from evil weeds, and
seditious plants, which to the great misfortune of good men, do grow there in
such abundance, had obtained the miraculous Instruments of Drum and Trumpet, at
the sound whereof, Mallows, Henbane, Dogs-caul, and other pernicious plants of
unusefull persons, do of themselves willingly forsake the ground, to make room
for Lettice, Burnet, Sorrel, and other useful herbs of Artificers and
Citizens, and wither of themselves and die, amongst the brakes and brambles out
of the Garden (their Country) the which they did much prejudice; and that the
Gardners would esteem it great happiness if they could obtain such an
Instrument from his Majesty. To this Apollo answered, That if Princes could as
easily discern seditious men, and such as were unworthy to live in this worlds
Garden, as Gardners might know nettles and henbane, from spinnage and lettice,
he would have only given them halters and axes for their instruments, which
are the true pickaxes by which the seditious herbs (Vagabonds, which being but
the useless luxuries of humane Fecundity, deserve not to eat bread) may be
rooted up. But since all men were made after the same manner, so as the good
could not be known from the bad, by the leaves of face, or stalks of stature;
the Instruments of Drum and Trumpets were granted for public peace-sake to
Princes, the sound whereof was cheerfully followed by such plants as took
delight in dying, to the end, that by the frequent use of gibbets, wholesome
herbs should not be extirpated instead of such as were venomous.

The Ambassadors would have replied again; but Apollo with much indignation,
bad them hold their peace, and charged them to be gone from Parnassus with all
speed, for it was altogether impertinent and ridiculous to compare the purging
of the world from seditious spirits, with the weeding of noysom herbs out of a
Garden.

The Seventeenth ADVERTISEMENT.
A doubt arising upon the truth of a usual Saying, That a man must eat a peck
of Salt with another, before he can perfectly know him. Apollo makes the point
be argued in a general Assembly of Learned men which he causes to be called
for that purpose.

THe common saying, That to know a man exactly, one must eat a peck of salt
with him, being questioned by some Vertuosi, Apollo being unwilling that the
Addages of the Learned, which are general Rules, and inviolable Laws, by which
his Vertuosi steer their lives; being I say, unwilling that the truth of them
should be any ways scrupled at; many days since made it be disputed very
exactly and diligently in a general Assembly of the Vertuosi: Where this saying
was proved to be so true, as many of the Assembly were of opinion that half a
peck more should be added to the former dose; grounding their Judgments upon
this apparent reason, That the shameful vice of dissembling, and infamous
practice of hypocrisy being known daily to increase amongst men, it stood with
all the grounds of good Arithmatick, that as corruptions increased in wicked
men, necessary remedies should be multiplied by the Learned, whereby stoutly to
resist vice in its rise. But not so far to shame the present age, as to show,
that whilst the malady of vice encresed in the world, remedies grew less, the
wiser sort of the Vertuosi thought it not good to alter the ancient measure;
wherefore it was generally concluded by them all, that the saying was very
true, for what concerned men; but was very false in women, who without eating
either salt or oil, knew the very thoughts of their husbands the first night
they lay with them.

The Eighteenth ADVERTISEMENT.
The Hircanians send Ambassadors to Apollo, to be resolved by his Majesty in
the Important Article, Whether it be lawful for the people to kill a Tyrant?

AMbassadors came the 19 of this present monenth from the Warlike Nation of
Hircania to this Court, where two days after they had Audience given them in
great pomp by his Royal Majesty: For the Vertuosi being very desirous to see
the Customs and Habits of Forreiners, came in great numbers to honor
Personages so quallified. The Ambassadors being brought before Apollo, the
chiefest of them said, That the famous Nation of Hircania being at present
miserably oppressed by a Prince, who with unheard of cruelty did Tyrannize over
them, had been persuaded by the fame of his Majesty's wise and true answers, to
send them so far a Journey as to Parnassus, only to know the true decission of
that weighty Question, Whether or no it were lawful for the common people to
kill a Tyrant? It is not to be believed how strangely Apollo was incenst to
hear such a question propounded; he was so mightily moved to anger against
those Ambassadors, as giving no other answer, he straitway rose up in an
unwonted fury, and commanded, that for example to others who should dare to
propound so pernitiously seditious doubts, they should be immediately dragged
out of the Hall; which was accordingly done. Such an action appeared so hidious
to the Illustrious Muses and the Senate of Vertuosi, as not any one of them
durst intercede with his Majesty in the behalf of these unfortunate
Ambassadors. But Apollo seeing much confusion and amazement in the faces of his
beloved Muses, and Vertuosi, said, he thought he had too slightly revenged
himself upon those Ambassadors, for this their so scandalous and perfidious
demand; for that it was not only not lawful for the people to dispute so
seditious an Article, but that they should keep it like fire, from entering into
their breasts, since such a doubt would be apt to cause more mischief in the
world, then Paris his Apple had done. For those that were born in a Republics
Liberty, had no occasion to raise any such Dispute; since in a free Country,
every light shadow, little semblance farr-fetcht suspicion, or least jealousy
that a Senator should affect to Tyrannize over his free Country, was sufficient
to cause revenge be taken by a halter or hatchet, without cavelling upon such
foolish words, and calling in question a business of so great importance; for
in a well governed Commonwealth, if a Senator should incur any such suspicion,
any color, show, or suspicion, though never so remote, ought to serve for so
convincing proofs, as the party accused must first be hanged, and his process
to be made afterward by usual course of Law. But that in Monarchies, where the
base Plebeians were incapable of themselves to discern between a lawful Prince
and a Tyrant, they ought, for the great commodity which the peoples ignorance
gives to such as are ambitious, seditious, lovers of novelty, and such as
despair of their own affairs, of painting out wicked Tyrants for legitimate
Princes, and legitimate Princes for cruel Tyrants; to keep the world from
slaughter and execrable confusion, they ought, I say, according to Tacitus his
precept; Bonos Imperatores voto expetere qualescunque tollerare. Tacit. lib. 4.
Hist. To pray for good Princes, and to bear with any. This being said, Apollo,
who out of his innate goodness cannot endure that any should part distasted
from him, though they by their impertinencies have given occasion of offense,
commanded that the Ambassadors should be sent for back; who when they appeared
before his Majesty, he said unto them, Beloved Hercanians, To people who love
to live peacefully, Ferenda Regum ingenia, nec usui crebras mutationes, Tacit.
lib. 12. Ann. Princes humors are to be born withal, and then especially when
they are occasioned by puniard, venem, or any other mischievous machination:
For the always just God being the only competent Judge of Princes, and not the
people, who are continually carried about by seditious men, you ought, Quomodo
sterilitatem, aut nimios imbres, and cetera Naturae mala, ita luxum, vel
avaritium Dominantium Tollerare. To tolerate the luxury or avarice of
Sovereigns, as you do barrenness, too much rain, and other evil of Nature.

The Ninteenth ADVERTISEMENT.
Nero the Emperor, for a very singular commendation given him by Cornelius
Tacitus, rewards him with a gift of 25 Mules laden with Crowns of Gold.

VEry Singular is the news which happened this very week in Parnassus, of 25
Mules loaded with Gold, which Nero the Emperor sent to Cornelius Tacitus: All
the Vertuosi were much astonished at so rich a present, and forthwith ran to
Tacitus his house, some to know the true worth of so much treasure; others to
know what had occasioned so rich a gift; and they found that the reward came to
1250000 crowns which Nero gave for the praise which the Historian gave him,
when he said that Nero had not infra servos Ingenium, Tacit. Annal. lib. 13.
The most learned of this State said, that though Nero's gift was very splendid,
yet Tacetus had deserved much more from him in that excellent praise which he
gave him, that his genius was not to be subject to the base Dominion of a
servant, was more worth then many rich Treasures, because there are but few
Princes that deserve such praise. On the contrary, the meaner sort of the
learned thought that reward did so far exceed Tacetus his merit, as they did
not stick to speak ill of so heroic an action, terming it one of Neroes
prodigallities, and one of those inconsiderate profuseness used by shallow
pated Princes, when by giving past number or measure, they deserve rather to be
esteemed foolish squanderers, then virtuously liberal. Wherefore these men,
more moved out of envy to Tacitus, then out of any love they bore to Neroes
honor, told Nero, that most of the learned in Parnassus did not approve that he
should reward two or three bare words written by the Historian, with so great a
mass of money, who had said so many obsenities to his prejudice, as did totally
obscure that praise which he had so highly rewarded. It Is said for certain,
that Neros answer was; That as excellent Picture-drawers did the better set off
the figures which they draw, by dark shadows, so true Historians, by the
liberal mention of vices, and not the bare imperfection of Heroes,
whosememories they do by their writings eternize, purchase believe of the
praises which they give them, no more shameful invectives being to be spoken
of Princes, then exagerated praises, without making any mention of those
defects which are so joined to humanity; which when they are truly related,
they were true testimonies of the writers impartiallity; and that therefore he
did the more value the imputation written of him by Tacetus, for that the
praise which he gave him, did exceed all the shameful things which he could
possibly write of him: For as all the most exquisite virtues which a Prince can
be endued with, were directly darkened if he suffered under the execrable vice
of subjecting himself to a servant, so the virtue of knowing how to be Master
of those that serve, did so well quallifie any whatsoever Prince, as the
splendour of so sublime a virtue, did sufficiently cover the fowlest faults: And
that all this was not without good reason; for as it was impossible to deny but
that the unfortunate man who undid himself in seeking the Philosophers stone by
his Furnaces and Limbecks, was a mad man fit to be chained up; so it must be
confessed that the Prince who having made an ignorant servant of his, a Golden
Ox, did adore him like an Idol, was of necessity to be esteemed a fool past all
recovery.

The Twentieth ADVERTISEMENT.
The Vertuosi visit the chief Church in Parnassus, and beg of God an important
favor.

YEsterday being the first day of April, according to the custom of this Court,
the Illustrious Poets, accompanied by the Muses, went to visit the chief Temple
in Parnassus, and with great devotion beseeched Gods Divine Majesty, that he
would vouchsafe for his mercies sake, to preserve his faithful Vertuosi from
the lies of such persons, who being wholly composed of malignity, are
notwithstanding held by Princes to be exact honest men.

The XXI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo, to encourage Senators of Free Countries, to cultivate Liberty, without
affecting Tyranny, causes an exceeding woeful spectacle to be shown in
Melpomene's Amphitheater.

APollo firmly believing, that in free Countries, more then in any other sort
of Government, Laws are instituted for the common good, that therein men set
their minds more to undertake; and to perform gallant works, and that learned
Sciences, and all civil Policy do there flourish most; does much abhor those
Tyrants who commit outrages upon the Liberty of a well regulated Commonwealth:
As those who to maintain an usurped Power, are bound to hate men of great
worth, and to persecute their excellent virtues with the same severity, with
the which Lawful Princes punish vice; and though their genius lead them to
incline to clemency, they are notwithstanding necessitated to use cruelty, and
to Govern the State vitiously, it being very true, that Nemo unquam Imperium
flagitio quaesitum bonis artibus exercuit. Tacit. lib. 1. Hist. No man did ever
Govern that Empire well, which he came by ill. His Majesty, to affright the
Inhabitants of free Countries from committing like wickedness, caused the
Senators that were resident in that State, to meet yesterday in Melpomenes
stately Theater; and having made Caesar the Dictator appear on the other side of
the Theater, he brought in his sister Actia, together with his Nephew Augustus,
and his daughter Iulia, and the children which she had by her husband Marcus
Agrippa, Lucius, and Gaius Caesar, Agrippa Posthumus, Giulia, and Agrippina,
with the numerous issue that the latter bore to her so famous husband
Germanicus. It was a sad and miserable spectacle to Caesar, to see how by his
prodigious ambition, he had not only drawn on his own cruel death, but had
totally extinguished his blood, which happened in a short time after: For
certainly it was a very compassionate spectacle to see, that of so copious an
offspring as proceeded from his eldest sister Octavia, and Giulia, daughter to
Augustus, there was not any one who had not ended their lives, either by
poison, sword, famine, or some other miserable death. To this Cesar's so great
heart-grief, was added the immence rage which assailed him when he saw the
Roman Empire which he had purchased to his so great reputation, and with the
effusion of his blood, should pass after Augustus his death, into that cruel
and bloodthirsty Family of the Claudii, which did so detestably persecute the
blood of the Giulii, from whom they had inherited so glorious an Empire. Nor
was the Compunction less which this so very sad sight caused in all the lookers
on; for thereby the usual calamity of Tyrants was recal'd into their minds, who
are not only unable to evade Divine inevitable Justice of laying the
foundations of new Tyranny, by their own violent deaths, but that God, who is
still severe in punishing the wickedness of ambitious men, would not permit
that his progeny who had dared to undertake so horrid an excess, should long
enjoy the power of State which had been so ignominiously gotten: and which by
divine providence fell soon into the power of a family, who forced by good
policy, to extinguish the first Tyrants whole race, took public revenge for
subjugated liberty. Moreover it was a calamity which the eyes of the cruellest
men that were in that Theater could not behold, not the hearts of the most
ambitious tolerate, to see that all Tyrannies are laid with the materials of
so many violent deaths, which the unslackt lime of such wicked injustice with
the sand of so many horrible cruelties, and with the water of large lakes of
humane blood: whilst all the Vertuosie wept to see this so lamentable
Spectacle, Apollo said with so fearful a voice, as infused terror into every
one; behold said he, you Tyrants, who are so desirous of Sovereignty, these
that you have here before your eyes are the ends of your proud thoughts; in
these unfortunate Tragedies does the longing, and immoderate thirst which such
as you have over dominion terminate; and those who have impiously made
themselves Masters of their Countries liberty, bring their families to this
greatness that you see. Thou Caesar, who by thy wicked going about to inslave
the so Noble Roman republic did make it appear, that thou either did not
know, or did not fear God, see and behold to what height of infelicity he is
able to bring thee, and all thine.

Though Caesar gave apparent signs that he was much confused and afflicted to
hear these words; yet Apollo the more to rent in pieces the soul of this
ambitious man, and to comfort his Vertuosie, who were much afflicted at this so
horrid sight, and to encourage Senators to preserve the liberty of their
Country, commanded that the humane Neptune of the Sea, the always glorious
Prince Andrea d'Oria should be admitted into the Theater, with all his most
excellent family. Whereupon Caesar, beholding the happiness of that renowned
Family, and the glory of those Senators, who in the Commonwealth of Genoa were
esteemed, honored and observed, as mindful of the great benefit which they had
received from that new founder of their new liberty; and that that Prince of
every happy memory, had left so glorious a fame of his modesty behind him in
those Citizens; the envy he bore to the Grandezza of those Heroes did torment
him more then his own misfortune: and he then knew, that when he and those that
descended from him had conquered France, he should have done better, and more
advisedly, if he had undertaken, as did that glorious Prince Andrea d'Oria, to
reestablish the liberty of his Country, which was fallen into the disorder of a
confused Dimocrasie, and to beat down the Tyranny of that ignorant people, with
those very weapons with which he had trampled upon the Senates authority: and
to have planted a perfect Aristocracy in his Country, and so have won unto
himself the high Title, and glorious prerogative of being the second founder of
the Roman liberty, by the doing whereof, he and his posterity might have been
as famous in Rome, as the Family of the Dorii shall ever be glorious in the
Noble Republic of Genoa, as long as the world shall last.

The XXII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Inthroned Academians, having admitted the chief she-Poets, or Poetesses
into Parnassus, Apollo commands, that they be taken from thence.

THe inthroned Academians, contrary to their ancient Institutions, did some few
months since admit into their Academy the Virtuous Ladies, Victoria Colonna,
Veronica Gambera, Laura Teracina, and other famous Lady-Poets of Parnassus;
which was done with so great applause of the Vertuosie, as the Academians set
on fire by the beauty of those Ladies, were not only very frequent at their
learned exercises; but did every day publish such Poesy, as made the very
Muses wonder: but it was not long ere his Majesty smelt a very displeasing
savor; wherefore he commanded the chief of the inthroned, by no means to admit
any longer such like parties: For he had found at last, that Women's true Poetry
consisted in their Needle and Spindle; and that the learned exercises of Women,
together with the Virtuosie, was like the sporting and playing of Dogs, which
after a while ends in getting upon one another backs.

The XXIII ADVERISEMENT.
Justus Lipsius being solemnly admitted into Parnassus, the next day after his
entrance, did, contrary to all men's expectation, accuse Tacitus for being
impius, and reaps but little credit thereby

JUstus Lipsius (as has been formerly said) arrived some few days ago upon
the confines of this State, whose writings, though they were presently voted
worthy to be read by all the Vertuosi, and to be deservedly placed amongst the
eternal labors of the Learned, in his Majesty's Library; and that consequently
eternity should be decreed unto his name in full Senate, with as plenary
prerogative as has at any time been granted by this State to any other
Subject, yet the public entrance of a person so highly qualified was deferred
till Tuseday was sevennight last; because the noble Flemish Nation would
signalize her self upon this occasion, with extraordinary demonstration of
honor to this her Citizen: wherefore they erected many Triumphant Arches with
much splendour and magnificency in the chiefest places of Pernassus. The
Cavalcata was remarkable; for many of the Learned in all Sciences favored this
Senator, who having received from his Majesty the noble title of Universal in
all Sciences, every one thought he was knowing in an things, and every one
wondered when they saw, that at the very first meeting Lipsius saluted the
Noblest Romans who went to meet him, by name, as if he had particularly known
them. His learned writings were carried by Caius Valerius Patercolus, who
though his age had made him lame, yet to show himself thankful to Lipsius for
some good turn he had received from him, did beg this favor of his Majesty. By
express order from Apollo, Lipsius rode in the midst between moral Seneca, and
politic Tacitus; but a great uprore was likely to have risen hereupon; for
Tacitus having always formerly granted the right hand to Seneca, by reason of
his prerogative of age, and his reputation in the most prised Sciences; yet he
did so hotly contest with him for it upon this occasion, as upon the noise
thereof all the learned Moralists running in to aid Seneca, and a squadron of
Politicians to assist Tacitus, it was feared some great scandal might be
occasioned thereby: but the Moralists struck sail, for they knew that if it
should come to blows, they should not be able long to resist those insolent
Politicians, who not having any regard to what is just or honest, thought it
not dishonorable, but rather great worth to overthrow their enemies, though it
were by treachery: but all the business was quieted upon the appearance of the
Masters of the Pegasean Ceremonies, who by order from the honorable, the Lord
Censors, said to Seneca, that since Sciences, as fruits in Rome, and fish in
Venice, had their seasons, he might do well to yield the right hand for that
time to Tacitus, and that for the most apparent injury which he should thereby
receive, he should solace himself with the remembrance of what honors had been
done unto him in the better times of his former days; wherein those very
self-same moral Sciences, which in these present unfortunate times are reputed
mere predantickness, and old moldy things, were in so great esteem, as that
they were valued as the very precious jewel of all learning; and the rather,
for that this present age, which consists wholly of self interest and violence,
did so highly exalt the practice of Policy, as that by scandalous example it
permitted Peripatetical Philosophy, which was the supreme Lady of all humane
Sciences, to be trodden underfoot. Seneca obeyed the Censors command, but much
against his will; for moral Philosophers who make so great show of seeming
humility, are even borne with intence ambition.

When Lipsius was come to the Foro Delphico, he was not permitted to see the
splendour of his Majesty in open air, nor was he met and received at the foot of
the Palace stairs by the Muses; for those who write inventions of their own,
and who are beloved by Apollo and the Muses are only thought worthy of those
singular favors: whereas Lipsius his learned writings were only found to be
laborious, and miraculous for the variety of reading that was in them; a thing
so common to all the Trans-Alpine writers, whose brains are thought to lie in
their backs, as it is usual with Italians, whose brains lie in their heads, to
invent always new things, and to labor with matter taken out of the Mine of
their own ingeniosity, with much sweat and toil, nor with stuff, borrowed from
other Writers; it being a thing thought belonging to beggarly, botchers, and to
broken Critics, to piece out the tatterd Gowns of the Learned, but to cut out
new clothes, after a new manner, and with imbroideries not formerly seen, a
thing belonging to an experienced and skilful Tailor Somsay that Lipsius was
thus smally favored by Apollo, and by the Muses, and that they were offended
with him, for that they having endued him with so noble a Talent, as he might
like a Tacitist have written the civil wars of Flanders, a thing so much
desired by the College of the Vertuosi; yet he for certain respects which his
Majesty held unworthy, had hitherto resisted the inspiration given him, by his
Majesty and the divine Goddesses: but this last is a suspicion grounded only
upon likelyhoods, whereas the former is sustained by Truth. Apollo stood to see
this Cavalcata in his little Cabinet, which stands close by Auroras lodging,
and which Italian Poets call the celestical Balcony, and he was clad in a white
Cloud, which (as upon like occasions is usual) just when Lipsius enterd the
Foro Delfico, was by a western wind a little rarefied; so as his Majesty by the
spendor of one only beam with which he beheld this his Vertuoso, cleansed him
from all the stains of ignorance, which till then remained in him, and made him
become a perfect Litterato. When Lipsius was afterward come into the great
Hall where Audience is given; just as he began his Oration, with humble thanks
to Apollo, for the incomparable grace he had vouchsafed him, he was forced to
hold his peace, by reason of a sore mischance which befell the learned
Pausanias, a Greek Writer, who was sat on the Cronologist Classis; where he
fell into so deep a sound, as he was thought dead, and all the reverend
Cosmographists ran to help him, Pausanias familiar friends said, that that
accident might be occasioned by mere weakness; for that it being late, he had
not refresht his soul in his Library, as he used to do before he came out of
his house, by taking two spoonfuls of Conserves made of Pindarus his Poesies;
but Euterpe whose humble servant Pausanias professes himself to be, sprinkling
two of Thucidides substantial sentences in his face, made that virtue return
into him which was almost lost. Then Pausanius, not considering how great a
fault he committed in hindering Lipsius from ending his Oration: O devouring
Time (exclaimed he, being overcome with grief of soul) O envious old age, which
by your sharp and biting teeth, consume even those things, which were made by
men, to the end that they might for ever live upon the earth; how is it
possible that the vicissitude of things should be so certainly affixt to the
variation of time, as that my beloved Greece, formerly the mother of Learning,
the Queen of Sciences, the honored and safe habitation of liberal Arts, the
Garden of the world, the natural Country of the famous Vertuosi in all sorts of
Learning, the only place in the world eternized by my pen, should now be
wholly become ignorance, totally savedg, uninhabited, and so dismantled of all
those both public and private edifices, wherewith thou did formerly so much
abound, as now there is nothing to be seen in thee but poor Cottages, and that
the famous Athenian Orators, Philosophers and Historians, are become in these
our unfortunate days, base Oile-men in Constantinople: whereas on the
contrary; Flanders, which in my time was nothing but soletary woods, encumbered
with marish grounds, full of savedg beasts, and men more savedg, where nothing
was to be seen but hideous Caverns, poor Cottages, inhabited by beggars, should
now be become a very fruitful, beautiful, and pleasant Province; inhabited by
civil, wealthy and industrious men, full of noble Cities, adorned with both
public and private edifices, very sumptuously built; and which makes the
wonder the greater, that it should be a happy Country, where the learning of
the ancient Greeks and Latins, seem to have taken up her eternal abode: all the
learned Grecians, as Aristotle, Plato, Demosthenes, and Pindorus, were so moved
at what Pausanius had said, as also many others who could not forbear shedding
of tears; but before Lipsius his Ceremonies could be completed, fell into so
great lamentations, as being followed therein by the other Vertuosi; Lipsius,
who knew that his Oration could not be heard, by reason of the great noise
which those sighs and groans made, came down from his seat, being satisfied for
the injury which Pausanius had given him by that interruption, with the
consolation he received from the Encomium he had made of his Country the
Flemmish Nation.

It was believed by all the Learned of this State, that great intimacy and
friendship was contracted between Cornelius Tacitus and Giustus Lipsius, by
reason of the many reciprocal courtesies which had past between them; but to
the wonder of all the Learned in Parnassus, the contrary happened: For two
days since, Lipsius accused Tacitus for having said some very impious words in
his first Book of Histories. His Majesty much incenst to hear such an
accusation, commanded Tacitus to appear before him the next morning, and to
make his defense; Tacitus obeyed this command with such undaunted alacrity, as
his learned Friends, who had been much astonished, were greatly cheered. I, who
give you an account of these Informations, was present when Beato Renano, and
Flavio Orsino, both of them being Tacitus his good friends, drew Lipsius aside,
and earnestly entreated him that he would desist from that accusation, which
would prove a great dishonor to himself, if he should not be able to make it
good, and would prove very unfortunate if he should prove it: For Tacitus being
the first Politic Baron of Parnassus, and therefore much followed by potent
men, who have long hands, and short consciences, they would certainly in time
work their revenge. To this Lipsius answered, that howsoever he would discharge
his conscience; which being said, he appeared before Apollo, where came
likewise Tacitus attended by the most pollisht Vertuosi of this Court. Then
Lipsius thus began; That he was a friend to Socrates, a friend to Plato, but a
greater friend to Truth. Here Tacitus interrupted him, and bad him leave those
preambles, which smelt so rammish in that place, and fall roundly to his
Impeachment, for his fellow Politicians could not with patience hear
premeditated preludiums from them from whom they expected foul performances.
Then replied Lipsius, You in your first Book of History have taken the freedom
to say, That God cares not otherwise for man's welfare, then in what concerns
punishment; a conceit so much the more impious, for that it would be a great
fault in an earthly Prince, much more in God (whose peculiar Virtue, Mercy is,
and Charity to all mankind) to say a thing so exorbitantly wicked. Your very
words (said he) are these; Nec enim unquam attrocioribus Populi Romani
Cladibus, magisve justis judiciis approbatum est, non esse Cura Deis
securitatem nostram, esse Ultionem. Tacit, lib. 1. Hist.

It Is true that you may plead in excuse of this your great fault, that you were
led thereinto by unwary Lucan, who having said the same thing before you, wrote
these Verses:

Foelix Roma quidem, Civesque habitura superbos:
Si libertatis superis, tam Cura placeret,
Quam vindict a placet.
Blessed Rome, great Citizens might well have had,
Had the Gods minded her good as well as bad.
When Tacitus had heard this, It grieves me, said he, my Lipsius, that you who
have boasted your self to be the only Oracle of my obscurest meanings, have so
grossly erred in a point which so much imports my reputation. For those words of
mine which you have now recited, are so far from being impious and wicked, as
you accuse them to be, as I will prove them to be pious and holy: and that you
may know I speak truth, I will by a circumlocution of many words, interpret
that my conceit, which according to my custom, being expressed in few, you cannot
conceive. After having in the beginning of my Histories, acquainted the Reader
with what I intended to treat of in my whole Work, I said, I undertook a labor
full of various chances; Atrox praeliis, discors seditionibus, ipsa etiam pace
savum, Quatuor Principes ferro interempti, tria Bella Civilia, etc. Cruelty in
Wars, seditious discord, savageness even in peace, four Princes assassinated,
three civil Wars, etc.

When I had related the great calamities and miseries which the Romans suffered
after Nero's death, I said they were so many in number, and such in quality, as
it had never at any time been better verified, by the bitter sufferings of the
Romans, and by Divine Justice, that that same God who had formerly so favored
and protected the people of Rome, as being as it were inamored of their
greatness, it seemed his only care was, to render them perpetually victorious,
triumphant, and Masters of the World, was seen so to change his mind after
Nero's death, as it did evidently appear; Non esse Curae Deis securitatem
nostram: which is, That he had quite given over the care of their welfare; esse
ultionem; which is, that he minded only to take revenge for the great distastes
which they had given him. Is it then Lipsius! a wicked conception to say, that
by reason of the great excesses committed by the people of Rome, both before,
and after the death of Nero, Gods care of protecting them from all evil, was
turned to severe Justice in afflicting them with all sorts of misery. The thing
which you have said (said Lipsius) is very pious; but it does not square with
the words which I accuse of wickedness, which will then receive the
interpretation and sense which you give them, when the words, securitatem
nostram were only to be understood of the people of Rome; but they being
universal, it is apparent that you comprehend all mankind: That by the word
Nostram, upon which I perceive you chiefly ground your self (replied Tacitus) I
only understood the people of Rome, Lucan makes it clear unto you, who you were
pleased to say, led me into this error; he expressing my very conceit in Verse,
mentions only the Romans; affirming that Rome would have been perpetually
happy, and would have kept with her Citizens in continual glory, if God
Almighty had been as well pleased to preserve her in her ancient Liberty, as he
was to revenge himself of her. And do not you think it to be true, Lipsius,
that the Romans, who could never put a period to the insatiat ambition which
they had to rule over the whole world, did so provoke Gods anger against them,
by laying so many Noble Monarchies and gallant Commonwealths dessolate, by
having plundered the world, and filled it with fire and blood, to satiate their
unquenchable thirst after wealth, as after having delivered them over into the
hands of cruel Tyrants, by whom they made trial of the most deplorable
miseries, he at last permitted, that by exemplary shame, they should be
trampled upon by the most barbarous Nations of the earth? Certainly a most
unfortunate end; but much merited by the Roman ambition, cruelty, and avarice:
precipices into which the Divine Majesty of God causes those Empires to fall,
which know not how to prefix bounds to their insatiate desire of Reign. But to
make your error appear yet more clear unto you, Do you remember, Lipsius, that
ever I made use of that word, Nostram, or Nostri, in any other part of my
Writings? I remember (said he) that you mention how Tiridates, King of Armenia,
who was sent to Rome by Corbalone, to acquit himself before Nero, of some
imputations that were laid upon him, did capitulate with Corbalone before he
took his journey, that no servitude at all should be made to appear in him
Tiradates, that he should not be made to lay down arms any where during his
journey, that he should be admitted to visit the Governors of the Countries,
without being kept out of doors, and that he might be suffered to keep the same
grandezza in ceremonious observances, as did the Consuls; which way of
proceeding was laughed at by Corbalone, and esteemed a barbarous vainglory, as
you your self do in these words publish; Silicet externae superbiae sueto, non
erat notitia nostri: apud quos jus Imperii valet, innania transmittantur.
Tacit. lib. 15. Annal. Doubtless, by one accustomed to foreign pride, no notice
was taken of us: Needless things are forborne amongst those that stand upon the
right of Empire. And in another place, relating how much the discord of her
enemies made for the quiet and greatness of the Roman Empire, you say, Maneat
quaeso, duretque gentibus, si non amor nostri, at certe odium sui quando
vergentibus Imperii satis nihil jam praestare Fortuna majus potest quam Hostium
discordia. Tacit. de Morib. Germ. Let there I pray continue amongst the Nations
if not a love of us, at least a hatred amongst themselves, since to the
declining fate of the Empire, Fortune can now grant nothing greater then her
enemies discord. Then said Tacitus, Do you believe, Lipsius, that by the words,
non erat notitia nostri, and si non Amor nostri, I did intend all mankind, or
only the people of Rome? Lipsius then grew pale, and said, I now my Tacitus,
perceive my error, I humbly crave your pardon, and freely confess, that the
more your Writings are read, the less are they understood, and that your Annals
and Histories are not to be read by a mere Gramarian, such a one as I am.

The XXIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
A mournful day in Parnassus, in commemoration of the unhappy Introduction of
the Grace-Cup.

THis first day of May (a day by all Nations consecrated to Jollities) is so
sad a day in Parnassus, as not only the Muses, Poets, and all the Vertuosi are
clad in Mourning, but the public Market places, open Tarraces, and Schools of
Learning, are all covered with Blacks, for that it appears by the testimony of
Pollidore Virgil, on this day of unhappy memory, first through the ambition of
Princes, and then through the foolish vainglory of private people, the
pestiferous use of the Grace-Cup was introduced. Never in the memory of the
Learned, did there happen so sad a calamity in Parnassus, and more bitterly
bewailed by all the Vertuosi, then the direful spectacle of beholding that
precious Liquor, Wine, the only delight of Tables, without which, eating would
be a laborious task, fit only for Porters, cruelly driven from the Table; and
certainly not without reason: For what greater misery can befall mankind, then
to be reduced to drink according to another man's discretion, and to be brought
to that sad condition, even to beg for Gods sake a glass of Wine from a mean
servant, who many times minds thee not, and oft-times does not hear thee, which
that a man might live as long as Nestor, he ought to have always in his hand,
or hold it to his mouth? And what more cruel means could there be invented to
torment a gallant man, then to make him stint his drinking when a savory bit
has provoked a lusty thirst in him? And is it not a spectacle able to make a
man die for anger, to see drink brought sometimes in too little a glass,
oft-times half empty, and in so unequal a thirst, to drink still the same
measure? And which makes the grievance the greater, to have the Wine always
changed? For the gluttonous, and wicked Butlers cannot be persuaded to bring
out their best Wines to Feasts, but keep it for themselves. In this the
Literatie's so great affliction, the glorious German Nation, which is free from
so severe a slavery, pitying the misery of the Spaniards, Itallians, and
French, moved a Treaty with the Princes, to exterminate from out the world, the
known pernicious practice of the Grace-Cup: But the Princes answered
resolutely, They would never give way that the glory of the Bottle-house should
be taken from their Festivals. And though to facilitate the business on the
behalf of the Literati, it was propounded that Wine should stand still upon the
Tables, that it should always be good, that in the Butteries, or
Bottle-houses, Si facesse la speca delle minestre che spesse volte ammorbano di
caccio riscaldato; They should spend their porredg seasoned with tosted chief;
but they were not listened unto: So as the business apappearing to be desperate,
Andrea Marone, a famous Brescian Poet, stepped forth, and in the presence of
Apollo, the Muses, and of all the Learned in Parnassus, did very fluently on
the sudden make a stout invective against so cruel an invention in Heroic
Verse; and proved conclusively by the authority of Esculapius, Hippocrates,
Galen, and other famous Physicians, that Hectic Fevers and Tissicks, which
were but little known before, were mightily increased by the sorrowful
introduction of the Grace-Cup, and the three-ounce glasses. For those silly
people who were foolishly persuaded to drink by the ounce, drunk but by
scruples, thereby purchasing unto themselves pale and weak complexions; whence
it happened, that in these present times, wherein the vanity of good breeding
was more respected, then substantial drinking with cheerfulness, the strong
complexion of old lusty men was wholly lost. In the end of his Oration, this
Poetical Orator averred by the testimony of the Muses, that when the custom of
drinking great carrowses was given over, the race of Homers and Virgils was
wholly lost, and the world was pestered with hide-bound Poets.

The XXV. ADVERTISEMENT.
The principal Monarchies abiding in Parnassus, ask the Illustrious Venetian
Liberty, by what means she obtains the benefit of so equisite secrecy, and such
exact obedience from her Nobility? And received from her their desired
satisfaction.

THe controversy which arose some few days since amongst diverse of the
Literati, and which was decided (as has been said) by the Illustrious Venetian
Liberty, has afforded this State of Parnassus much occasion of discourse. But
more particularly it raised such an envy in the powerful Monarchies of Spain,
France, England, and Poland, as two days since they went to the aforesaid
Liberty of Venice, and told her that they wondered very much to see that she
should find such faithful secrecy in all her Nobility, when they had very much
desired (but all in vain) to obtain so much from one single Secretary, and a
pair of Councellers: A calamity affirmed by these powerful Queens, to be so
much the greater, as that in this present fraudulent age, the first weapons
which some Princes use to draw against their enemies, was to corrupt other
Potentates chief Officers with vast sums of Gold; they therefore desired to
know of her, by what means she in her weightiest affairs obtained so much
secrecy from her Nobility, and such obedience also in the certain danger of
their ruin? To this the Venetian Liberty answered, That she did allure her
Nobility to the virtue of Secrecy by rewards, and frighted them from the vice
of disobedience by punishments. The aforesaid Monarchies replied, That they
likewise made use of the same means, yet could not compass the same ends. That,
said the Venetian Liberty, is because the rewards given by Monarchies, are
poor, and the punishments slight, in comparison of those which were practiced
in well governed Commonwealths. To this, answer was made, That Monarchies could
affirm the contrary; for the rewards of free Countries, compared with the
profuse liberallity which great Kings use toward their chief Ministers of
State, was but beggary: For it was never known that the State of Venice
rewarded the fidelity of any of her Senators with the rich Donatives of
Castles, Citadels, Cities, and other Noble and rich Fee-Farms, with which
Princes did often remunerate their Ministers of State; the greatest rewards
used by the Venetian Commonwealth to her most meritorious Senators being to
promote them to greater Magistracies, and that by degrees, and not without
their having taken much pains ere they could come by it. Moreover, that the
greatest part of her employments being rather expencefull then profitable, they
only brought with them an increase of reputation. That then for the point of
punishment, certainly punishments inflicted by the resolute will of Princes for
great offenses, were incomparably more severe and dreadful then those which
were decreed against a Senator by any Senate, which were usually rather mild and
circumspectious, then precipitate and cruel: And that there was a great
disproportion between a Prince who judged his Vassal, and a Senator, who by his
sufferage punished his equal, his friend, one of his own blood. That the State
of Venice used no worser Gibbits, Gallowses, Fetters, Ropes, nor fire in their
Nobilities misdemerits, then were used in Spain, France, England, and Poland,
unless it were the Cavala Orfano, which was the Venetians utmost severity. That
if Kings had not that Channel in their Kingdoms, they could notwithstanding sew
up their disloyal Officers in sacks, and cause them to be thrown into deep
Rivers and Wells.

The Illustrious Venetian Commonwealth did then smile, and said, That in lieu
of those Fee-Farm Rents which Princes bestow with such a limited authority upon
their well deserving servants, she gave unto her Loyal and obedient Nobles, the
Kingdom of Candia, Corfu, and the other Islands subject to her Dominions, the
States of Dalmatia, Istria, Freuli, Padua, Vicenza, Verona, Brescia, Bergamo,
Crema, and that most majestical Miracle of the most Royal Cities, Venice: And
all this with full authority to command and govern them absolutely; so as her
Nobility were not to be esteemed as private men, but as Kings, and great
Princes, who in the weighty affairs of the Commonwealth, were faithful to
themselves; whereas the servants of Princes were faithful to others; and that
the detestation which the Noble Venetians had of selling the Commonwealths
secrets to foreign Princes, arose from the infinite disproportion between what
they should lose by their fellonious dealing, and what they got by their
Loyalty: That there was no proportion or comparison between the remorse which a
Minister of State feels for having betrayed his Prince, and the fear a Senator
had to be unfaithful to his free Country: Because to be unfaithful to others,
was to betray himself.

Lastly the Venetian Liberty said, That the rewards which Princes give to their
Secretaries, and other State-Ministers, did often produce pernicious effects,
and clean contrary to the intention of the givers: For that they did not only
make the Officer grow more cool in his Masters service, since he had nothing
more to hope for from him; but that Princes minds being so mutable, and the
plots of their Court-rivals so frequent, it often happened that the servant
sought by his disloyalty, and by suppressing his Master; to secure that reward,
which by his good service he had got. All which were pernicious effects, and
wherein their rewards fell so much the shorter, for that the Patrimony of the
Venetian Nobility increasing always with the greatness of their Empire, the
love of their Senators was daily increased more and more, and their charity
toward the weal-publick. Then she said, the disproportion in punishments
between her and Monarchies, was far greater, for she had often had experience,
that when her Nobles have even been in arms, and much importuned by foreign
Princes, if she should but mention unto them the Senats displeasure, and their
degradation from Nobility, there was not any Venetian Senator, who would not
with unspeakable cheerful obedience hasten to Venice, with firm resolution
rather to lose his life between two pillars, then to be deprived of that
Liberty which is so highly valued by generously minded men; and that there was
not any Senator of Venice, who would not willingly suffer death, rather then
put himself in subjection to any whatsoever foreign Prince. The reason why,
because the Noble Venetian was a Fish which being born in those Waters of
Liberty, could not live out of Venice, in the element of servitude.

The XXVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Francis the First, that Potent King of France, meeting the Lady Philosophy
naked, proffered her his Royal Mantle; which would not be accepted.

THe bountiful King of France, Francis the First, met casually yesterday the
Lady Philosophy, leaning upon Aristotle and Plato, as she went sporting her
self in Parnassus: And seeing her to be naked, the King had a strange
compunction of mind to see that the very Queen of all human Sciences, who ought
to abound in all the most exquisite delights, should be so poor, as that she
should not have wherewithal to cover her self. Wherefore that magnanimous
King, throwing off his Royal Cloak or Mantle, which was all imbroidered with
Flowre-de-Luces made of Diamonds, would therewithal have covered that
beautiful Lady; when first having rendered all due thanks to so great a King,
for so courteous an offer, she said, That she who had no shame to hide, nor
deformities to cover, might without any prejudice to her reputation, walk naked
in Parnassus.

The XXVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo complains bitterly of the Muses, for that they inspire many mean wits
with Poetical fury; and they defend themselves excellently well.

APollo finding the products of Modern Italian Poets, for the most part very
imperfect in Similies, Metaphors, Allegories, Hyperboles, and other figurative
expressions, with which they deck and adorn their learned Poems, sent two days
ago for the Muses to come unto him, with whom he bitterly complained, that the
most Noble Poetical Fury was inspired into certain ignorant people, who not
able to undergo the labor of purchasing by their perpetual study, the
perfection of Poetry, published poor Poems, by which that Poetry lost much
reputation, which is the delight of Learning, the only recreation of the
Learneds labors, the very restorative of the Vertuosi, the Jewel of all
Liberal Arts; not without much imputation of blame to them the Muses, who were
desired by the choicest Vertuosi, that Poetical fury might only be inspired
into laborious wits, and such as were in love with Learning, and who might make
themselves worthy to receive so singular a grace from them. It Is said that
Polyhimnia in the name of all the other Muses, answered his Majesty, That they,
in the inspiring of Poetical Fury, and the flowing vein of elegant Verses into
others, were always used to have respect to the fruitfulness, and natural
vivacity of men's wits; and that his Majesty very well knew, that the gift of
Poetical fury must of necessity precede the knowledgs of Arts, Sciences, and
Learning, to the end that those who should have received so particular a favor
from the Muses, might afterward improve the Talent which was given them, by
perpetual study; and that his beloved Pindarus, when they first inspired him
with Poetical fury, he was altogether void of all those precious Sciences, with
which he afterward did so richly adorn himself. When Polyhimnia had thus
ended, Erato added, that the bad Poems of some late Italian Vertuosi, was not
to be attributed to the idleness of the Poets, but to the misery of the present
times, wherein none of those liberal Mecena's being to be found, who were
formerly the maintainers of Poetry, such Sciences were now only prized by
modern men, as brought with them certain and present advantage; not such as
brought only delight and reputation; an unhappiness which was the cause why in
this present age, such studies were only plied, as serve to feed the body, and
those not regarded which only feed the soul. Whence it was, that even they, the
Muses, were with much sorrow, forced every day to see that those very elevated
and noblest Spirits, which they did most entirely love, and into whom they had
inspired all the most excellent Poetical fury that they were able, did rather
violently resist the gift of Poetry, and the instigation of their minds, bigg
with Verse, then pursue it. And that therefore the best Italian Wits, being
forced, even for necessity of bread, to abandon the noble study of Poetry, to
which they were naturally addicted, did so greedily thrust themselves into more
gainful studies, as that a noble Italian Wit, even then when he was most
inflamed with the composure of an elegant Stanza, was forced to forgo that his
laudable labor, and for the getting of a couple of crowns to turn Advocate in
a civil case at Law. That if his beloved Virgil did by his taking-Verses, so
much increase the honor of Poetry, it was because he was perpetually
encouraged by Augustus his bounty. That it was impossible for modern Poets to
cultivate by their assiduous studies, those fields of Poetry, which produced
nothing but barren brakes; and that it even broke the hearts of her and of her
fellow-Muses, to put his Majesty in mind, that Iovan Andrea dell' Anguilara, a
noble Italian Poet, died for mere want in a Lodging in the Street Torre di
Nona, at Rome; and that Sanazzarro being reduced to a great scarcity of all
necessaries, died mad in the same City; and that Lodovicus Ariosto, and
Torquatus Tasso, resplendent lights of Italian Poetry, were so hardly dealt
withal by the avarice and ingratitude of the present times, as all the
Vertuosi saw them enter into Parnassus, without Clokes, and with tattered
clothes.

The XXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Torquato Tasso presents Apollo with his Poem of Giurusalemme Liberata, or
Godfrey of Bullen, For which Lodovico Castelvetro, and Aristotle, are severely
reprehended by his Majesty.

TOrquato Tasso, two days after his admittance into Parnassus, presented his
learned and elegant Poem of Giurusalemme Liberata before Apollos feet, and
desired that if it should be thought worthy, it might by his Majesty, be
consecrated to immortality. Apollo graciously received the Poem, and according
to the ancient custom of this Court, gave it to the Reformer of the Library
(who at this present is Lodovico Castelvetro) that it might be renewed. After
two months space, Tasso applied himself to Castelvetro, who told him, that
having diligently perused his Poem, he found not that he had therein observed
the Rules of Poetry, published by Aristotle: That therefore he did not think it
fit to be placed amongst the public Writers of the Delfick Library, wherefore
he might do well to amend those errors, and then return to him, and he would
again renew it.

Tasso was much astonished at this unexpected answer; wherefore being incenst,
he forthwith went to Apollo, and told him, that with much labor, and infinite
pains-taking, he had composed the aforesaid Poem, in the weaving whereof, he
had only observed the Talent which Nature had given him, and which his Caliope
had inspired into him: Wherein he thought he had fulfilled all the duties of
Poetry, and that his Majesty having prescribed no Laws thereunto, he knew not
with what authority Aristotle had published any rules to be observed in it: And
that he never having heard that there was any other Lord in Parnassus, but his
Majesty his fault in not having observed Aristotle's Rules, was an error of
ignorance, and not of any malice. By these words of Tasso, Apollo was as highly
offended against Aristotle, as Princes use to be when their Authority is
entrench upon; in so much as he forthwith commanded the Guard of German Poets
to bring that bold Philosopher bound unto him; which they did. Apollo with an
incenst countenance, and irritated voice, asked Aristotle, whether he had been
so shamefully impudent, as to dare to prescribe Laws, and publish Rules to be
observed, to the high conceptions of the Vertuosi, in whom he had always been
pleased that there should be an absolute liberty of writing and inventing. For
the lively wits of his Literati being loose from any tie of rule, and free from
the chains of precepts, did greatly to his contentment, every day, enrich the
Schools and Libraries with gallant Composures, woven with new and curious
inventions; and that to make the wits of conceited Poets, subject to the
bondage of Law and Rules, was to infringe the Grandezza, and to take from the
alluring delights of their products, and greatly to inslave the wits of learned
men, who when they handled their pen with wonted and unbridled liberty, they
divulged such writings, as by reason of their novelty and elegancy, did not
only afford delight to him and his beloved Muses, but even admiration; as was
evidently seen in the Advertisements of a Modern, Menante, wherein under
Metaphors and jesting Tales (a new invention) important politic affairs, and
choice moral precepts, were couched. And that the Poem of his beloved Tasso,
being received by the general good applause of all the world, it did evidently
appear, that he had punctually observed all the rules of exquisite Poetry that
could be prescribed. Poor Aristotle trembled at the hearing of these words, and
humbly beseeched his Majesty that he would commiserate his old age, and that
such a Philosopher as he, might not suffer for another ignorance, saying, that
he had writ the rules of Poetry, not in that sense in which it was afterward
understood by the ignorant, as if without observing his rules and precepts, no
Poem could possibly arive at perfection; but that only to facilitate the Art of
Poetry, he had showed the way wherein the best Poets had walked: That the only
fault which he had committed, and for which he humbly craved his Majesty's
pardon, was, that having found long before, that the ignorant took those his
observations for Laws, and peremptory precepts, blinded with that ambition
which robs all men of their eye sight; for that that error had increased his
honor and reputation, he had given his Majesty thereby so high a displeasure:
And that he confessed that the brains of high strained Poets might write Poems so
absolutely perfect, as they might serve others for Rules and Laws to be
observed, without keeping his Laws and precepts: And that the truth of this
that he had said was clearly proved by the Politics which he had published,
which in comparison to the madly wrested Reason of State which was now
practiced by many, was mere foppery.

The XXIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Cornelius Tacitus is chosen Prince of Lesbos; whither being come, his success
proves not good

TWo months ago the Prince of Lesbos departed this life, whereupon the Electors
of that State, who as every one knows, obey an Elective Prince, sent
Ambassadors to Apollo, desiring him that he would be pleased to name a man unto
them worthy of so high preferment, and they would willingly choose him for their
Lord and Master. Many worthy Letterati were propounded by Apollo; the
Ambassadors thought, that since Cornelius Tacitus was famed far above all
others for matter of Policy, he was fittest to be chosen. But before the
business passed any further, they went to visit him, and asked him, in case
they should choose him for their Prince, how he would govern them: Tacitus
speaking at large unto the Ambassadors of himself, said, that all men knew what
his abilities were in the well governing a State; since the whole world set
such an estimation upon his writings, as he thought he might justly boast, that
it was governed by the modern Princes, according to the rules of his Politics:
That having shown others the true practice of the most exact Reason of State,
they might easily believe he should know better then any other, how to put it
in execution in his own State. And though upon this occasion he durst undertake
upon the sudden, in their presence, to make a complete discourse upon the means
that were to be used by a Prince who would govern an Elective Kingdom well, yet
to let them see that he with much reason was acknowledged by the most
understanding Politicians, to be the Master of that Art, he would tell them in
two words, what satisfaction he intended to give them in his Government. Which
was, That he would diligently imitate the late Prince in those actions which he
should know gave content unto the people, and that he would exceedingly detest
him in those which they were displeased with. He then added, That what he had
said, was the very extract of all true Policy, the quintescence distilled by
him, and only by him thought upon; and that relying much upon them, he had
imparted unto them this secret, which if it were made common, Shopkeepers, and
even the meanest sort of men, would know how to rule Kingdoms, and govern
Empires.

The Ambassadors were much pleased with what Tacitus had said, and did assure
him that he should be the man that should be chosen; they only advertised him,
that when he should be created their Prince, it would behove him to speak in a
more usual style, that he might be the better understood by the people of
Lesbos, who were not so learned as those of Parnassus.

To which Tacitus answered, That it was necessary for one like him, who professed
to speak more sentences then words, to speak obscurely; for sententious
meanings, and politic precepts, lost much reputation, when they were spoken in
trivial Latin: And he, to the end that he might not communicate that political
Science to the base rabble-rout, which ought only to be known to great Kings,
used that manner of Language; that therefore his conceptions were understood
only by the choicest wits, whose accurate pallats were able to relish them;
yet for the general good of those that understood but little, he would bring
with him for his Interpreters, Mercerus, Lipsius, Fulvius Orsinus, and that he
would bring with him as far as from Italy, the most affable Courtius Pecchena,
whom Ferdinand the great Duke of Tuscany, the best Scollar that ever came out
of Tacitus his School, had offered him, whenever he should have occasion to
use him.

The Ambassadors returned to Lesbos much satisfied with these answers, and made
such relation of Tacitus his miraculous wisdom, as by the general applause of
all the people, he was presently chosen, and declared Prince. But the success
of Tacitus his Government in his Principality, proved clean contrary to the
expectation which was had of him: For soon after he had taken possession, he
began first to sow, and then to nourish great discord between the Nobility and
the common people: and because the Nobility was of more worth, and better
advised then the vulgar, who were kept under by the power of great ones,
Tacitus secretly and cunningly adheared to the weaker side; wherefore the heads
of the people growing very bold with the Nobility, by reason of the stout
assistance which they received from the Prince, they exercised brutish
insolences, by means whereof, in less then a months space, a dreadful fire of
civil War was kindled in Lesbos. Tacitus this mean while appearing in public
to be a well-wisher to the general peace, interposed himself as a mediator to
compose those differences, which in private he wished might never have an end;
and showed himself to be so zealous of all their goods, as he became the
absolute arbitrator of the differences between both sides: And making use of
the calamities of others, as an instrument whereby to agrandize his Authority,
he first infused great fear into the people, that they would be quickly cut in
pieces by the power of the Nobility, if they did not all the sooner find out
some remedy for their preservation. By this means he easily obtained their good
wills, that a Militia of foreign Soldiers should be admitted into the
Metropolitan City, to keep them from being overpowered by the Nobility, which
Militia he honested by the name of Soldiers of Peace: And they, with
approbation of the Nobility, were permitted to be armed, under pretense, that
by them he would curb the people, who were already grown too insolent. The
Soldiers were three thousand in number, and an intiment confident of Tacitus
was by him given them for their chief Commander. And to the end that they might
be faithful to him, and ready to serve him upon all occasions, he obliged them
not only by oaths, gifts, and all demonstrations of liberality; but made them
as partial to him, as they were hateful to the Nobility and common people, by
permitting them to commit all sorts of cruelty and plunder against the Nobility
and Commons of Lesbos, Tacitus being thus fortified in his power and greatness,
did in a few days fill the Senate and City Lesbos, as also the whole State,
with Promooters and Spies, which he incensed against the chiefest of the
Nobility of Lesbos, who under pretense of diverse faults, were bereft of their
Estates and employments, wherewith he exalted and agrandized their accusers.
Wherefore the chief men of the Senate, some through avarice, some through
ambition, and very many to save their own lives, became wicked Ministers of
their Princes cruelty and ambition, by accusing, and falsely calumniating the
greatest Subjects of the State. Moreover, such Senators as he knew he could not
oppress by false accusations, he employed them abroad in foreign Negotiations,
which were expensive, and could cause no jealousies; then by little and little
he disarmed under color of various pretense, the ancient Officers who had the
charge of the Militia, and put their arms into the hands of such as were
affectionate to him; and whilst by this deep and wicked cunning, he abased the
powerful, he exalted new men, chosen out of the meanest sort of the people, and
who did wholly depend upon him, to be Senators, and other supreme Magistrates.
Then under color of securing the State from being invaded by foreign Princes,
he began to begirt it round with strong Citadels, which he put into the custody
of forreiners, who were his friends. And because he could not endure that the
people and Nobility should be armed, and knew that to disarm them, would be a
dangerous business, he made use of a safe way to disarm his Subjects by long
peace, by idleness, or wantonness, and by using severe justice upon such as did
any ways dispute these their necessary recentments: And totally to irradicate
all virtue from out his Subjects souls, he caused costly Theaters to be built
in the chiefest Cities, wherein pastimes, Comedies, Huntings, and other
delightful spectacles, were perpetually represented, by the overmuch use
whereof the people and the Nobility, gave over their ancient care of public
affairs, and the thought of Military exercises: And as one who knew very well,
that to come by his desired end of erecting a Tyrannical Government over a
people who were born freemen, and had long lived in liberty, it was requisite
to glut them with perpetual plenty and abundance, Tacitus gave himself wholly
to provide that great store of all good things, should always be found in his
State.

Thus far Tacitus his affairs past on successfully; but when he would go about
the last precept of Tyranny, by laying snares for the lives of some great
Senators which he was jealous of, he contracted so cruel and so universal a
hatred against him, as lest he might be oppressed by a great conspiracy which he
found was plotted against him, he fled disguised six days since from Lesbos,
and returned to lead a private life in Parnassus. His Nephew Pliny, who as all
the Vertuosi know, was always the best friend that ever Tacitus had, was the
first that came to visit him; he with a Roman freedom, greatly reprehended his
friend, that having prescribed such approved Rules of well governing States, to
others, he himself should prove so unfortunate in his Principality of Lesbos.
The same Pliny relates that Cornelius Tacitus gave him these very words for
answer; Heaven (my Pliny) is not so far distant from earth, nor does snow so
far differ in color from cole, as the exercise of Empire is far from, and
unlike unto the Theory of Politic Precepts, and the best Rules of Reason of
State: For that sentence which in Galba's person I teach Piso, and which has
won me so much credit amongst men, as it has been thought to be the answer of
an Oracle, and which the ignorant think may easily be put in practice, has in
the use thereof proved very unfortunate to me: The reason is, because the
Metamorphosis is too great, when from being a private man, one becomes a Prince.
And know Pliny, that private men hate and detest many things as great defects,
and apparent vices in Princes, which are virtuous and excellent perfections. I
tell thee this, for that when I was first chosen Prince of Lesbos, I was
resolved to steer the Navigation of my Principality by the assured North star
of the aforesaid sentence; and therefore I diligently informed my self of all
my Predicessors actions, firmly resolving to imitate him in those which were
praised, and to shun those which were blamed in him: I knew that he had greatly
offended the Senate by assuming too much Authority, by which he had taken unto
himself the affairs of all the Magistrates; in so much as little more then the
bare name of Magistracy remained unto them. I found he was much hated for the
little esteem he made of the Nobility, and for that he would have all the
affairs of the Senate depend upon him: And I knew also, that in his austeere
manner of life, by which it appeared he desired to govern the State of Lesbos
rather by absolute Dominion, and as an hereditary Prince, then as an elective
Lord by limited Authority, he had distasted all men. Whilst I was a private man,
I thought this way of Government to be brutish, and altogether Tyrannical, and
therefore I resolved to shun it. But know, that the very first hour took upon
me my Principality, I found those my first wholesome resolutions to be so grub'd
up and eradicated by the cursed power of Rule, as to say it properly unto you,
Vi Dominationis convulsus and mutatus. Tacit. lib. 4. Annall. I began to think
those my Predicessors actions, which whilst I was a private man; I esteemed so
foolish, insolent, and Tyrannical, to be excellently good, and not things done
out of fancy, or by chance, but good precepts politic resolutions, and
necessary State-Reason: So as not able any ways to resist the violent ambition
of Government, I thought I should be baser then a Pack-bearer, if I did not
arrogate unto my self the whole power of command in Lesbos, where the Prince
lives with much limited Authority; which my inordinate desire did occasion that
bad satisfaction in the Senate, and whole people of Lesbos, which has made me
run upon the Rock which you see. All which disorders (my Pliny) are occasioned
not through my ignorance, but through my knowing too much: For in the
Principality of Lesbos, where people live between Liberty and Slavery, Nec
totam Libertatem, nec totam Servitutem patipossunt. Tacit. lib. 1. Hist. They
can neither endure to be wholly slaves, nor wholly free. He who will Reign
long quietly there, must not only resolve to leave things as he found them, but
must be of a peaceful spirit, so far from ambition, as that he may be able to
put in practice the hard precept, of living himself, and suffering others to
live: so as men who are absolutely Politicians, as I am, who are incited by
nature to affect sole Dominion, and who will measure all things by their Reason
of State, prove very unfortunate in Elective Principalities.

The XXX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo being aware of the great disorder occasioned amongst men by the flight
of Fidelity; By assistance of the Muses, and of the sublimest Heroic Virtues,
procures her return to Parnassus.

IT cannot be said by the tongue of man, how greatly Apollo was troubled at the
secret and sudden departure from Parnassus some weeks since (as you have heard)
of the Illustrious Virtue, Fidelity: For his Majesty could not with patience
think that the world should be deprived of so beautiful a Princess: His
afflictions were increased by hearing of the great disorders which arose in all
places, between the people and sacred Friendship, the only delight of mankind;
since she saw her self forsaken by Fidelity, lest she might receive some fowl
affront from Fraud, she would no longer live amongst men, who being freed from
the Oath of Allegiance to their Princes, and from the severe bond of love, by
which they are bound unto their private friends, they grew so very perfidious,
and so savagely seditious, as allowing all sorts of wickedness to be lawful,
they drive away pure Fidelity by treachery, from human familiarity, and holy
peace by sedition, filling the whole world with blood, theft, and all
perfidious and cruel confusion. Apollo was moreover perpetually troubled with
the just Appeals of Princes, who publicly protested, that by reason of their
Subjects heinous infidelity, they were forced to forgo the Government of
mankind. Wherefore Apollo thought it necessary (as a remedy for so great
disorder) to call a Diet of the States General, which he did on the twentieth
of the last month, whither he summoned the Princes Poets, and the Deputies of
all virtuous Nations; who not failing to appear on the prefixed day, such hatred
was discovered in many people against their Princes, as they said openly, that
not through any disloyalty, but that driven by despair, they had for ever
banished that Loyalty from out their hearts; which, as being very prejuditial to
them, they were resolved never any more to acknowledge; by reason that it was
basely abused by many Princes. For in times past Subjects Loyalty served as a
means to force Princes to barter civil and courteous proceedings, with their
peoples faithful service; but now they saw clearly that the virtue of humble
and prostrate obedience, was accounted the baseness of an abject mind; and the
merit of a voluntary and incorrupt Loyalty, necessity of service. By which
foul way of proceeding, public disorders were so far advanced, as many were
forced to put on the resolution which now was seen, only that Capricious
Princes might clearly know, that the Authority of commanding was soon lost,
when the ill usage of Subjects, and ingratitude toward them, had so exceeded
all humane patience, as they had made Nations which were naturally well
disposed to obey, resolve to admit of no more Masters, but rather hazard
themselves in a free Government, then to be so undervalued, rent in pieces, and
cruelly dealt with by Princes. Though the anger of Princes toward their people
was great, and the peoples distastes greater, yet the Illustrious Muses,
assisted by the Heroic Virtues, who labored very much to bring a business of
so great concernment to a happy end, did at last by their dexterity, mollify
and appease the minds of incenst Princes, and the hearts of venomed people: And
the Diet was dissolved upon these Articles of agreement; That the people should
solemnly promise to admit again of Loyalty into their bosoms, and swear to make
her absolute Mistress of their hearts: And that Princes should be bound to
banish avarice and cruelty from out their breasts, and possess their souls
fully with liberality and clemency, which were the things that made Subjects
loyal and obedient. Since it plainly appeared by authenticate faith, and was
witnessed by Gaius Plinius, and the rest of Natural Historians, That sheep
which did so willingly obey their Shepherds, did infinitely abhor Butchers: And
that it was impossible to make Dogs (though naturally very faithful and
loving to men) wag their tails, and leap about them, who gave them more blows
then bits of bread.

The XXXI. ADVERTISEMENT.
In the time of Carneval, the Vertuosi in Parnassus run races, and make other
demonstrations of mirth, and jollitie.

THe time of the Vertuosi's festivals, and public rejoycings being come,
Apollo caused Macrobius to publish by sound of Trumpet, in the Chair
appropriated thereunto, Aulus Gelius his Saturnalia (whom the reformers of the
modern Pedantry call Messer Agillio) his pleasant Attick Nights; and the
pleasant genial or jovial days of Alessandro de gli Alessandri, and finally
the merry Bacchenalia of the Romans, the Lords of the world, and supreme
Princes of Learning, all of them festival and merry days, and consecrated by
the Genius of gallant men: and by his Majesty's particular edict it was
commanded that they should be cheerfully celebrated by all the Nations of the
Vertuosi which inhabit Parnassus, according to the institutions and customs of
their several Countries. As soon as this so joyful news was made known to the
people, the rich public Libraries were opened in Parnassus, and the famous
Libraries of private men, into which during those days of jubilee, it was
lawful for every one to enter, to come out of, and to tarry there as long as
they listed, to surfeit by their perpetual reading upon the savory viands which
the Vertuosi have first seasoned, and then disht up at the plentiful Table of
their Composures.

It was an honorable and a joyful spectacle to see the public invitations
made by Plato, by Athenaeus, and the other great Princes of the Court,
throughout the whole streets and houses of Parnassus, where the Vertuosi drank
deeply of the Falerno of Learning, and filled their bellies till they were
ready to burst with good Discipline. Only the Doctors of Law, seeing the Shop
of their Tribunals, and of their litigious Traffic shut, were sad, and died
for hunger amidst such plenty of savory meats, and abundance of merriments: For
mere Pettifoggers being many ages before declared by his Majesty to be mere
Asses, he inhibited them to feed upon the sweet food of Divinity, Philosophy,
Poetry, Astrology, and other savory Sciences, upon which the acutest Wits do
only feed. Wherefore the Pettifoggers were seen, much to their shame, to go
through Kitchins licking of Ladles, whereas other Scienced men were served with
all the delicacies of Learning; and then it was that highminded spirits did
detest the sordid study of Law-Cases, and great Volumes of trivial Law, as that
which being only able to fatten the foul great body of Wealth, makes curious
wits die of the Hectic Fever: But above all the rest, the invitation made by
Pliny, was the most famous, to which the most learned in all Sciences that were
in Parnassus, being come, they were all satisfied according to their several
pallats, with costly and pleasant Cates. And though at that splendid Feast they
did for the most part only eat and swallow Gudgins, yet were they all so well
dressed, and handsomely disht in by that copious. Wit, as they were eaten by all
the Guest with much delight, praised for their excellency, and taken for truths.

The third day of the Feast there appeared two load of Neapolitan Villanelle
Fruits of Parthenope, which for being come from that virtuous Climat, were
suddenly bought up and eaten by the hunger-starved wits of the Litterati; but
because through their much slipperiness, or glibness, they occasioned dangerous
Fluxes in most that eat them, such impurities were forthwith forbidden by the
Censors to be any more brought into Parnassus. The same day Tansillus clad like
a Gardner, presented Apollo with a basket full of Neapolitan Brocali, the
excellencies whereof he did so exagerate in four Stanzas which he on the sudden
recited, as having persuaded his Majesty to taste them, as soon as by the very
smell he found them to be ordinary Coleworts, he turned toward Tansillus, and
said, All your Poetry will never make your Neapolitan Brocali prove any thing
bu^ common Coleworts; and Coleworts do not deserve the praise of so much
prittle prattle.

Soon after, a handsome Peasant of Ferrara, called Pastor Fido, presented his
Majesty with an odoriferous handsome Tart: Apollo not staying for the usual
hour of dinner, fell to eat it with such an appetite in the open street, as he
lickt his lips and fingers ends, according to the Countrey-fashion, when he
tasted the Pastoral Tart; and seemed so delighted with that food, as he thought
it not only good manners, but even requisite to give part thereof to the
Illustrious Muses, left that they, who are always big with Verse, by longing
to taste thereof, might miscarry, or might be delivered of a Poem marked with
some fowl spot of ignorance. Whilst the Muses, being called by his Majesty,
did together with Apollo, eat the Tart of that fortunate Shepherd with such
delight, the Vertuosi who stood looking on, longed very much to taste so savory
a thing. Wherefore his Majesty gave every one of them a piece of it; and the
Tart was so commended, as they all confessed there could nothing of more delicate
in that kind be eaten. There was only one of the Vertuosi who said it nauseated
him, as being too Melli^uous; to whom Apollo, being much incensed, said, That
sweetness was the friend of Nature, and that those that were not mightily
delighted therewithal, had a depraved taste, and that he was certainly a
malignant, if he did not confess that that delicate Tart, being seasoned with
more conceptions then words, was raised up with the Paste of Capons skins; and
that he made himself to be known to be one of those sour detractors, who
blinded by envy, blame such things as are to be imitated by extraordinarily
fruitful wits: But his Majesty's anger, and the dread which the Vertuoso was
in, were turned to laughter, when the Tart being wholly eaten, Signco^
Giovandalla Casa, took the Plate whereon it stood, and licking it with equal
greediness and unmannerliness, told his Majesty and the Muses, that in things
that do ravish with delight, men were not Masters of themselves, nor could they
remember Gallateo's rules, and that in time of Carneval, it was lawful to
commit exorbitances.

His Majesty went afterward about the Foro Massimo, and was much delighted to
see every corner full of canvasing and disputations, and the Piazza thronged
with Orators, who made Learned Orations in praise of the Learned Sciences; and
bitter invectives against ignorance. Some fantastical Italian Poets added to
his Majesty's mirth, many of which being mounted upon benches, sung an infinite
number of Verses ex tempore, which showed they could not imitate the Latin
Poets, who through difficulty of feet, by which their Verses walk, are forced
to go leasurely.

And now Apollo dismissed the Muses, who went sporting themselves for many hours
through the gladsom street with their inamored Poets; and were much delighted
in Mauro's shop, wherein were great store of large and little beans, with which
some of those Dieties crammed their bellies full: And it was noted for a very
strange thing, that they liked the empty husks better then those that had
kernels in them. They then cast their eye upon Monsieur de la Casa's Oven; they
entered where Varchi was kneading, and from thence went into the shop where
Iovan Baptista Marini made Spanish Buskins, whereof whilst Coppetta would have
pulled on one, and it proving to be very straight, he used violence in plucking
of it on, that he tore it, so as (which occasioned much laughter in the, rest)
he pulled off one of the straps, and gave a strapping fart.

As Apollo returned afterward to his Royal Palace, some Courtiers of great
Princes desired they might have leave to make some Mascherades; to whom his
Majesty answered, That they needed not to mask or disguise their faces, for
that their souls were so well masked, as they might go any where safely, for he
assured them they could not be known, neither by the eye, nor yet by the
judgment of any man, how wise soever.

The next day, according to custom, they ran Races with their Coaches; and it
fell out odly amongst those of four wheels, for many Charrets appearing at the
first starting with new wheels well greased, and swift horses, Cornelius
Tacitus appeared there with a three-wheel'd Charret, swathed round about, and
drawn by lean weather-wrung-Jades, which he had hired. And then it was that
Tacitus made his skill appear; for being started, whilst all the other skillful
Coachmen belabored themselves in the Cource, and deafned all the lookers on
with the noise they made in whipping their horses, and speaking unto them,
crying, stand up; Tacitus very tacitly, no ways discomposing himself, by his
rare dexterity, and admirable skill, did so seasonably switch and put on his
horses, and did so judiciously guide his disordered Charret, as he was come to
the Staff or Post, before the other fleeter Charrets had driven two thirds of
the way. Whereby all the Vertuosi of this State discerned how much the
dexterity of a juditious wit, exceeds strength or force in all things in so
much, as the wisest said, that they who carry on their business handsomely, with
skill and dexterity, are fit to bring any disordered enterprise to a good end.
The Vertuosi were not so much delighted in seeing the Courtiers run on foot
naked: For they were much troubled to see what injustice was used in the
inequality of the starting-places; which the ignoble and poor Vertuosi took
from far off; whereas they that were noble and wealthy, were so near the
staff, as without running, they might touch it, if they would but put forth
their hand: So as by such inequality, they thought it rather a thing purchased
by fortune, then gotten by industrious labor, when at Court a poor Litterato
comes by the staff of honor and Supreme dignities. Yet in this last Race it was
observed, that many Noble and rich men came behind, and the poor mean runners
won the reward: And though some say they did it through the humorousness of
Princes, and by favors backed by Court; yet the more judicious sort affirm, that
it is necessary for such who by their dexterity and fair behavior, know how to
gain their Princes love, and have the wit to arive at highest preferments from
them, to have good legs to run withal. But great was the mirth which was
caused in all the people, by a chance which happened between two very noted
Personages of the Court, who (as it often falls out) whilst the one thought to
keep the other back, they justled one another, and grew so angry, as giving
over the chief business of who should win the Race, in the midst of the way
(which was very dirty) they indiscreetly fell together by the ears, and after
having cruelly bespattered one another, by foul accusations, and shameful
calumnies, they became a ridiculous spectacle to the lookers on; and for their
greater shame, were hist at by them. This, though it appeared ridiculous to the
foolish rabble, was notwithstanding thought so worthy consideration by his
Majesty, that, as being very exemplary, he gave order that it should be cut in
Marble by Praxiteles, that it might serve everlastingly for a Lesson to
wrangling Courtiers. It merits memory, that whilst Servius Honoratus, Master of
the Barbary Horse which won the Race, went crying through Parnassus (as the
custom is) Long live Virgil, that gallant Personage, who counts that shame,
which other Poets account glory, caused Servius to be bastinadoed by his
servant Daretes; for which act, though Apollo was much troubled at it, Virgil
justified himself, saying, That he had left such memory behind him in the
world, as his name ought to be exalted and celebrated for his own worth, not
for the gallantry of a horse. Of former years the Prizes were readily, and
without any ceremony given to those that won them, by the Governor of
Parnassus, and by the Urban Praetor; but this year Apollo would give them with
his own hands: Wherefore he caused it to be intimated to all the Potentates
that were in Parnassus, by the public Parators, that they should appear in the
Royal Hall, that they might be present at so important a ceremony: It seemed a
great novelty to those Princes, to hear that his Majesty would have those
Princes who were summoned only upon weighty occasions, assist at an action
which in former years was thought but mean. Yet his Majesty's commands being
upon pain of punishment, they all appeared. Then Apollo said, I know, my Lords,
that you very much wonder why I my self should now do that with so much
solemnity, which formerly was performed by my Officers without any manner of
ceremony: But because not only all your happiness, but even all the greatest
satisfaction which the the people over whom you command, does depend on this
sole action; for your own advantage I would have you present at it. Learn then
of me, all you Rulers of the earth, to banish all private passions from out your
hearts; and in rewarding those that serve you, govern your selves by their
deserts, not by your own humors, and giving (as you see me do now) the prize of
dignities, and reward of honors to those who by their honorable and laborious
course of life have deserved them, you and your posterity will reign happily
for ever: When by doing otherwise, you will dishonor your selves, ruin your
States, and of great Princes, which now you are, you will in time run evident
danger of becoming private foot Soldiers, only for that you would be inamored
of stinking carrion.

The XXXII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Militia of Ianisaries, seeing one of their Soldiers ill rewarded, mutiny
in the Ottoman Monarchy, and are by Apollo quieted.

TO the great terror of all the Potentates of this State of Parnassus in the
Ottaman Quarter such an uproar arose, as Alarms were given throughout the whole
City; and that potent Signory presently drew forth her numerous Armies, and as
if she would come to a general battle, she ordered them in diverse squadrons;
wherefore the Germans, Spaniards, and Princes of Italy, growing very jealous,
took up arms also, and sent out their Scouts to learn the reason of those
rumors; who brought back word, that the whole Militia of Janisaries were
mutinied against the Ottaman Monarchy. Apollo, who was presently advertised
thereof by the Pretorian Bands of Satirical Poets who keep Corpse de Guard
continually in Foro Delfico, caused the uprore to be quieted, and then gave
command that the Ottaman Monarchy, and the chief Commanders of the Janisaries
who had mutinied, should appear before him: And because the Ottaman Monarchy,
as also the Janisaries would present themselves before Apollo, accompanied by
multitudes of men, they were told by the Lyrick Poets, who supply the place of
Porters, that in such occasion of tumults, people came modestly attended to
Princes; wherefore the Ottaman Monarchy with his chief Vizier, and the
Gianasary who had been the occasion of this uprore, without any other company,
were admitted unto his Majesty's Audience. Apollo demanded of the Janisary the
true cause of that Tumult? Who answered, That he, accompanied by a Spahi, with
evident danger of losing their lives, had taken by surprise the important Town
of Testis in Persia: for which action, which was of infinite advantage to the
Ottaman Empire, the Spahi was largely rewarded by being made Captain General of
the Asian Cavallery, and that he who had merited as much, as the Spahi was so
ingratefully dealt withal, as he was only made Spahi della Porta; which foul
partiallity was so much detested by the whole Militia of Janiaries, as they had
jointly taken up Arms to revenge so great an injury. Apollo having heard this,
turned to the Ottaman Monarchy, and told her that he much wondered why such a
Princess as she who professed to recompense the worth and merit of her
soldiers with infinite rewards, had showed her self so partial toward that
Janisary. To which the Ottaman Monarchy answered, that she had not so highly
rewarded the Janisary as he had done the Spahi (though he very well knew it
became him so to have done) out of an important reason, that it was well known
to all men, that she took the young sons of her Christian Subjects, whereof he
made three choices; making such as were of best natural parts, a Seminary of
youths, who when they came to years of being employed, they were placed in
several services of the Chamber, and about the very person of the Ottaman
Emperors; and to these, when they came to more mature years, the Government of
Provinces was given, the care of Armies, and the absolute command of his
greatest Empire. That out of the second choice he made his mighty
Horse-Militia, and his Gentil husmini della Porta, called Spahi. And out of the
third, which was the refuge, and those of weakest natural parts, he formed his
formidable Militia of Janisaries. And if it should so fall out, that a Spahi
should by his worth exceed the expectation which was had of him (as was seen in
the Spahi who had surprised the Fort of Testis), he was admitted into the first
rank; but if it should happen that any extraordinary worth should be found in a
Janisary, by which he might have done some act of much merit, yet they were
never raised to any higher degree by the Ottaman Emperors, than to the degree
of Spahi. And that the reason of this his resolution was ready; for that the
first Seminary of Bassaes, as also the second of the Spahi, and the third of
the Janisaries, every one of them abundantly loving the brethren of their own
Classis, to give the command of Armies, or Government of Provinces to men of
the first or second Seraglio, who were very few in comparison of the Janisarie
Militia, was no ways dangerous; but that to entrust places of jelousie in the
hands of a Captain, or other Officer, who was come out of the Janisarian body,
would be an indiscreet and dangerous advice, by reason of the great retinue of
so dreadful a Militia that such a Subject would have: And so much the more,
for that whereas the Bassa's and Spahi's being men highly minded, and who do
not willingly subject themselves to their equals, live continually in strife,
jelousies, and emulation, by reason of their pretenses to the same preferments;
whereas the Janisaries, as being an ignorant sort of people, did not only live
in greater union, but would greatly admire, love, and even adore those who by
their extraordinary worth, were got out of their Classis. That therefore, to
advance one to the Supreme power of a General, who would be followed and
beloved by so mighty a Militia, would be no better then to nurse up a serpent
in ones bosom, which did misbecome a wise Prince to do. And that the Ottaman
Emperors held it for an infallible maxim in Policy. That that Militia on which
the perpetuity, greatness and selicity of an Empire was grounded, should be
commanded in chief by a foreiner; who would be obeyed by the Army, or rather
out of the reverence which the Soldiers bear unto their Prince, then for any
merit, Valor, Nobility, or attendance they should find in the reiner. When
Apollo had heard this justification made by the Ottaman Empire, he did so much
admire her wisdom, as he commanded that Janisary to be quiet: And turning to
some Vertuosi that stood by, and said, that without reading wicked Bodine, or
mischievous Machiavil, he found who was a perfect Politician; since such
barbarous Princes, and who profess utter enmity to Learning; were the Kings of
men, in the exact understanding how to govern the world, and in the exquisite
practice of the best State-Reason.

The XXXIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo frees Carlo Sigonio, and Dionigi Atanigi, the first being accused of
Ingratitude by Pietro Vittorio, and the other by Hannibal Caro.

Whilst Apollo sat this morning in the Tribunal of Gratitude, in the company
of the other Judges, Carlo Sigonio, a Learned Noble man of Modena, was brought
before his Majesty by the Keepers of the Prison, fast bound; whom Piero
Vittorio a Florentine, complained against bitterly, for that this Sigonio being
seized on by the Sargeants, who were carrying him to prison for a debt of a
thousand Ducats which he ought to Paulo Manutio, he, to keep his friend from
suffering such an affront, and from the prejudice of long imprisonment, had
with such liberality, as was more then he could well do, disburst the thousand
Ducats to Manutio, which having afterward re-demanded of Sigonio, he had set
several times for the payment of it, but Sigonio still broke his word, so as
finding himself at last abused, he was enforced much against his will, to
imprison him; and that seeing his former friendship strengthened by so great a
courtesy, was turned into hatred, he was much grieved that Sigonio in so just
a cause should so often falcifie his promise; he therefore desired, that as an
unacknowledging and ungrateful man, he might receive condign punishment,
according to the Laws of Gratitude.

Apollo did so little value Vittorio's Impeachment, as openly taking upon him
Sigonios protection, he said that they broke their words who did not fulfill
such things as were in their power to do; but as for the promise of paying of
moneys upon a prefixed day, they were only to blame, who coining moneys by the
malignity of a lying intention, and not by the mere want of coin, did not make
good their promise. Then turning to Vittorio, he said, that such a one as he
ought to consider, that the courtesy he had done to Sigonio, was one of those
whereof the obligation of Gratitude was lost, when all that was rigorously
exacted, which was known to be deserved by a friend: For such courtesies as did
exceed the condition of the receiver, were done by the Vertuosi, only to
discover their magnanimous liberal mind, and only the more to oblige a man: and
that great good turns done to such friends as were of ability, were
sufficiently rewarded by purchase of the fame of being Bountiful and Liberal.

As Apollo had ended this cause, the Impeachment was heard which the
Commendador Hannibal Caro made against Dionigi Atonigi, wherein it was
alleged, That when Mario Molza died for having had to do with too many women,
he left a little daughter of his to his custody, which when she came to be
sixteen years old, he gave to wife to Atonigi with a Portion of 40000 Crowns:
In which resolution, the violence of his affection to Atonigi, had overcome the
consideration of his beggarly estate, which ought to have kept him from making
that alliance. And that Atonigi being thus well dealt withal by his dear
friend, was not ashamed in recompense of so great a good turn, to acknowledge
it by the beggarly gift of a douzen shirts, and four hand-towels: And that
after so great ingratitude, the very marriage day he had very discourteously
forbidden him his house; he then added with tears in his eyes, that he having
bred up that young woman as if she had been his own beloved daughter, she
likewise loved him as if he had been her father, and that to see himself
deprived of her so dearly prized conversation, was the thing of the world that
did most torment him. Apollo answered Caro, That doubtlesly Atonigi had done
amiss; and therefore commanded, that to complete the gift of twelve shirts, and
four hand-towels, he should immediately add a douzen handkerchifs, and eight
night-caps, with which demonstration of gratefulness, Caro should think himself
well rewarded by Atonigi. When Caro heard this judgment given by Apollo, he
was not only (as it became him to have been) not appeased, but growing very
outrageous, he freely said, That in this discourteous act of Atonigi, Tacitus
his Sentence was proved very true upon himself, That, Benificiaeo usque laeta
sunt, dum videntur exolviposse, ubi multum antevenere, pro gratia odium
redditur. Tacit. lib. 4: Ann.

Benefits are so long welcome, as there is any appearance of a possibility of
repayment, which when it is much exceeded, hatred is repaid instead of love.

Apollo hearing this, answered Caro somewhat angerly, That Tacitus his Sentence
was very true, but very badly understood by him, and by many others: For great
benefits were usually seen to berepaid with infinite ingratitude, more through
the impertinency of the Benifactor in exacting Gratitunde of another
Obligation, then through the discourtesie of the receiver. Then growing more
incenst, his Majesty said to Caro, Do not you know, Signor Hanibal, that the
extraordinary affection which Guardians bear their women-Wards, when they are
once grown into their teens, is usually turned into libidinous love? And are
you one of those special Officers, whereof I have known diverse, That for having
helped a friend to a rich wife, will be paid for their good turn, by a nights
lodging with the Bride? And in so many years as you have lived in the well
pollisht Court of Rome, have not you learnt, that as well wives, as
Principalities, cannot be given to a friend, with intension of reserving the
use of them to ones self, without running apparent danger of having the
difference decided by the sword? Then Apollo said thus to Atonigi; My beloved
Dionigi, enjoy thy dear wife in peace and quiet; and if Caro shall at any time
tax thee of ingratitude, call you him Impertinent, and so you shall give him
his due name.

The XXXIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Publius Terentius being by order from Giasone dol Maino, an Urban Praetor,
charged with Fornication; is by Apollo freed, with much derision to the Praetor.

PUblius Terentius lives in a little, but very well accommodated house in the
quarters of the Commick Poets attended only by his maidservant Bacchide, and
Davus his manservant. And though Bacchide in the flower of her age was very
handsome, and a great friend of Terentius, and of many other Commick Poets, yet
now being very old, and therefore somewhat deformed, she lives modestly, and
without any scandal, in Terentius his house, and without offense unto the
neighbors. But some ten days since, Giasone Mayno a Modern Praetor of Urban,
commanded Terentius upon a certain penalty, That he should put Bacchide out of
his house, and so free himself from the shame of keeping a public Concubin.
Terentius did not only not obey this command, but refused to pay the
amercement; wherefore the Praetor gave order for arresting his body, and he was
yesterday taken; whereat Apollo was so highly offended, as he said in public,
that even in Parnassus the wicked abuse was brought in, by his rather malicious
then ignorant Officers, of being quick-sighted in appearance; but blind in the
substance of affairs. Wherefore giving order that Terentius should be forthwith
set at liberty, he caused Giasone, to the infinite shame of so great a Lawyer,
to be cast into the same Prison; and did not only publicly disgrace him, by
taking from him the place of Praetor, but did exceedingly grieve him by
substituting Philippo Decio in his place, who was his capital enemy. And Decio
being gone yesterday to Apollo, to receive the Mace and Tipstaff, the
particular ensigns of the Pretorian Dignity, his Majesty told him, that he
might learn that by Giasons punishment, that good Judges, who in the
administration of Justice, did mind more the pleasing of God, then making merry
with men, the Alessi were first driven out of the doors of respected Poets, and
then the Bacchidi.

The XXXV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Public Audience is given by Apollo, wherein by wise Answers, he decides many
Affairs of his Vertuosi.

THe contentment of Princes who love to see their people well satisfied,
consisting chiefly in the often hearing all men's grievances; Apollo, to boot
with his other often Audiences, gives public Audience every Thursday in his
great Hall, attended by his Senats, Collaterals, and full Parliaments of this
Court. And because that therein virtuous resolutions are had, and such as are
worthy to be known by those who living far from this State, have the curiosity
to hear news from Parnassus; Menante, who was present at the last Audience,
expressly that he might satisfy his Customers, will now give you a true
relation of all the chief things that happened there.

The first who addressed themselves to Apollo in this Audience, were two
honorable Ambassadors, who told his Majesty that they were sent from mankind,
who weary of the necessity they were in, of eating every morning and evening,
did much bewail, that human Wit, so highly endued, and capable of understanding
and knowing all things, who together with their mothers milk, did drink in the
unexplicable curiosity of still Learning, should notwithstanding be wholly
busied in fordid occupation of cultivating the earth, and in other painful
exercises, only to provide food for himself, as bruit beasts do; that therefore
they were sent to his Majesty to ask council, whether mankind should do well
to beg of Gods Divine Majesty that he would be pleased to grant men the
benefit of living long without meat, as he had done to Dormise, Snakes, Bears,
and otheir Animals. A thing which they desired, only to the end that they might
with a fasting mind or stomach, which does so much better the operations of the
Intellect, apply themselves to the study of all those Sciences which belonged
properly to men.

This request which was thought to be very honorable, and full of virtuous
zeal, by all that heard it, was much derided by Apollo; who answered the
Ambassadors, That those who through strange conceits, and extravagant
novelties, thought to new mould the world, did always fancy unto themselves
ridiculous things. And then he asked the Ambassadors what obligation the earch
had to so great a God. The Ambassadors answered, she was bound to propuce green
grass and plants. Apollo replied, If it were so, Why, for the space of 6000
years and more, that the earth had absolutely obeyed the will of her Creator,
were there no Woods seen but on Mountains and in desert places? The Ambassadors
said, this was because men for their plowing (which was the sustenance of man's
life) did with their Axes cut down the Woods in such places as were aft to bear
Corn. Apollo asked them then again, To what case the world would be reduced, if
husbandmen had not weeded and purged it of such superfluous plants as the earth
produced? The Ambassadors answered, That then doubtless the world would be so
overgrown with wood, as it would be uninhabitable. Apollo asked once more,
whether they did believe that men did busy themselves in cutting down of
Woods, rather out of a desire that free commerce might be had among Nations, or
that they might reap the abundance of fruit which the earth produced, being
sown and planted by man's industry?

To this the Ambassadors replied, That the great abundance of pleasant Products
which by man's industry the earth brought forth, made the noble Art of Husbandry
appear not painful, but full of delight. The Ambassadors having clearly learnt
by this Answer, and by the precedent Interrogatives made by Apollo, That if men
did neither eat nor drink, the world would be so full of Woods and Forests, as
it would rather be a fitting habitations for Bears, Wolves, and other wild
Beasts, then for men, departed the audience much confused.

They being gone, Menenius Agrippa came to Apollo, and told him, That he having
happily ended the important and difficult business of making peace between the
Senate of Rome, and the common people, who being distasted, had withdrawn
themselves into the Aventine Mountain; That he might purcase more Grace from
his Majesty, and a more honorable place in Parnassus, he acquainted him now,
that he had bethought himself of another handsome story; by which he hoped to
agree the great disunion between the Hollanders and the Spaniard. Apollo laughed
to hear this, and answered Menenius. That men's humors were so altered in
process of time, and that hatred was grounded so inveteraly in them, as not
only rediculous tales were not able to appease those obstinate people, nor make
them lay down their perfidiousness which they proposed unto themselves when
first they rebel'd, of purchasing their Liberty at the price of blood, or else
to die in the quarrel: but neither were the sad Tragedies able to effect it,
which to that purpose had been represented upon the Scene of the Low Countries
by the Spaniards, for above the space of fifty years.

Menenio being departed with this little satisfaction; Paolo Vitelli, that
famous conductor of the State of Florence, appeared with his head cut off (a
most horrid spectacle) in the Audience; who complained bitterly of that
Republic, for that in a precipitous-manner, without any confession made by
himself, or any of his friends (who were imprisoned for his sake) which did any
ways prejudice his innocence, he out of slight suspicions, and not being
suffered to speak for himself, had his head struck off in Florence the very
next morning after his imprisonment: And that the Judgment was hastened, not
for that the importancy of the fact was such as could brook no delay; but to
hinder the intercession of great Princes, who would have moved to assist him.
Apollo seemed much to abhor that Judgment; and because he greatly loved, and
admired the worth of that Military man, he desired the Judges that they would
give their opinions in the case. Who when they had heard the relation of the
process, gave sentence for Vitelli's innocence: Wherefore Apollo by public
decree did restore Vitelli to his former ancient reputation. Paolo thanked his
Majesty, and very humbly beseeched him, that for his satisfaction, and to keep
other Commonwealths from giving such precipitous Judgments, he would be
pleased to show some rigorous rescentment against the Florentines. Apollo wished
Vitelli to be quiet, for that his son Alessandro making use of the fair
occasion which fell into his hands after the death of Duke Alexander, had so
revenged his fathers death, as had infinitely surpassed all the terms of the
Guardian-ship, for which he was impeached.

As soon as Apollo had given satisfaction to Vitelli, Carmagnuolo, a famous
Venetian Captain, who had likewise been beheaded, complained bitterly before
his Majesty against the State of Venice, who out of vain suspicions had
unjustly taken off his head: And then he delivered his Process and his Sentence
into Apollo's hands. Apollo, without either receiving or perusing the process,
willed Carmagnuolo to rest content, for no Review, nor yet appeal was allowed
of, from any sentence maturely given by an Aristocratical Senate (as was that of
Venice) out of the great presumption he had of her exact administration of
Justice.

Carmagnuolo being gone from the audience, an African (to the wonder of every
one) was seen to enter the Hall, leading in his hand a lusty Lion, by a little
chain, which Lion was so very tame, as it fawned upon its Master like a little
whelp. This man presenting himself before Apollo, in the name of Hanibal the
Carthaginian, gave him that Lion, which his Majesty was very well pleased
withal; who asked the African what art he had used to tame, so fierce,
ravenous, jealous, and cruel a Beast? The African answered, By feeding him
continually with his own hand. Apollo turned then toward the Princes, who for
the honor of that Audience, were there in great numbers, and said unto them,
Learn, Lords, by the miracle of this Lion which you see is become so tame, that
fair treatment does domestichize even savage beasts; do you the like by your
Subjects, and make them not come hardly by their food, through your angersom
Taxes upon things necessary for human life; for by so doing, you shall not be
beloved, served, and honored by your own natural Subjects only, but even by
the most Foreign and Barbarous Nations of the earth.

This being said, two armed foot-Souldiers appeared in the Audience, who when
they had presented his Majesty with their credential Letters, told him, that
they having forsaken their Country, wives, children, and means, to serve
Princes, without any respect to their own lives; that whilst they bore arms in
the most remote Wars, by virtue of the not only cruel, but inhuman Military
Laws, they were cruelly slain, hung up upon trees, shot to death, by their
Superiors, even for the smallest faults. And that through the unheard of
cruelty of Modern Commanders, the ancient punishment for shaping out of their
quarters, of having their share of provant in Barley, and other less severe
executions, being now no longer in use, every least misdemeanor, were it but of
omission, was punished with death; and not he who understood, or knew most, was
thought the best Judge in the Camp, but he who was most resolute in executing
cruelty; and that the inhumanity of Military Laws was grown so great, as the
circumspection, equity, and consideration which they ought to have who judge
not beasts, but men, was esteemed poorness of spirit, and idle folly. That
therefore the universality of Soldiers so sorely afflicted, did humbly beseech
his Majesty, that he would be pleased to order the moderation of so inhuman
Laws. There was not any one in the Audience, how severe soever, who was not
moved to hear the barbarity of these Military Laws: Only Apollo showed no
compunction, but with an angry countenance, thus answered those soldiers; Who
forces you to forgo your own homes, and to change the wholesome human Laws under
which you are born, with those severe ones which are practiced in War? He who
falls down of himself, deserves not to be raised up, nor is there any mercy to
be hoped for from one who is so very cruel to himself.

This request having received its answer, much to the delight of all the
Vertuosi that were at the Audience, the famous Printers appeared before.
Apollo, namely, Sebastian Grifo, Guilielmo Ruell of Lions, Christofano Plautino
of Antwerp, the Giunti of Florence, Giolito, Valgresi, and many others from
Venice; and amongst these the learned Aldo Manutio did not disdain to make one,
who in the name of all his fellows, told Apollo; That of all Modern Inventions
found out by the wit of man, he thought the precedence ought to be given to the
Press, both for the use and admirable felicity thereof: A benefit, which had
the ancient Litterati had, they would not have so lamented the burning of
former Libraries; and that now the Press had not only for ever secured the past
and present labors of the Vertuosi, but had made the way to Learning much more
easy; and that his Majesty's State wanting so excellent an invention, if he
should so please, they would for the public good, bring it upon their own cost
and charges, into Parnassus. Apollo absolutely refused that offer, and said,
That men praised the Art of Printing upon very indiscreet grounds; for it was
that that had infinitely obscured the glory of the Liberal Sciences: For having
made Libraries more numerous then good, they were admired only by the ignorant;
and that when with infinite labor, the writings of other men were copyed out
by the pen, such as deserved not to pass through the hands of his Litterati,
they and their shame died in the house of their unfortunate Author: whereas now
so great abundance of foolish and ignorant volumes were printed, as that
Libraries were shamefully crammed with them, to the little reputation of the
Liberal Sciences, and of his Litterati; and that by the reason of the
unexhausted store which were printed of the learned labors of the Vertuosi,
the Homers, Virgils, Ciceros divine and painful labors, which for the miracle
of their wits, ought to be shown to men only upon some particular days of the
year, were polluted by flies and moths in every Book binders shop: That
therefore they might be gone when they pleased, for he would by no means admit
of the break-neck of the too ambitious Litterati into Parnassus.

Presently after this, Seneca the Moralist appeared before his Majesty, who
had caused his cruel enemy Publio Suilio to be personally cited before that
Audience; and rather in rage then anger, complained of certain injurious words
which that man had spoken to the prejudice of his reputation; wherefore he
pressed that he might be punished as a slanderer. Apollo commanded Suilio to
repeat the words by which Seneca took himself to be so highly injured. Suilio
confessed ingeniously, that moved thereunto rather out of truth, then any private
hatred, upon a certain occasion which arose, he had reproached Seneca with
these words used by him, Qua sapientia, Quibus Philosophorum preceptis; intra
quadrienium regia amicitiae, ter millies sestertium paravisset? Romae
testamenta, and orbos velut Indagine ejus capi. Italiam and Provincias, immenso
fenore hauriri. Tacit. lib. 13. Annall.

Seneca perceiving that Apollo was very much scandalized at the excessive
getting of seven millions and a half of moneys in so short a time, told Apollo,
the world knew his wealth, though it were very great, proceeded not from any
greedy desire he had of riches, but from Neros mere liberality. Apollo, who did
not approve of Senecas excuse, said freely to him, That the flood of that his
immence wealth, which was very shameful in such a Philosoper as he was,
especially when gotten in the twinkling of an eye, must of necessity have
received troubled waters from the torrents of fowl industry. To which Seneca
answered, That his condition was not to be considered according to Suilios
rotten tongue, which was so accustomed to lying, as he lived only by the
infamous practice of slander and backbiting, but by the so much praised and
admired writings which he had published. Suilio finding himself thus bitterly
offended by Seneca, answered boldly, that it was not the pen which exactly
showed what men were, but the leading of their lives: For works, not words,
were the true touchstone whereby to know the true allay of men's genius. Seneca
being about to reply, Apollo, who was nauseated by that hateful difference,
turned toward him, and bad him say no more; for great riches gotten by any
whosoever in a short time, brought but little of reputation with them, and that
it behooved of necessity, that to the sweet of so rich treasure, the sour of
public mumurs should be added. At last, fetching a deep sigh from the bottom
of his heart, Apollo said, I heartily wish, O Seneca, that either thou had
never been born, or that thou had not left the seed of so many punctual
followers of thy behavior. Seneca quitted the Audience with this but smally
satisfactory resolution. When the two Noble Princesses, the Roman Lucrece, and
Katherin Sforza, bowed to Apollo, to whom Lucretia (to whose share it fell to
speak first) said, That by witness of all Historians who had written the
affairs of Rome, the foul outrage which Tarquin the proud had done her, having
been the only powerful cause why the Kingdom of Rome was turned into so famous
a Commonwealth, and which was so much celebrated throughout the world, she had
not notwithstanding obtained so honorable a place in Parnassus as she thought
she deserved, and which in the opinion of all the Vertuosi, was due unto her:
And that Helen of Greece, who compared to her, had been the occasion of but
trivial novelties, had obtained a much higher place. She therefore desired,
that if his Majesty should think she had suffered wrong, she might be righted.
Apollo answered Lucretia, That the change of the Roman servitude into Liberty,
and the driving of the Tarquins out of Rome, was attributed to the outrage done
to her, by those only who understood but little of the worlds affairs; but that
those who saw further into State Affairs, knew very well, that the Tarquins
lost so famous a Kingdom, when by their bad comportments they made themselves
so hateful to the Plebeians, on whose good will their greatness was grounded;
for it was hard to bring such a Kingdom as was that of the Romans (which by
reason of the infinite privileges it enjoyed, might be said to live in a sort
of Liberty) to receive total bondage, without openly provoking the enmity of
the Senate, and of the whole Roman Nobility, which were by natural instinct
given to be very desirous of Liberty, and consequently very jealous of their
Countries Privileges. That therefore the Tarquins, though undergoing some
indignities, ought tenaciously to have endeavored the not losing the affection
of the people of Rome, which was that which did not only maintain them in
power, but which might have settled them in a perfect Monarchy: which
leaning-stock, when through their ignorance they lost, they gave a fitting
occasion for the Nobility to join upon any the least accident which might occur
with the common people, and to take up arms aaainst them, just as it fell out
by the outrage which they had committed against her. He further told Lucretia,
that if she should obtain from him the Place in Parnassus which she desired,
she would only have taught people the trivial document, that Princes in their
lust ought above all things, to avoid the staining the blood of their great
ones; but that being in the place she was in, she clearly proved that important
Politic Precept, That when a Prince knows not how to keep the Nobility and
common sort of people divided, and has not wit enough to make either the one
or the other of them greatly partial to himself, but through ignorance makes
both of them his enemies; it is as easy to drive him out of his Dominions, as
it is to throw down an Oak, how great soever, whose roots are first cut away.

With this answer Lucretia was dismissed the Audience, when Catherin Sforsa,
Princess of Imola and Forli, told his Majesty, that her husband being cruelly
murdered by the conspiracy of some of her disloyal Subjects, and the Castle
holding out for her, she, to the end that both her State and her own person
might not fall into her enemies power, made them believe that she would deliver
up the Castle to them, if they would permit her to go thereinto, that so she
might make her Soldiers give way to the surrendering of it, and that for their
security, she would deliver up her little children as Hostages unto them; and
that when she was got into the Castle, she from off the Walls threatened the
Conspirators with condign punishment for the wickedness they had committed:
Wherefore the Conspirators seeing themselves thus deceived, protested openly,
That unless she would deliver up the Castle unto them, they would cut her
children in pieces before her face: That she was not at all astonished at these
their horrid threats, but plucking up her clothes, and showing them her
privacies, she bad them do what they would with her children, for she had still
the mould to cast others in. For which her resolution, she was highly commended
by all Historians. She desired that Apollo would point out for her what place
he should best please, in Parnassus.

The Judges differed much in their opinions concerning this demand; some of
them thought it to be an act of shameless and affronted impudency. But Apollo
affirming, that to keep still within the terms of modesty, was the duty of
private women, said that Princesses who were descended of high and Noble blood,
upon any weighty occasions which should occur unto them, were bound to show
manliness. The vote given by Cino of Pistoia upon this occasion, is not to be
past over in silence, who said; That that place was worthy to be seen by all
men, out of which was come that famous Champion Iovanni d' Medici, Father to
that great Cosmo, who having been the happy Founder of the flourishing Tuscan
Monarchy, from which Italy now receives so great splendour and ornament, has
deserved immortal fame and glory throughout all ages.

Katherin Sforza having obtained the favor she desired, a Court-Notary drew
near to Apollo, who acquainted his Majesty, that Giovan Pico, Count of
Mirandola, that Phoenix of all Sciences, and only ornament of all virtue being
some few days sithence departed this life, had by his last Will and Testament,
left a Legacy of threescore and ten thousand Crowns, to be disposed of to some
such pious use as his Majesty should please to appoint.

Apollo being told this, forthwith commanded that an Hospital for the
incureable, should be built with those moneys, where all diligent care and
charity should be used for the cure of such as were sick of Ambition, an
infirmity from which those that were affected with it, could never free
themselves, Licineo Mecenate, the delight of that State, whose house is a
secure haven for all the Vertuosi, and a sanctuary for the Litterati, said
then, that he by the disposal of his whole Patrimony amongst the Vertuosi,
having deserved the Prerogative that all such as use any extraordinary
liberality toward the Litterati, should be called Mecenati, was much grieved
that his name should be irregularly and lavishly used, by mean and
hunger-starved foolish Scholars, for some little reward which they might
receive from Princes.

Apollo was much troubled at Mecenates complaint, and to the end that that
glorious Title might be perpetually maintained in its due decorum, he decreed
that for the time to come, no man under the pain of infamy, should presume to
give the honorable title of Mecenas to any Prince, from whom he had not
formerly received costly and curious food and raiment during life.

Then great Tamberlan the Scythian appeared before Apollo, in so great pomp, as
gave much delight to all the Audience, who were likewise very much pleased with
the novelty of his fantastical face and habit. This truly singular man who
had the vain glory to be called the Emperor of the East, having (according to
the custom of his Nation) only bowed his head a little to Apollo by way of
salute, said, That he who by his worth had raised himself from the mean
condition of a shepherd, to such a greatness, as to have formed a vast Empire,
and to be the man alone, who of all the Princes of the Universe, had
discomfeited the numerous Ottaman Armies in open field, and taken the Prince of
so dreadful an Empire prisoner, to the end that he might obtain a fitting place
in Parnassus, was not satisfied, but rather thought himself much injured by
finding himself placed in the Classis of famous Commanders, and not in that
(which he thought he had very well deserved to be) of Founders of great
Kingdoms, wherein he found Romulus, Caesar, Pharamond, Ottaman, and many others
placed. Apollo answered Tamberlan, That great difference being put in
Parnassus, between overrunning a number of great Kingdoms with numerous forces,
and the founding of an Empire, he did ill to pretend to the place of Founders
of Monarchies, which was only granted to such, who to the worth of knowing how
to purchase, had the singular wisdom joined, of knowing how to maintain. For
the gallantry of many Soldiers shared in acquisitions, but the safe preserving
of what was got, showed the exquisite wisdom of one only Prince; and that the
Prerogative of Founders of Kingdoms was only granted in Parnassus to such, who
had so well joined the Virtue of Maintaining, to the Valor of Archieving, as
they had so well ordered and established the States which they had won, as to
transmit them happily over to the third Heir. A thing which had been so little
observed by him, as even his own immediate sons could not keep the States which
he had won at the expense of so much blood; and that according to Tacitus his
Precept, neither Prince, nor any private Captain, who would win the fame of
being wise and advised in the mannaging of Arms, ought Nova moliri, nisi
prioribus firmatis: attempt new things, unless they had settled former: for he,
Longinquis itineribus percursando, quae conservari nequibant; following after
what was not to be kept, had imitated those base smel-feasts, who eating more
then they could well digest, were with shame compelled to cast up what they had
eaten. And that though Alexander the Great, at his first entrance into
Parnassus, had extraordinarily affected the same Prerogative of a Founder of
new Monarchies; yet by reason of his indiscreet way of warfaring in Asia (which
he rather overrun as a ringleader of robbers, then subjugating as a great King,
by the true rules of Military Art) he could not obtain it.

Tamberlan went much afflicted from the Audience, when Alexander Vellutelli
appeared before Apollo, who presented his Majesty with his Commentary upon
Petrarks Sonnets. Apollo, before he would take the Book, asked Vellutello what
style he had used in commenting upon the rhimes of that excellent Poet. And
Vellutello answering, That first he endeavored to show the occasion why the
Sonnet was made, and that afterward he gave the true signification of the
words, and made known the Poets conceit; Apollo bad him keep his Commentaries
to himself; for, for his part he loved those Commentators upon Poets, which
discovered unto the Reader the Authors subtilty in weaving of his Poem; who
showed wherein the excellency of his Verse lay, which were his flourishes,
which his Figures, and which the other Poetical beauties; and that the Italian
Poems were so perspicuous of themselves, as they needed not any such
Commentators, who supplied only the base Office of interpreting words to gross
and ignorant people.

Vellutello received this very small satisfaction from Apollo, when a certain
Personage appeared before his Majesty, who told him, That he having commanded
the famous Province of Pamphillia, had willingly given over his command, merely
out of a desire of living retiredly; wherefore he desired that the same place
might be alloted to him in Parnassus, which those Vertuosi enjoy, who have
proved by their actions, that they are Masters of that excellent Virtue of
Moderation. Apollo answered this man, That Kingdoms are sometimes renounced by
virtue of a soul inamor'd of that felicity which men enjoy in a virtuous private
life; oft-times to satisfy sons who are arived at years fitting to rule
people, and sometimes to shun the tumults of rebellion, or out of fear of some
potent Enemy, and not seldom through unaptness for government; wherefore he
would be informed what was fitting to be done in this weighty business, by
examiners deputed to the like affairs; who if they should find that he had done
so gallant an action, and which is so strongly withstood by Humane nature, as
to relinquish a Kingdom, mearly out of a well disposed mind, he would willingly
grant him a sublime place amongst those other Demigods, who had preferred the
peace of a private life, before the hazards of reigning; and he should be the
more content to do this, for that the execrable ambition of reigning was so
disproportionably now increased amongst men, as that to come by Kingdoms, they
did not only gladly embrace any whatsoever wicked enterprises, but all means
which were used to compass so abominable ends, were by men esteemed to be good
and virtuous, though they were infinitely wicked and inhumane; that if they
should find he had renounced Government, either to please his Children, grown
already fit for rule; or that he might see the succession of his Empire settled
in his blood during his own life, he would give him an honorable place amongst
those prudent Princes, who by quickly giving over their States to their
children, have known how to shun coming to some woeful end with them, who were
become impatient of living a private life: But if it should be found, that
being under the great weight of Government, wherein men ought to show the
greatest worth, he had renounced his Kingdom out of poorness of spirit,
incapable of such greatness, he might then return back again: For the true
moderation of the soul being seen in gallantly undergoing cases of adversity,
not in losing a man's self in prosperity, his Parnassus was very unlike those
wicked times of Nero. Quibus inertia pro sapientia suit. Tacit. vitae Agricoll:
when slothfulness was taken for wisdom.

Presently after the Duke of Rhodes, a man not well thought of in this State,
by reason of his apparent foul vices, came to Apollo, to whom he grievously
complained of the lewd life that his people led; for he said, That Gluttony,
Lust, Implacable Enmity, by which his Subjects made the streets run with humane
blood, did very much reign in his State; and that the moneys which they ought
to spend virtuously in feeding their families, they viciously threw them away
at dice, the very seminary of contention; and such severe punishments as keep
men from doing ill in other places, not proving any ways valid for the cure of
so great an infirmity in his state, he humbly beseeched his Majesty for some
opportune remedy to this his so great necessity. Apollo answered the Duke, That
it being impossible but that people should be their Princes Apes, he might
compass his desired end, when abandoning the Idleness, lust, play, and bloody
customs, to which he was so greatly given, he would amend his own ways; for the
best Bezar to cure the members of a languishing body, was to be applied to the
ill-affected head, it not being possible but that a Prince, who himself lives
devilishly, should have worse Devils then himself to his Subjects.

This Prince being gone, a young Stoic, of appearing civil behavior,
complained grievously to Apollo, That whilst being yet but a novice, he was,
without any reason, expelled the house wherein he had much desired to spend all
his days. Apollo inquired of Epictetus, who was there present, wherefore the
Stoics of his sect had dismissed that young novice. Epictetus answered, Because
for six months space that that young man had been a novice, not the least
imperfection could be found in him, though all his proceedings had been
narrowly pryed into by many of his sect. Apollo hearing this, seemed much to
abhor the nature of that young man (who appeared to the whole Audience to be
very modest and well composed) and said, That he must certainly have devilish
vices hid within him, who had not the excellent virtue of discovering some of
those imperfections, which all men that were made of flesh did so abound in the
very first day of their conversation with other men.

Thus was the young Stoic dismissed when Giacomo (...) came in a great heat into
the hall, and told Apollo, That being sent for by the Genoeses to write the
story of their Country, he was persecuted by them, and accused of viciousness,
and at once lost both his life and his reputation, only for that some of them
found him resolute to obey the truth in things that were past, with that
liberty which becomes (...) Historian, without respect of persons. Apollo,
contrary to the belief of all men, did not only seem not any ways to
compassionate what had be^en this his Vertuoso* but in a resenting manner told
Buonfadio, that though the fault for which he was proceeded against was false,
yet he had deserved to be treated as he had been by the Genoeses, for his foul
indiscretion. For to profess that a man will write things prejudicial to the
honor of great parsonages, whilst they and their children are alive, though
the things he write be true, was rather an act of imprudency and rashness, then
of an incorrupted mind, that greatly loves truth; and that he was a greater
fool who believed he could save his life from the anger of a powerful man,
whose reputation he had asperst with his pen, though but slightly, much more if
he should wholly dishonor him; and that Historians might do very wisely to
imitate Grape-gatherers, and others, who had skill in fruits, who knowing they
stould not please men if plucking unripe grapes from the vines, and green
apples from appletrees, they should bring them to the Market, had that
requisite patience (which would likewise very well become Historians) to stay
till time might bring things to perfection; and that the great master of wise
Historians, Tacitus, when in his writings he mentioned those great Senators who
Tiberio regnante penam vell Infamiam subire, who underwent punishment or
disgrace in Tiberius his reign, when they had any posterity living, wisely took
his pen from off his paper, choosing rather to err against the Laws of History,
then to prejudice the reputation of such families, who were known to value
nothing so much as their honor; for that singular man thought it to be a thing
of too eminent danger to an Historian, Nimis ex propinquo diversa arguere.
Tacit. lib. 4. Annal. to contradict actions too near at hand. Buonfadio went
away much afflicted from the Audience, by reason of this public reprehension;
when with unspeakable gravity Zeno the great founder of the sect of Stoics,
drew near to Apollo, to whom, after he had saluted him, he said, That being to
go upon a far Ambassy, for affairs much importing the Prince of Guido, he
desired to take his leave of Apollo's Majesty, and to kiss his hands, before
he took his journey. Apollo perceiving that the Prince of Guido was himself
present at the Audience, asked him with a very angry countenance, If there were
not other Litterati in Parnassus, to make use of upon that his occasion, and
whether he were one of those Princes, who through avarice, and out of a
malicious intent of being able to break his word with less danger, committed
such indignities, as to send Stoics to lie at Inns. His Majesty complained
afterward very much of the Stoics, who making open profession to have
abandoned ambition, and all worldly pomp, did not withstanding wind themselves
so willingly into State affairs, wherein great impieties being often times
committed, it were an excellent thing that they were not only negociated by
ignorant people, but even not known unto them. Then turning to Zeno, he in a no
less angry manner said unto him, That he having promised before both God and man
to attend one profession, if he should afterward publicly undertake another
employment, it was an action of infinite scandal* and that such a one as he,
the founder of so famous a sect* should, by greatly abhorring the Courts of
Princes, and by sequestring himself wholly from their affairs, make Tacitus
rather appear alyar to all the world, then a Teller of truth, who had termed
the Stoic sect, Arrogant. Et quae turbidos, and negotiorum appetentes faciat.
Tacit. lib. 4. Annal: which makes men turbulent, and desirous of business.

Zeno was thus dismissed the Audience with scorn, when many Princes together in
company presented themselves before Apollo, who told him, that they did love to
learn Sciences as well as did the other Vertuosi of Pernassus, and that they
did esteem the liberal Arts very highly; but that the mountain of virtue being
very steep and craggy, it was so difficult to get to the Top of it, as the
lovers of learning weakening always their stomachs, disturbing their heads,
breaking sometimes the vain of their breasts, and spoiling their eyesight, the
Litterati were generally seen to fall into the dangerous diseases of Hectic
fevers, Tisicks, and into Hypocondriacal indispositions; that therefore they
humbly desired his Majesty that he would be graciously pleased so to
facilitate the way unto this mountains top, as Princes who were not accustomed
to such insufferable labors, might have some encouragement to arrive at the
top of it. To these Apollo answered, That the only means whereby to make the
way to the Liberal Arts easy, was the fervent love of learning, the taking
delight in reading the fruitful labors of his Litterati, and to study out of
pleasure; but that Princes being accustomed by their moneys to possess at night
whatsoever of exquisite they had desired in the morning, would likewise possess
themselves of the precious treasures of Sciences in their pastimes and idle
delights; wherefore they did abhor such things as were only to be come by by
labor and toil; and that the famous Francisco Maria della ^overe, ought to
encourage them to clime the mountain: who thinking learning the only
recreation of elevated souls, the delight and sole contentment of great men,
was, to the glory of the Liberal Arts, to the honor of Italian Princes, and to
the singular glory of the present Age, become the most universal and best
grounded Litterato which the present time had in all the choicest Sciences; he
therefore wished them not to think the study of learning so hard a business, nor
so laborious a thing but pleasant past me and recreation, and that so they
might as easily come to the Mountains top, as if they had made the journey in a
coach with six horses.

These Princes seemed to depart very well satisfied with this answer; when Luca
Guarico appearing before his Majesty, said, That he having foretold Iovanni
Bentivoglio, that Bolognian Tyrant, that he should that year be driven out of
his Country; which accordingly succeeded, Bentivoglio had inhumanely made him
be ceased on by Sergeants, and caused him to have fifty lusty stripes given him
with a rope; which having much discomposed all his bones, had also wounded his
reputation. He therefore desired his Majesty that he would be pleased to
rescent that high piece of injustice in such sort as he should best like.

Apollo seemed to all men rather to laugh at the harm and (...) that was done
to this man, then any way to compassionate him; and asked by what art of
Divination he had foretold this calamity to Bentivoglio? Guarico answered, By
the excellent Science of Judicial Astrology which he had very much studied.
Apollo replied, Why did not the same Astrology which made you foresee other
men's misfortunes, admonish you of your own mishaps? Guarico answered, Because
through his Parents negligence, he knew not what day he was born on. Apollo
then laughed, and greatly despising Guarico's vain and unfortunate study, told
him, he was a great fool, and worthy the misfortune which had befallen him; for
wise men hated to be the first bringer of ill news, even to men of the meanest
sort, much more to Princes, whose ears were so delicate, as they delighted in
nothing but good news; wherefore it was better to flatter them, by foretelling
them a long and happy life, and to assure them that they should quickly enjoy
many things which they desired, and be very happy. For to foretell Princes who
were jealous of their lives and good fortunes, that their death was near at
hand, or any other bad accidents, and to profess the doing of this by a false
Art, which only became foolish people, was to show that a man did desire all
those misfortunes should befall them which he did prognosticate. Guarico was no
sooner dispatched, but Count S. Paul appeared, a noble Prince of France, who
sorely complained unto his Majesty against Lodowick the eleventh King of
France, who after having pardoned him, and sealed his pardon with many oaths,
had made his head be struck off. Apollo, with much cruelty, answered the Count,
That he ought not to blame King Lodowick so much for this his misfortune, as
his own imprudency; for when Subjects arrive once at so great rashness as to
take up arms against their Lords and Masters, they were very great fools if
they did trust them at any time after. For nothing of more shameful being to be
seen in a State, then that a man should walk therein who had plotted his
Princes death and the ruin of his State; all Princes thought it less shameful
to break their words, then to live with such a blur in their face. That
therefore they only ought to confide in such like pardons as made a Prince be
praised for clemency; but that for such as brought shame with them, they ought
to trust no more unto them then to a rotten rope.

As Apollo was a little advanced, Iovan-paolo Lancellotto, a famous Perugian
Lawyer, appeared, who presented unto his Majesty his complete commentaries
which he had lately made upon his admirable Canonical Institution. This noble
Vertuoso was cheerfully and lovingly received by his Majesty: yet Apollo told
him, He had been very ill advised to gloss upon the Argument of his well filed
Institution, for such eminent wits as he, who were absolutely Masters of the
Matters which they write upon, using very artificially a succinct and pithy
brevity, as if they gave others the substance and quintescence, by them
extracted not without much pains from the difficultest Sciences showed, and
that much to their honor, that they writ to such as were learned, who did
fully understand the subject they treated on; which leaving without any
Commentaries, they made it appear unto the world, that what seemed hard and
obscure to others, was very easy and clear to themselves: That if it happened
afterward that other Vertuosi commenting upon the learned labors of other
men, for the public benefit of the lovers of learning, they did so wittily
adorn them with various acceptions of several significations, as they made them
often times speak excellent things, and which their Authors never dreamt of, as
it luckily befell Aristotle, illustrated by Averoe's his eminent wit; and Homer,
who being most happy of all other writers, in having learned Commentators, was
very much enriched by the learned labors of other men.

The last that appeared was Claudius Nero the Emperor; who signified to Apollo,
That being at last aware of his wife Agrippina's shameful incontinency, who
blinded by the violent ambition of Government had given her self over to the
imbracements of his base servant Pa^antes, he was resolved to take such revenge
upon her, as the world saw he had done upon Messalina, who had likewise been an
unchaste wife of his. But that this wicked woman, being gotten into Thali^'s
(...) a safe sanctuary, by reason of the great respect which was given to that
Illustrious Muse, he could not get Agrippina into his hands. He therefore
earnestly desired his Majesty to command that that dishonorable woman might
be put out from thence, to the end (...) he might wash away the shameful stain
wherewith she had tainted his reputation. Apollo was never seen to rage more,
no (...) when in the fiery house of Leo, then at this (...) of the Emperor
(...): to whom with a threatening voice and gesture, he said, He might do well
to hasten quickly out of that Audience* for he whose first wi^e (...), fell by
marrying another into the same ^it of Infamy, deserved rather to be buried
there alive, then to be helped out by any one.

The XXXVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Harpocrates being found by Apollo to be ignorant, is driven out of Pernassus.

THis morning Apollo sent for Harpocrates, that great M^ster of Silence, to
come unto him; and told him, that he had still admired his perpetural
Taceturnety, but that now he much desired to hear him discourse, for that
silence was to be wondered at in him, who upon occasion could give content to
the curious Litterati, by his copious speaking. Harpocrates hearing this,
shrunk up his shoulders, and made signs that he could not speak. Apollo ^ad him
lay aside his affected silence, and discourse upon some elegant subject.
Harpocrates still continued to put his finger to his mouth. When Apollo, with
somewhat an angry countenance, commanded him to speak; Harpocrates drew then
near to his Majesty's ear, and in a very submiss voice said* That the world was
grown so depraved in its customs, ^as they deserved chiefly to be esteemed
wise, who had eyes to see, judgment to observe, and mouth to hold their peace.
Apollo being mightily offended at this Answer, turned to those that were about
him, and said, He had at last discovered that Harpocrates was a piece of
useless flesh, and commanded him to be packing out of Pernassus; for he had
discovered him to be one of those gross pated coxcombs, whereof there were very
many in the world, who under color of a virtuous silence, did hide and
palliate gross Ignorance.

The XXXVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
A learned Roman desires a receipt from Apollo to make him forget certain great
injuries which he had received at a great Prince his Court. His Majesty gives
him some of the water of Lethe to drink, but with bad faccess.

THe learned Roman who some days ago came to Pernassus, had Audience given him
yesterday by Apollo. To whom he said, That he was much disquieted in his mind,
by reason of diverse injuries which he had received from ^undry of his
ill-wishers in a great Prince his Court* Dove le persecutio (...) s^
^ssercitano co^ artificii di ^essanta Cara^, where persecutions are exercised
cunningly, and to an excessive height; and the more for that he could not be
revenged without pulling greater ruin upon himself, then what his enemies had
occasioned him; and yet he found not that he had so virtuous a soul, as to put
on the generous resolution of pardoning offenses: Wherefore to free himself
from the hellish torment which he continually lived in, he addressed himself unto
his Majesty, humbly beseeching him that he would prescribe him some receipt,
whereby he might cleanse his soul from the many passions of Hatred, wherewith
it was foully polluted. Apollo appeared clearly to commisserate this Gentleman's
unhappiness; insomuch, as he commanded a great bowl of the water of Lethe to be
given him to drink, so prepared, as it should make hateful things be forgotten,
but should in no sort prejudice the remembrance of benefits received. The
Gentleman drunk up the water with much greediness; which to the great wonder of
all men was found to have the virtue only of making him forget such injuries
as he had received from men of a inferior fortune then he was; and that those
which he had received from his betters, were rather more deeply graven in his
mind then forgotten. Whereupon many began to murmr, that that virtue was not
found in the Lethean waters, which had been so much discourst of by the Poets.
When his Majesty did assertain them all, that the waters of Lethe had, as they
should ever have the same virtue, but that it had not wrought the desired
effect in that Gentleman, because men nobly born, and of generous hearts, did
usually write injuries received from mean men, in sand; but over hand blows
given by men of power, in characters never to be blotted out; for that it
became Nobility to forget offenses out of magnanimity, not to pardon them out
of* necessity.

The XXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Duke of Laconia is accused before Apollo to have Idolatrized a Favorite of
his, for having advanced a faithful Secretary to the highest State-preferments;
and he defends his cause excellently well.

THe now Duke of Laconia has so highly exalted a subject of his (for whom he
has a great affection) from a low and mean fortune, to the highest
State-dignities, as he has not only admitted him into the Laconick Senate (a
preferment ambitiously coveted for the eminency thereof, even by great Princes)
but having infinitely enriched him by giving him great revenues, has made him
be as much honored, and respected as highly as any whatsoever Personage of the
State. This famous Duke was accused before Apollo some few days ago, by those
who did much envy the advancement of this his servant, for idolatrizing a
Favorite. Apollo being highly incenst against this Prince for so heinous a
fault, without further informing himself (as upon all occasions he is used to
do) of the truth of the impaachment, sent immediately for Luigi Pulci,
Provost-Marshal of this State* and threatened to punish him severely, if he did
not within half an hour bring the Duke of Laconia a prisoner unto him, in the
most shameful manner he could devise. Pulci did diligently obey, for he dragged
that Prince along immediately before his Majesty, loaded with irons. Apollo,
who was presently advertised of this Attachment by an express Messenger, gave
order that the greatest bell should be rung, whereby the Quarantia Criminale
should be summoned, which was done; whither the Duke being brought, Apollo
having himself acquainted him with the fault which was laid to his charge, told
him in a very angry manner, That he aforded him only one half hours space to
make his defense in: And in the interim (as if the Prince his case had been
altogether desperate) he commanded that he should be condemned to eternal
infamy, who having committed so foul an Indignity, as to adore a servant of his
own, was not worthy to live amongst the virtuous Princes of the Phebean Court.
The Duke began then thus to defend himself, Most mighty Sir, and Father of the
Vertuosi, I have so armed my conscience with the breast plate of Innocence, and
have behaved my self so virtuously in all my actions, as I am more then certain
that I have never deserved ill at your Majesty's hands, nor am I any whit
affrighted at your Majesty's anger, nor at this precipitate Judgment, that the
horrible sentence of my Infamy should precede the Cognizance of my cause: I
only wonder to see, what I thought never to have seen, that the foulness of an
Impeachment, even in the justest of Tribunals, as this is, should be able so
greatly to endanger the reputation of one of my condition. But I rest pacified
with Gods will, who will have the gold of Innocence refined in the fire of
Calumny, by the Test of Persecution. I freely confess unto your Majesty, That
I have exalted my Friend much more then my accusers have informed against me;
and in this my action, which has been made by relation to appear so heinous to
your Majesty, I am only sorry that I have not showed my self so grateful to
this my friend, as his deserts challenge, I should have been. And if those who
accuse me and other Princes of prodigallity, of Giddy-headedness, and of
poorness of Spirit, born to serve servants, did not suffer themselves to be
blinded with malice and envy, when they see a Courtier greatly beloved, and
rewarded by his Master, but would with an unbyassed mind consider the merits of
Court Favorites, they would style that virtuous liberality, which they now call
Vicious Prodigallity; those gifts the debt of Gratitude, which they term
inconsiderate actions, and that a virtuous affection, to which they attribute
the Infamy of Idolatrizing Minions. But it appertains not to common men to
penetrate, Abditos principis Sensus, et si quid ocultius parant. Tacit. lib. 6.
Annal. into the secret of Princes. Whence it falls out that ignorant men call
Virtuous Gratitude, the effect of an abject mind. The Principality of Laconia
(as is very well known to your Majesty) is elective; wherein the neighboring
Princes have always had a greater stroke then he who was Governor, not only
out of the common end of all elective Princes, in procuring potent Friends to
those of their blood, after their own death; but by reason of the adherence
which Foreign Princes have for no small ends, with such Senators as have the
prerogative of choosing a new Prince: whose followers they work upon by those
means, which are too well known to all men. And your Majesty likewise knows,
that the Prince of Macedonia had by his subtilty got so great a Power in my
State, and was so far increased in strength above all the Grecian Princes, as
he was not only the sole Arbitrator of all Greece, but aspired at an universal
Monarchy: It is moreover known to your Majesty, that the same Prince of
Macedonia, under pretense of Friendship, and of taking the Dukes of Laconia
into his protection, did with deep designs labor their suppression: And
because the Prince of Epires greatness kept him from achieving so high designs,
he either totally to remove, or at least to weaken that obstacle very much, did
occasion those Insurrections of the Commonalty, and Rebellions of the Nobles in
the Principality of Epire (more by his gold and underhand dealing, then by open
force of arms) which did so much weaken the State of Epire. And I will not here
repeat (since it is sufficiently known to all men) how my wise Predecessor,
knowing that the suppression of Epire was a manifest may to the ruin of the
Laconick Empire, resolved openly to assist afflicted Epire with puissant
Forces, so to secure himself from the ambition of ^o potent an Enemy; and how
that that good Prince whilst he had these wise considerations dyed; not without
great presumptions that he was poisoned by the procurement of the Prince of
Macedonia, who was not able to endure that the division of Epire (which he
thought so sure) should be hindered. In this unhappy crisis of affairs, I had
this dignity conferred upon me; and that I might not come byso unhappy an end
as my Predecessor did, I, in the beginning of my Principality, seemed to be of
a remiss spirit, and totally incapable of the great affairs of State, and only
busied my self in reforming the Magistrates of my Dominion, together with the
abuses, and other vices of my people, appearing publicly to be a main Enemy to
the Prince of Epire, but inwardly knowing very well, whither the Prince of
Macidonia's plots tended. And knowing that whatsoever evil befell the Prince of
Epire, tended to the lessening of me, I put on a resolution of assisting him,
that I might establish my own State which was in manifest danger: But to secure
my life from those misfortunes whereinto my predecessor fell, I was forced to
be very secret in my proceedings. And it is well known to your Majesty, as to
all the rest of these honorable Judges, that amongst many imperfections of
elective Kingdoms, the greatest is, that they less enjoy the so important
benefit of secrecy in their State-Ministers, then any other sort of
Principality: for men's manners are so depraved, as that such as are Senators,
are for the most part greedy Merchants in their high places, by which they
strive to reap all possible advantage.

Finding my self in such straits at the entrance into my Principality, and
knowing that for certain I was to split upon the rock of infidelity, if I
should in a business of this weight, make use of those ordinary Secretaries,
who I knew for certain, were long since pensioners to foreign Princes; Great
God (from whose goodness I acknowledge this great mercy) opened my
understanding, and it was he who propounded unto me, this my, I will not say
servant (for I have found such singular worth in him, as will not suffer him to
be styled by so base a name) but dear friend; and to him who had served me with
all fidelity for eight years space, whilst I led a private life, I discovered
that secret of my heart, which I thought very dangerous ever to have dreamt of.
And then I was aware that the excellency and chiefest praise of a Secretary,
did not consist (as many men believe) in knowing how to speak eloquently, but
how faithfully to be silent. And this I say, because I so happily made use of
this my Officer in the important business which I had in hand, as I luckily
deceived the subtle Prince of Macedonia, which no wit, how cunning so ever,
could do at any time before. And by means of this my so faithful Secretary, I
succored that Prince my friend, whom I publicly professed to persecute, no man
ever penetrating into my Council; and I have had fortunate success in the
mystery of cheating and abusing, even those who make public profession to be
Masters of that Art; and by this handsome under-hand-dealing, I have reduced the
formerly ruinous and precipitate state of Epire, into the condition that now it
is: It being risen from so deplorable a condition, to the high pitch of being
the only true Arbitrator of whole Greece. And the Macedonians who had fancied
unto themselves universal Monarchy, and who thought to have sipt up every man's
State in less then a months time, are fallen from this their height of hopes,
into the pit of desperation, and quite giving over their ambitious conceits of
possessing themselves of other men's States, have much ado to preserve their own.

Apollo having heard this, ran joyfully to embrace the Prince of Laconia, and
with a great deal of tenderness, spoke thus unto him; You, Duke of that noble
Nation, who express much in few words, have had to do with a man of such
worth, and one, who to say truth, has very few that are like him, amongst all
the Laconick Senators; I mean this friend of yours, as if you should give unto
him your whole State, you would notwithstanding die ungrateful. For in these
unfortunate times, wherein through the perfidiousness of many, Princes secrets
are sold by the candle, to who will bid highest for them, that servant who in
weighty affairs proves faithful to his Master, cannot be so much rewarded as he
deserves.

The XXXIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
The People of the Island of Mitilene, their Prince being dead without issue,
argue whether it will be better for them to choose a new Prince, or to set up
Liberty in their Country.

THe Inhabitants of the famous Island of Mitilene, whose natural Prince did not
only die lately himself, but together with his life, left the whole Royal Line
extinguished; being without a Prince to Govern them, disputed in many of their
Congregations, whether it were better for them to live still under a Monarchy,
and choose a new Prince, or put on that noble resolution which had made so many
people fortunate, of erecting a Free State. Great and dangerous contentions
arose touching a business of this weight; and it is said that one of the chiefest
Citizens, in the last Congregation that was assembled to this purpose, spoke
thus:

Beloved fellow-Citizens, Of all the felicities which men receive from God in
this world, two are the greatest; That they are born men, not Beasts; and free,
not slaves. And surely there is good reason for this; for what greater
happiness can any man receive in this life, then to obey only the Laws of God
and men? What Jewel is to be compared to the rich Treasure full of all the most
precious Oriental Stones, of securing life, means, and reputation from the will
of one particular man, inclined to commit so many impertinent things? None that
is here, acknowledges Liberty to be more lovely then my self; and that it is a
precious gift, which immortal God bestows of mere grace on those whom he
loves; he who knows not this, I pronounce him to be blind, him a fool who does
not highly esteem it, and him an enemy to himself and Country, who does not
heartily endeavor it. But my dear friends, you must consider, that as those
precious stones are most esteemed of, which are rareliest found amongst men; so
we must grant that perfect Liberty is a precious Jewel, and much desired by
mankind, because it is rarely found amongst men. And know, that as the
Carbuncle and Diamond are created by an absolute heavenly virtue, and such
counterfeit stones are poor and base, which men make in imitation of the Divine
Artificer; so Liberty may be rather said to be a Divine Manifacture, then any
humane work. If it were possible to Institute a Free State so easily as I
perceive you imagine, there where Monarchy has a long time reigned, since
Liberty is a thing so much desired by all men, there would be no Monarchy left
in the world: For people to come by so great a happiness, would all of them lay
claim to Liberty. And yet since there are many Monarchies, and but few
Commonwealths, we must needs see, that to erect Liberty in a Country, is rather
an impossible then a difficult thing, and a gift which ought rather to be begged
of God by prayer, then to be hoped for from any humane wisdom: Nor be not moved
by the example of so many Commonwealths, which with so much happiness to those
people, are lately instituted in Germany: For examples square not, unless where
the same circumstances agree* Too great is the disproporion between the Germans
(who are born in a sort of middle Liberty, from which condition, passage is
easily made to entire Liberty) and us, who having always undergon all
servitude from our Princes, are so (...) from being able to purchase perfect
Liberty, as we cannot pass from this, into the other extreme, without exposing
our selves and Country to manifest ruin.

I grant that some Princes prove sometime fantastical, insolent, very beasts;
and that it is a species of great felicity to secure ones self from these
evils; but say you with me, That there is not a more fantastical, insolent, or
bestial Government in the world, then that of an ill ordered Commonwealth, of a
free tumultuous State. All who have written, or reasoned of Politic Affairs,
confess that a people like us, born, bred up, and who have lived even to their
decrepid age in servitude, are altogether incapable of living free.
Commonwealths being more formed by the good condition of Citizens dispositions,
proportioned to live free, then by Laws: For as a new Vine soon grows dry if it
be planted by an aged Tree; and on the contrary, does grow up prosperously, and
bring forth fruit in great abundance if it be placed near a plant, which as if
it were her husband, is of like age with it self* so the new Vine of Liberty
scorns to take root, and to bring forth satisfactory fruit, if it be placed
near an ancient Tree of a people grown old in servitude. For the ambition of
the Nobility, and sedition of the common people who are capital enemies to
living free, would for certain so suck up the radical moisture which gives life
to the new Vine, as they would in a short time make it wither and become dry.

This truth which I relate, is evidently seen in the as perspicuous, as rare
example of all the past and present Liberties of the immortal Venetian
Commonwealth, which being planted whilst yet a young Vine, together with the
little bush of the Venetian people, though born but a little before in those
moorish and fennish grounds, takes such deep and strong root, as it now gives
savory fruits of secure Liberty to its Citizens. It is folly for us to hope for
alteration of Customs, which are not changed so easily as apparel: For man's
genius affecting quietness in all its operations, a soul which knows how to
submit it self to a Citizen, who though his superior in being a Magistrate, is
yet his inferior in all other respects; how being rich and young, to honor a
poor old man with submission, to bestow all his love upon his Country (next to
his God) yea rather then upon his children or wealth,* to preser the public
good before private interest; to judge uprightly in civil and criminal affairs
between friends and parents, to tremble at the severity of the Laws in a ^ee
State; to possess the wealth of a Prince, and have the mind of a private man, so
far to mortify himself, as humbly to beg the favorable vote of his inferior;
and finally to have the taceturnity in public affairs, and to possess all
those habits worthy of a freeman, which are observed to be so exactly in every
Noble Venetian; is a Doctrine which is not learnt by Books* nor by the mouths
of men; but which is brought from the womb; and sucked in with the mothers milk,
by such as are born in Free Countries.

If (as I understand many of you are minded to do) you will send to Venice, to
receive the Laws of living free, from that excellent Commonwealth, doubtlesly
rare ones will be given you; but Laws, no less then habits, do not square with
^ll men. God would be too gracious to men if they were permitted, in the midst
of July, when they are scorched by the Sun, to go into the Woods, and take from
thence the greatest Plane-tree which they should find there, and (...) it into
their own Gardens, so to enjoy the shade thereof. Liberty, like a young Tree,
planted amongst men, is very hard to rear up; for it must be continually
watered with new Laws, according to occasion^ which every day arise, and pruned
by severe Justice. Nor must men be impatient in these cases; for no man enjoys
the noon-day-comfort of a great Tree standing in his Courtyard, which was not
first planted but a little sprig by his great great Gandfathers. And it has
been Gods will, that Trees and Commonwealths, should with much difficulty arive
at long life, and be long in bringing forth their fruits. And very exceeding
great pains and labor was taken to make that very Plant of the glorious
Venetian Liberty, what the world sees it now to be; and those Ancients who
planted it, partook of no good thereby, but only pain and toil in bringing it
up; whereas now their twentieth generation enjoy the verdure, the
noon-day-comfort and freshness thereof. For though it be above ^100 years since
it was planted in those Washes, yet is it not so long since it became so
perfect, and so secure a Plant of true Liberty, as that it fears not the wind
of foreign Princes pride, nor the frost of Domestic seditions:

Add to these things (my fellow-Citizens) that it is not so much the Laws,
though they be very good ones, nor yet the other particulars which I have
touched upon, which have maintained, do maintain, and will maintain the
Venetian Commonwealth in perpetual greatness, as is the miraculous and singular
situation of those Marish and Fenny grounds, which we cannot partake of. All
that understand any thing in State Affairs, confess that the Senate is the Heart
and Fountain of Life of every Free State. Skilful Fencers, when they will
overthrow their enemy with few blows, make a thrust at their heart; and Princes
who have en-deavored to subdue Commonwealths, have made their first blow at the
Metropolitan City of the Free State, only to dissipate the Senate; for these are
the mortal wounds which kill all, even the most potent Liberties: For the Senate
being routed, and consequently the heart of the Commonwealth struck through, it
dies immediately. An imperfection which Monarchies have not, the greatness of
whose Empire is always where the Kings person is; as the Duke of Guise made
proof of, who by his taking of Paris, did rather accelerate his own death, then
hasten on his own greatness. The Dictator Caesar proves this which I affirm, to
be true: Who to Tyrannize over his Country, made himself Master of Rome (which
Pompey was very indiscreet in abandoning) only that he might defeat the Senate:
A thing which Hanibal, the true Master of Militia, and sole honor of Africa,
knew before him, and endeavored it, but knew not how to effect it: And which
after him, the Emperor Charles the fifth, that Founder of the greatness of the
Spanish Monarchy, knew very well how to do, and did practice it against the
Florentines and the (...).

This mortal wound could never be given to the State of Venice, whose
Metropolis, where the Senate abides, is fortified, and armed with the
proof-Armor of Marshes and Washes* wherefore I think I may conclude, that
their wills are good, who desire to bring in Liberty of living Free in our
Country; but their wisdom is but weak: And that they who are for a Prince,
intend well, and are excellently well advised; and in taking a resolution in
this our so weighty business, I desire you all to remember, that the Florentine
Nobility, which through the impertinency of the seditious people, could never
bring in a perfect form of living free in their Country, not being able any
longer to undergo the cruel and bloody insolences of the base Plebeians, were
forced to call in a foreign Tyrant, the Duke of Atene, only that by
extraordinary severity, he might afflict the common people of Florence, who did
so abuse their Liberty.

Though these reasons were thought very efficacious by the wiser sort, yet
could they not make the people resolve upon choosing a new Prince: Wherefore the
business was carried, for living free, and that Ambassadors should be sent to
Venice to receive the Laws of living free, from that Commonwealth, which was
suddenly done. The Ambassadors were received and welcomed by the Venetian
Commonwealth with incredible magnificency, and the Venetian Government, Orders
and Laws were shown unto them, which the Ambassadors caused to be exactly
copied out, and registered, and so departed. And being returned to Mitilene,
they made their Report, and read in public Senate, the Laws which they had
brought with them, which gave very bad satisfaction to all the common People,
and to the greatest part of the Nobility: For the people could by no means
endure, that by the Venetian Laws they should be excluded from public
Government, saying that that Country merited not to be called Free, where all
did not command: And the wealthier Nobility being accustomed under Monarchy, to
purchase favors from the Favorits, and to obtain places of Magistracy (which
they did shamefully execute) from their Princes, stormed, and said publicly,
That that was a most unfortunate Country, where men were inhibited the making
free use of their moneys; which was purchased by industrious men at the cost of
so much sweat, not only to buy meat and clothes, but to purchase therewith such
things which increased reputation: And that it was much better for Citizens to
be ruled over by a Prince, whose good will might be won by a thousand several
ways, then to be governed by inexorable Laws, when they were administered by a
numerous Senate; where a little not being sufficient, and enough not being
always to be had, whereby to make so many prevaricate and break the Laws, it
might truly be said to be incorruptible. And that under Monarchies, the
chiefest of the Nobility did from the first, execute the prime places of the
Principality; and that in Commonwealths it was sad for them to begin together
with the meanest Senators, at the lowest employments, and come slowly by
degrees to places of highest dignity: That it required more then the usual
years of man to arive at the supreamest preferments; and the rigor of
bestovving places of Magistracy only according to men's mere merit, was a
Precept first invented by Tyrants, to keep potent men lovv, and to exalt the
mean.

But amongst all these bad satisfactions, nothing distasted three parts of four
of the Nobility more, then the severe Magistracy of the Censors, which they
heard was used by the Venetians, who perpetually did severely and strictly
examine all men's behaviors; wherefore they said freely, that if the Nobility
were so severely proceeded with in the State of Venice, the Noble Venetians
were slaves amidst their Liberty, and the people of Miteline free amidst their
servitude, for very dread of these things, all, with a loud voice cried out,
Monarchy, Monarchy: And that if any one would set up Liberty in Mitilene, let
them burn all Laws and Statutes; for such understood that to be perfect
Liberty, where none obeyed, all commanded, and every one did what he list.

The XL. ADVERTISEMENT.
James Creyton, a Scotchman, having incenst the Vertuosi in Parnassus, by a
proud defyance, was so shamed by them through a bitter jest, as without ending
the dispute, they forced him to forgo Parnassus.

JAmes Creyton, a Scotchman, the Prodigy of Nature for Learning, came some
days ago to this Court with such vainglorious pomp, and self-oftentation, as
moved as much nauseousness in the compleatest Vertuosi of this State, as wonder
in the meaner sort of people, who are usually ignorant, to see that a young
fellow of but 25 years of age, should pretend to be exactly knowing in all
Sciences, when the chiefest Vertuosi know the continual study of 80 years is
but a short time to be Master of one only Science. This Creyton the next day
after his entrance into Parnassus, caused a paper to be fixed upon the Gates of
all the Colleges, and upon the Pillars of all the Delfick Portici, wherein in
large Capital Letters these words were written, Nos Iacobus Crytonius, Scotus,
cujuscumque rei propositae ex improviso respondebimus. We James Creyton, a
Scothman, will answer ex tempore to whatsoever shall be propounded, This bold
defiance, which was thought by many to be very arrogant, did so nettle the
Vertuosi, as many of them framed Arguments even in the hardest Sciences,
wherewith they thought to choke him at very first. But an acute Satirical Poet
bereft the whole College of the Litterati of the pleasure of that dispute: For
the very night after the posting up of this defiance, he underwrit in those
very papers, these sharp words: And he that will see it, let him go to the
sign of the Faulcon, and it shall be shown him. Creyton was so stung with this
biting Jest, as he presently departed from Parnassus, much ashamed and
confused; having first made known unto his Majesty that he thought he could no
longer appear with his honor amongst those Vertuosi, who had done him the
affront to deal with him as with a Juglar and Mountebank.

The XLI. ADVERTISEMENT.
After strict examination of such as were to be chosen, the List of Governors
is filled up in Parnassus.

AFter long expectation, the distribution of the Governments of this State was
yesterday published with general satisfaction, it is not to be imagined what
diligence and circumspection was used by his Majesty and his State-Ministers in
the choice of them: For first they were careful to choose old men to govern the
people, only that I Polledri non habbiano a por bardella a Cozzoni, Coults
might not put Tramels upon their Pacers: And it was a thing worth much
consideration, that of so many as put for it, they chose only men of slow Wits,
cold Natures, such as were perplexed and irresolute in all their actions, and
drousie, even to the point of appearing foolish; whereas they excluded those
who for the vivacity of their spirits, seemed fit to have been preferred before
them. And this was done because those wise men who were chosen to examine,
verily believe, that bold, and over-lively wits are not very fit to govern
others, they themselves standing in need of a bit and Caveson, to keep them
from falling into ditches; for experience has taught all men, that such men,
with their too irresolute wits, do rather disquiet people, then prove
Instruments of keeping them in that peace and good satisfaction, which ought to
be their chiefest care who are the Governors of Provinces; and it is a thing
known to all men, that those Electors hold it for an infallible Maxim, That he
succeeds best in the Government of Cities, who being of a slower wit, and
settled mind, knows best how to fit himself for making his abode there, as it
were the sign of an Inn: For the world, which is much ruled by it self, is
much disquieted and imbroyled by the chymera's of some sharp wits, who being
overwise in all their ways, Intempestivis remediis delicta accendunt. Tacit.
lib. 13. Annal. Make things worse by unseasonable remedies. Hence it was, that
in the strict examination that was made in this so weighty business, the
ignorant were not excluded, but only those who were too wise, and who having
their heads full of querks, and new inventions, are enemies to those ancient
Customs, to which the people being accustomed, think themselves wronged by
being bettered by new Laws. 'Ts true, they studied to find out flexible people,
of easy and supple wits, who could accommodate their own Nature to that of
others; nor did they admit of any Officer who had not past four years in the
study of that important Philosophy, of living, and suffering to live: A Basis
whereon all peoples quiet, and the assurance of all good Government which can be
expected from the good Governor of aProvince, is securely grounded; in whom
they thought not the knowledge of the Laws and Statutes to be so necessary, as
that they should be verst in that gentle way of proceeding, and in that
dexterity of judgment, which is not registered in Books. A Consideration so
much the more necessary, for that some Lawyers who have had the Governments of
several Provinces, have behaved themselves but foolishly therein: Witness
Bartolo, the very light of the Law, who with all his Legal knowledge, was
forced to leap out of the window at the Palazzo di Todi, to shun being seized
on by those who could no longer endure his Impertinencies; who had a fair
tongue, but foolish pate. And it is very certain, that they did drive away
certain great beastly fellows, even with Bastenadoes, who proudly playing the
Peacocks, and publicly professing severity, delight much with their grave
looks to threaten men with death in public assemblies: and they excluded from
all hopes of Government, brutish Busirides, who thirsting after humane blood,
think they can mend the world, with Pillories, Gallowses and Axes: but they
mightily loved those who labored more to inhibit them to punish faults, and
who underwrite Capital sentences in ink, made of Tears. The next day after the
publication of the bestowing of Governments, all the Provosts came before the
Regio Collaterale, where Apollo was in person, and there with solemn
ceremonies, they made oath between his Majesty's hands, that they would leave
the world in the same happy condition as they found it; it being high treason
in this State, where Tacitus his rule is observed (that super omnibus negotiis,
melius atque rectius olim provisum, et que converterentur, in deterius mutari.
Tac. lib. 4. Annal. That better provision was made for all things in former
times, and all alterations made since have proved to the worse) to make any the
least Innovation in Governments.

These oaths being taken, the great Delfick Chancellor, placed in a high seat,
said, You Gentlemen Officers, his Majesty's pleasure is, that in the places
which are bestowed upon you, you be sure to have a strict care to your ways;
and that you swell not so with ambition as to play Rex, but that you remember
you are but counterfeit Princes, whose Empire is but weak, grounded upon a
frail sheet of paper, and fortified by a little wax. Then Marcus Tullius Cicero
made an Oration in praise of those new Officers, affirming that they were so
wise and good, as they were able to new mould the world. And this oration being
ended, Apollo, with a pleasing countenance, did with his own hands give every
one of them their Letters Patents, and commanded them to go presently to their
several charges. It was a thing which caused astonishment in all men to see,
that as soon as ever their Patents were delivered, his Majesty's formerly clear
and serene face toward those his Officers, was changed into a dreadful and
angry aspect, as if he had hated them deadly, and the civilities, proffers, and
friendly demonstrations of those signori del Collaterale, were changed in the
twinkling of an eye into Threats and Accusations; insomuch, as they themselves
who had been so very circumspect in making that election, swore to every one
that those Officers were a company of greedy companions, public sellers of
Justice, and Birds of prey; and before they departed, by order from his
Majesty, an Urtamartino taken out of the Pegasean Stable, was given to those
who were Governors of the chiefest Provinces, an Instrument thought necessary
by all wise men, to beat down some imperious fellows, who defiring to domineer
in other men's houses, do with ready money purchase hatred, laying the blame of
all their impertinences, insolences and ill usage committed against the master
of the house, upon their own discomposed and hasty nature. I was told by very
credible people, that after this Salustius Crispo President of the Collaterale,
taking the Governor of Libetro (whom he much favored and loved) aside, told
him, That he should do well to be very negligent in the beginning of his
Government, but be exquisitely diligent in the end thereof; remembering always,
that to begin ones Employments Acribus Innitiis, I^ioso fine. Tac. lib. 4.
Annal. with strict beginnings, and neglective end, was to imitate the Asses
Trot, which is so usual to the common sort of officers; that in his
administration of justice in things of dispute between ordinary people, he
should do them exact right without any respect of persons; but that in
controversies which might arise between the Nobility, or people of better rank,
he should use the dexterity of a wary judgment, with the rigor of Justice,
remembering always that the accusations of powerful men were so hateful to
Princes as they besprinkled the Officers Garments with certain spots and stains
of bad impression, which could never be washed away with any soap of Innocence;
that therefore with such he should so use the buckler of dexterity, with the
sword of justice, as no wounds of distaste might be given or received by either
party: for it being requisite for Princes, for their own affairs, to have the
Nobility satisfied, the Officer must know exactly the art of drawing rotten
teeth with a piece of cotton; that in his Government he should strive Omnia
scire, sed non omnia exequi, Tacit. vita Agric. to know all things, but not to
put all things in execution; for to go about to wash a Blackmoor white, were to
play the mad man; and that in this so corrupt Age, Officers might do more
wisely to bear with some ancient disorders in the people, then with very little
of satisfaction, to afflict ones self, with introducing good where it was not
welcome, that he should shun contentions with neighbor Officers, who were
subjects to the same Prince, and that such differences as he could neither
cloak nor shun, he should like a Gown-man defend them with his pen; but that he
should neither seek for, nor yet shun differences with neighboring Princes:
but defend such as should arise, like a Soldier with his sword, observing
still the temper, as to show reverence toward foreign Princes, and zeal
toward his own Prince: that being placed in Government to decide quarrels, and
to put an end to other men's differences, he should keep himself from kindling
new ones, as he would do from fire, holding it for a certain rule, that
Officers won infinite reputation, when at the very instant that they were set
upon, they could resolve to give over with loss: Merce che delle mosche
pigliate con le natiche, may non si trovo chi facesse utila ritratto: and that
he should think that nothing did more show an Officers lightness, then to seem
greedy of disputes and quarrels, whereof wisemen would give fourteen to the
dozen; that in some things he should do well to prefer the public peace,
before the rigor of Justice, taught by books; that he should never be over
angry, for any whatsoever Impertenency which should be seen or heard of in his
Government; and that if he could not do this, he should not only forbear from
acting, but even from speaking in the heat of Anger; and should recommend the
consideration of all things to cool blood; that in weighty affairs he should
avoid to appear undaunted, bold and resolute, but take pleasure in taking the
crab out of his hole with his Princes hand, armed with the Gantlet of
Authority; for though the Officer had authority to act, ^tvvas notvvithstanding
good often times, not to use that authority: that he should avoid such
Governments, as he would do precipices, where any of the Blood Royal lived,
or any of the kindred of Court-Favorites; which were the Silla and Caribdis,
and inevitable quicksand of ruin to all Officers: and that he should not be
ambitious of governing in Provinces, wherein were many of the Nobility, to
govern whom, was to lead a heard of Foxes, and a flock of Hens to feed, and
be bound to bring them all back again to their folds at night: but that he
should esteem such Governments best, which being full of mean and ignorant
people, received full satisfaction if they had plenty of bread in their
marketplaces: that he should keep conversation and acquaintance at large with
all that were in his Government, but stri ct friendship with none; that he
should avoid that retiredness which made men be hated, and that domestical
familiarity, which caused scorn, but use such gravity as purchased love and
respect to the Officer, that he should abhor to converse with base men, and
communicate only with persons of his own profession; and that he should be
wary of making any one his friend, to whom he might not at the very same
instant become a capital enemy, without any prejudice to himself; for in
Officers houses mushromes grew in an instant to be as high as Ciprus Trees;
that he should by all means shun having to do with those great ones in Cities,
who love to have many followers, and make profession of Arms; for that
Giddy-headed Officers cannot more shamefully nurse up a Serpent in their
bosoms, then by lending an ear to the intercessions which such men make for
unruly people, who are imprisoned for seditious faults; every one being ready
to spend their lives in his service, who has once saved them: that in public
Audiences he should observe great gravity speak little, but resolutely,
employing his ears more then his tongue in such places; and that he should
there shun to argue the points of reason with Advocates; for an ignorant man
that speaks, knowing better what he has to say, then a learned man that
listens unto him; an Officer who will on the sudden argue a case with an
advocate, cannot make good his reputation against him, who hav^ng first studied
the business, comes prepared, without being so insolent as to use his authority
instead of reason; that he should praise, and yet shun the hateful and foolish
customs of Provinces; and that he should patiently bear with the stinking pride
of Advocates, and the affronted impertinencies of Proctors, and maintain their
honor in public, whose faults he might correct in private, that he should
practice that golden sentence of Tacitus, Utilissimus idem, ac brevissimus
bonarum, malarumque rerum delectus, cogitare quid aut nolueris sub alio
Principe, aut volueris. Tacit. lib. 1. hist. It is the most useful and ready
choice of both good and bad things, to consider what you like or dislike under
another Prince; with such circumspection, as to shun a defect in his
Predecessor, he should not fall himself into the other extreme. As a certain
Prince had foolishly done, who to avoid the over much pleasantness which was
blamed in his Predecessor, betook himself to unheard of severities; that he
might account business his pastime, eminent spirits making the pleasure they
take in commanding and exercising authority over others, serve instead of
Picquet or Lurch: that he should be more careful in well governing his own
house, then in curbing seditions in the City, for that Provincialists are more
troubled at the immodesty of an Officers favorite, then at a foul insolency
committed by a Townsman; that he should abhor forestalling of Markets, and that
he should esteem those hisCapital enemies who should propound unto him such
unlawful gains; and that he should firmly believe that the only gainful
merchandise becoming an honorable Officer, was to engage himself deeply in the
Traffic of purchasing glory and honor; by which rising still to higher
preferments, he in a short time would abound in wealth and reputation; that he
should shun prodigallity and avarice (shameful extremes in Officers) that he
should set aside one fourth part of the day for the dispatch of civil causes,
and the other fourt part in deciding criminal affairs, and the rest in being
hospital, on which an Officers reputation did wholly depend; that he should
always have an eye to his Judges hands; that he should not resolve any thing in
difficult affairs, before he were fully possessed of the whole business; for
sudden resolutions were very dangerous in such like cases: and that he should
always behave himself so therein, as if he did rather grieve to have done too
little, then too much; that he should so accommodate his own genius to the
nature of those of the Province, as to be gentle with those that were pleasant
and peaceful, and severe with those that were stubborn and seditious; that
above all things he should curb the insolences of Sergeants and Marshals-men,
who in many places are grown so insufferably bold, as they have not only
caused wicked scandals to Princes, who in all other respects are glorious and
happy, but have rendered such States hateful where the bridle has been let
loose to such like Rascals, wholly made up of insolency; for he was ill advised
who gave much authority to one who knew not what discretion meant; that not to
appear foolish, he should not acquaint his Prince with every trivial affair,
nor keep from him the knowledge of things of importance, least he might be
thought to neglect him; that he should believe that wary Judges did threaten
more then punish, and that he should not forget, that Officers govern men, who
are subject to a thousand imperfections, infinitely addicted to error, and not
Angels, who cannot sin; that therefore in his Government he should rather
affect to be reputed pleasing then cruel; that he should avoid Baals, and
public Feasts, which do abase the Personages of Officers; that in the
shameful faults of Noblemen, he should be severe against the Delinquents
person, not touching upon the honor of his Family; that he should many times
rather wink at carnal faults, then seem over desirous to punish them; that by
wisely appearing pleased, he should rather make the world believe that his
subjects were good, then make them become such through rigor; for those that
boast they have hanged I know not how many hundred men in their Governments,
glory in their infamy.

The XLII. ADVERTISEMENT.
A^gus makes proffer of himself to the Dukes of Venice, to guard the Virginity
of their illustrious Commonwealth, and his offer is not accepted.

ARGUS never had any employment in Pernassus till now, since he proved so
unfortunate in watching fair Io; for though many great Princes would by large
salaries have hired him to guard their Ladies honor, he has always refused to
take upon him the care of any Ladies reputation, having clearly found in Io's
unfortunate business, that women, when they are lewdly inclined, or are
strongly solicited, are not to be secured, no not by a thousand Argusses: Yet
of late days, being very needy, he offered himself to Andrea Gritti, and other
Princes of the Venetian State, to guard their beautiful liberty, so as he might
be well paid for his pains, and he would bind himself to keep continually
ninety eight of his hundred eyes awake to watch over that illustrious Princess.
Argus was graciously listened unto by Gritti, and the rest of the Dukes of
Venice, who first presented him with a purse full of many millions of Crowns,
which they said they gave him for the good will that they found in him, but
that they had no need of his aid in this affair; for their liberty needed not
his hundred eyes to guard her honor, her own chaste inclination being
sufficient to do it, assisted by the six eyes, by the vigilant and dreadful
Magistracy of the three State-Inquisitors, who wrought so by the sword of
justice, which they did continually brandish over the heads of the Libenus, as
that their Liberty, though she be exceeding fair, was looked upon with chaste
eyes, even by the most ambitiously lustful, and coveted with a perfect
Platonic love.

The XLIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Florentines in their pastime called the Calcio, admit of a Spruce Foreign
Courtier, who wins the Prize.

THe Noble Florentines played the last Tuesday at the Calcio in the Phebean
field, which all the Litterati of Pernassus came to see; and though some, to
whom it was a new sight to see many of those Florentine Gentlemen fall to down
right cuffs, said, that that manner of proceeding in that which was but play
and sport, was too harsh, and not severe enough in a real combat; yet the
Vertuosi took delight to see it, for many praised the Gamesters swift running,
their nimble leaping, and their strength; others were very well pleased with
the invention of the Game, which was very good to breed up youth to run, leap
and wrestle; and many believed this to be the cause why it was instituted in
that formerly so famous Commonwealth: but the quicker sighted Politicians,
argued from the going together by ears of those young Florentines, that some
great mystery lay concealed in that sport; for that Commonwealths are fuller
of intestine hatred, and hidden ranchor of spirit, then are Monarchies, by
reason of the continual flocking to Magistrates, and frequent denials which are
given to Senators of such places as they desire, receiving doubtlesly more
distastes thereby one from another, then is observed to fall out between people
who live in a Monarchy; and it being impossible but that some violent passion
of anger must burst forth in a liberty full of distastes, the Politicians
affirmed, That the Commonwealth of Florence had done very well and wisely in
introducing the Calcio amongst her Citizens, to the end that having the
satisfaction of giving four or five good round buffets in the face to those to
whom they bare ill will, by way of sport, they might the better afterward
appease their anger. An evaporation which if it should be had upon another
occasion by a dagger, it would have much endangered the public liberty. The
same Politicians affirm for certain, that the Sancsi introduced the famous
Gioco della pugna in their Commonwealth, and the Venesians the assaulting of
the bridge in theirs, for no other end but this. But it happened that a spruce
Courtier who was a Spectator at this sport, being asked by that famous Pietro
Caponi, who by the bold answer he gave to a King of France, won eternal fame,
how he liked their Calcio; who answered, The sport was very pleasant, but that
those Florentines did not play well. And the Game of Calcio being particular to
the Florentine Nation, and altogether unknown in ^ther parts, Caponi thought
the Courtier had said amiss; wherefore he asked him, Whether he thought he
could play better? The Courtier answered freely, that if they would permit him
to play with them, he would teach those Florentine Gentlemen the true art how
to take the ball, how to ^un with it, how to repulse the wrastlers dexterously,
who would take it away, and other excellent master like tricks. Caponi laughed
to hear the Courtier boast thus, and having acquainted all the Florentine
Gamesters with what he said, they jointly invited him to play. The Courtier
made himself ready, and entered the lists; where the Florentines promising
themselves much pastime in buffetting and abusing him, made him a round, and
presently the Ball was thrown up in the air by men appointed thereunto: which
came no sooner to the ground, but that the nimble Courtier ran toward it, and
having taken it up, clap it under his left arm; those of the contrary party ran
to take it away from him: but he with great strength justled one, and thrust
away another; and whereas the Florentines, who were masters of the sport,
thought to have thrown him down, they were thrown down themselves; for the
sturdy Courtier did so freely lay about him on all sides with his arm,
shoulders, head, and every part of him, as he made all keep aloof, so as the
greatest part of the Florentines of the adverse part, were thrown to the
ground; and some of them received such blows on their breasts, as they could
hardly breathe for a good while after. And the Courtier having overcome all
that withstood him, threw the ball over the lists, and won the Prize. At which
he Florentines were so astonished, as they took a solemn oath never to admit of
any Courtier more to play with them; as those who in running had winged heels;
and are rather Devils then men in justling, thrusting, making men keep back,
and making room for themselves in croudes, and making way there, where people
flock most; in the art of never suffering the ball to fall to the ground when
they have gotten it, nor ever to be taken from them, and in giving their
adversaries such deadly squelches as they shall never rise again.

The XLIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Batista Platina, being bastenado'd by Agustino Niso, complains to Apollo
(little to his reputation) of the injury received.

BAtista Platina, who keeps the Pastrey shop in the corner of the Herb-market
as he the other day was raising a piece of dainty Paste, Agustino Niso da
Sessa, that famous Neapolitan Philosopher entered his shop, and took up the
rolling pin wherewith Platina made his Paste, and did so cudgel him with it, as
certainly he would have slain him, had not some of the Vertuosi, who heard the
noise, run in, and hindered him. Platina being thus ill dealt withal, caused
himself to be brought before Apollo; to whom he sorely complained of Niso, and
said, That he was not so much grieved at the blows he had received, as that he
had never deserved to be so foully affronted by that Philosopher, whom he had
always so deerly loved. Apollo did with much grief rescent Niso's extravagancy,
and gave order for him to be forthwith sent for: who when he appeared, was
asked by his Majesty, what had moved him so to dishonor such a Vertuoso as
Platina. Niso boldly replied, That by reason of Platina's evil proceeding with
him, he was forced so to revenge a shameful slash, which he had given him over
the face from one ear to another. Platina with tears, said to Niso, I have
always admired your worth Agustino, and loved you as dearly as my own soul, and
you, without any cause, have offended your friend, whom you were bound to love
and reward. Niso turned then to Apollo, and told him, That he being desirous
some few days before to give a private supper to some Neapolitan Vertuosi, had
sent to Platina's shop for a Veal Pie, for which he was presently paid; and
that Platina, whom he had never offend, had to no end placed his Arms over his
shop door, whereby he had published him throughout Parnassus, to be one of
those useless persons, who delighting in Gluttony, study nothing but how to eat
well. Platina excused himself, and said that he had placed his arms over his
door, to honor him, not out of any infamy to him. Apollo then bad Platina hold
his peace; for you (said he) have well deserved the mischief which has
befallen you; for the arms of men of honor, and of such a Philolosophers as is
my beloved Niso, ought to be seen in Libraries, no^ i^ Cooks shops, where none
but those of smell feasts ought to ha^g; for there is no fouller defect nor
vice, then to study how to please the pallat, and to make the base and
shameful profession to hunt after good victuals.

The XLV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo knowing what mischief overmuch riches causes to Poets, exhorts the
Magnanimous King of France, Francis the first, to moderate his profuse
liberallity which he used toward them.

THe Illustrious King of France, Francis the first, he, who whilst he lived,
did not only place learning on his right hand, but always saluted the
Litterati by taking off his hat; whom he so loved, as that he enriched many of
them, so as by authentic faith made to Apollo, it appears; that so great a
King was the first, who by his profuse liberality to the Vertuosi of that his
Noble Kingdom of France, had planted such learning there, as taking deep root
afterward, has brought forth infinite volumes of the labors of the learned
French, which have much enriched the Delphick Library; and that using still the
same bounty to such as lovelearning, he feeds a great many of the Litterati
very plentifully in his Royal Palace in Parnassus, to whom he pays very liberal
provisions.

A magnanimity and Splendour, which till now was very pleasing to Apollo, who
much to his coffeehouse, is come at last to the knowledge that this Kings
munificence toward the Litterati, produces bad effects; for that overmuch
riches, according to their custom, begins to blemish the souls of many
Vertuosi, with such vices as luxury and ease bring with them, which have so
produced the Moth of idleness even amongst the Vertuosi of this State, as that
many famous Poets have so far given over their studies, as even Ovid himself,
who formerly to the wonder of all men did every day enrich the Delfick Liberary
with some one Elogie or other, since he grew into so domestical acquaintance
with so great a King, suffered nothing to proceed from his pen in a whole year,
save four Epigrams made in praise of the four seasons of the year. Wherefore
Apollo perceiving that this Kings liberallity toward his Vertuosi occasioned
even the overthrow of learning; to the end that the intents and perpetual
desire which they have to learn still somew^at whilst they are poor, might not
be extinguished, sent two days since for King Francis, whom he told, that he
much loved and admired the great Liberallity which he used toward his
Vertuosi; but that for the indemnity of Sciences he was forced to will him to
be more moderate therein; for that Learning, which is born and bred in poverty,
was requisitely to live therein, as in her particular Element: That therefore
he should not permit Poets to purchase any thing by his Royal Munificence, but
meat and clothing; the one modest, the other mean: For that he clearly
perceived, that they in the abundance of bodily wealth, grew poor in the like
of their souls, vicious amidst riches, in delitiousness, idle; or that the like
disorder was found in them, as was observed to be in hens, which, the fatter
they are, lay the fewer eggs; Poets being like crickets, who sing not but out
of mere necessity: And that they follow not the chase, like dogs, for pleasure;
but like Falcons and Goshawks, for mere hungar.

The XLVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo having found out the first Inventor of Guns, as he is about to punish
him severely for his fault therein committed; The Artificer defends himself
very well.

It Is now some fifty years since Polidor Virgil had a Pension given him by his
Majesty of twenty Crowns a month, together with maintenance for himself, two
servants, and their horses,; only that he might endeavor to find out the
Inventors of all things which had been thought upon by extraordinary Wits for
the benefit of man: For Apollo thought such men deserved so well for their
industry, as that they were to be kept in perpetual memory. And his Majesty
being infinitely troubled that the Art of Warfaring (which was always cruel)
should now be arived at so great a height therein, by the new Invention of
Guns, as that in all late Wars much more use was made of fire, then of the
sword: And being grieved even to the very heart, that so many men should be
destroyed, and Cities ruined in a short time by this diabolical Invention, he
commanded Pollidor Virgil, that with all speed he should find him out (if at
least so devilish an Instrument could be found out by any humane creature) who
had the cruel heart to introduce a scourge amongst men, so like to dreadful
Thunder.

Pollidor obeyed, and in a short time did not only learn that the Inventors of
Guns was a Dutchman; but found him out, and delivered him alive into the power
of the Court. Apollo being hereat overjoyed, commanded the Judges of Assize,
that they should do exemplary Justice upon this so cruel enemy to mankind.
These gave sentence immediately, that the Dutchman should be put alive into a
Cannon, to which fire being given, he might be torn in pieces by his own
hellish Invention. All things tending thereunto were already in order, and the
unhappy Dutchman was brought to punishment, when in those his last streights he
entreated that he might be permitted to speak but a word or two before his
Majesty in his own defense. He had his desire granted; and being brought
before Apollo, spoke thus; Illustrious King of Light! shall he be condemned to
so cruel a punishment by your Majesty's Judges, who are esteemed to be just by
all the world, who has labored to deserve favor from God, and good will from
men, by inventing things beneficial for mankind? It is the intention, purpose,
and mind of a man that makes the fault, which, whatsoever excess may ensue upon
any man's work, yet is it not imputed to any one whose will was good, and his
intention holy.

I call God to witness, and your Majesty's own light, which sees all things,
that I did not invent Guns to afflict mankind (as I find many do wrongfully
think) but out of zeal, charity, and piety; and if any mischief has since
insued thereby, it was more then I intended: For being vexed at the very soul
to see, that through the ambition and avarice of those that rule, men were by
diverse ways drawn, will they, nil they, to the slaughter of War, I bethought
my self, that people could not receive a greater benefit from any one, then to
acquit the world of the vast expense of blood occasioned by War; being very
sure, that if Princes should want soldiers, they would not wage War so much,
and would content themselves with their own fortunes, when man to man with
their weapons in their hand, they must overcome that enemy, whose State they
would usurp. For the danger of losing their lives, would make them lay aside
the insatiable ambition which they have of domineering over the whole world. To
arive then at this so holy end, and wherein I thought the whole felicity of
mankind did consist, I bethought my self of this invention of Guns, firmly
believing, that out of horror of this so dreadful Instrument, all men would be
so terrified, as they would abominate the mystery of War. I did the rather
believe this, for that I saw men were mightily affrighted with Thunder from
Heaven, though they knew that God in his mercy makes more Thunder be heard for
terror, then Bolts seen for punishment; that notwithstanding many when they see
the lightning which precedes the thunder, run into corners to hide themselves;
nay others have built themselves Chambers of Iron for security. Wherefore I did
firmly believe that no man would ever be so rash or cruel to himself, as to
expose his life to the manifest danger of death, by incountring with earthly
Thunder, so like in all respects to the Thunder of Heaven; and levelled at the
life of man, not to affright, but to kill him. If the contrary to what I
believed, have since fallen out, and if men be grown so superlatively foolish
and cruel to themselves, as out of a desire to appear gallant, to go even with
delight against the mouth of the Cannon, and I to be blamed for other men's
rashness and beastiallity?

Apollo was so moved to hear this Dutchman so gallantly defend himself, as
turning his punishment into favor, he commanded that he should be rather
rewarded then censured; and with tears in his eyes, said, That by reason of
their beastiallity who dare sell their lives for the poor price of six pence a
day, he was compelled to be pleased that cruel inventions should daily more
increase, whereby to rid the earth of this lewd sort of men; and since that
neither fire nor sword were able to do it, he earnestly desired the Majesty of
his Creator, that he would once more open the Chateracts of Heaven, and quickly
power down new deluges of water upon the earth, to wash those wicked men from
off the earth (without harming such as love peace) who forgetting that they are
obliged to multiply mankind, have taken upon them the cruel trade of
annihilating it by fire and sword.

XLVII* ADVERTISEMENT.
The Roman Monarchy desire to be resolved by Cornelius Tacitus in a Politic
Doubt; and receive full satisfaction therein by Melibeus, the Mantuan Shepherd,
who was casually there.

THe Illustrious Roman Monarchy, which before it was trampled upon by the
barbarous Northern Nations, lived here in Parnassus in that height of glory,
which no other human worth could ever arive at; under pretense of going a
hunting, went in disguise the other day to find out Co^nelius Tacitus, who for
his recreation was retired to his Countreyhouse; and told him, that she was
come to him only to be resolved in a Doubt which had a long time troubled her
mind, the which she had conferred about with many other great Politicians, and
had not received such satisfaction from them, as she hoped to do from him, who
was the greatest Statist and Arch-Flamming of all Modern Policy. And that the
business which so much troubled them, was, That the Kingdom of France, Spain,
Egypt, Soria, the Commonwealth of Carthage, and the rest of the Immence States
which she possessed in Asia, Africa, and Europe, were of themselves formidable to
every one, before they were joined to her but that being all of them united in
her person, instead of strengthening her, they had made her weaker then she was
before; a thing which they did the more wonder at, for that it was evidently
know, that many threads made a strong Rope, and many little twigs a strong
rafter; and yet an infinite number of Principalities being joined together, had
not formed that eternal and great Monarchy, which men did expect?

Tacitus answered to this, that the question was of weight, and therefore
deserved to be maturely consulted, that he would return the next day to
Parnassus, where when he should have cast his eye over his Annals and
Histories, he believed he should thereout draw such an answer, as would give
her Majesty full satisfaction. The Roman Monarchy was very well pleased with
this Answer; and just as she was going to take her leave and be gone, Melibeus,
that famous Shepherd, who had brought a dish of Curds and Cream, and two new
Cheeses that very morning, as a present to Tacitus, and had heard the question
asked by that great Monarchy, desired her that she would be pleased to stay,
for that he would instantly give full satisfaction to her in that which she
desired to know:

Tacitus and the Roman Monarchy smiled upon Melibeus, and bad him hold his
peace, and go look to his sheep, for that was his profession. Melibeus then
boldly answered, That no sort of men whatsoever knew better how to discourse
of, and resolve State Affairs, then Shepherds; That Princes should be happy if
they used the same charity in governing their Subjects, as shepherds do in
feeding their flocks, and the people most happy if they would imitate sheep in
their obedience to their Princes. Tacitus and the Roman Monarchy marvailed much
at this bold and resolute answer of this Shepherd; wherefore they bad him
freely make his conceit known: With which permission Melibeus thus began;

Most powerful Queen, (as it is well known to my Virgil) am a shepherd of
Mantua, and I should much injure this my gray head and beard which you see, if
I were not absolute Master of my profession. I say then, that in so many years
that I have had the charge of sheep, I have clearly learnt, that a shepherds
power and greatness, consists not (as many that are covetous and ambitious
believe) in having many millions of sheep; but only in having so many as a good
shepherd may keep with his eye, govern with his rod, and rule with his whistle.
And the reason is apparent; for shepherds are beggars when they have too few
sheep: for great poverty forces him to milk them too dry, and to shear them
too close. Shepherds are always wealthy and happy in a mean (wherein all
perfection consists) whereas in Immensity they run certain danger, for that it
is very hard to govern such a number of sheep as is disproportionable to the
forces of any one man. Whence it is, that silly sheep, when in too numerous
flocks, first grow lean, and then of necessity die, through the mere
carelessness of him that looks unto them. This disorder is occasioned, for that
flocks of too disproportionate a greatness, instead of good institutions, are
full of fowl confusions; and the Proverb frequently made use of, and diligently
observed by us shepherds, is true, That a few sheep will not supply the
necessities of a Shepherds Cottage; many will; and infinity beget confusion;
and are rather prejuditial, than of use.

Princes and Commonwealths were happy if they had the property of Cammels, to
stoop down humbly to the ground to take up the load of Government; and if they
could put a period to their pride and ambition, by rising up on their legs, and
not suffering any more load to be laid upon them, when they know they have
sufficient for their strength to bear: but men do all their lifetime, long to
grasp a great stack of Hay, to the end that they may at one burden carry it
all home to their own Barns; which falling afterward by the way, they find
that after so much industry and pains, they have labored in vain. Hence it is,
that for 1600 and odd years that I have been a Shepherd in Arcadia, I never had
in my Penfolds above 500 Sheep, which affording me the certain gain of 500
crowns a year, I have still been held to be very fortunate by all the Shepherds
of Arcadia. I therefore think that shepherd unhappy, who being blinded by
avarice, thinks to grow rich in one day, by having many flocks of sheep, which
not being able all of them to be looked unto by the Masters eye (which is that
which fattens the sheep, and which is the flocks chiefest felicity) he commits
them to the custody of careless boys, and oft-times rents them out to cruel
Shepherds, who out of greediness to reap a little Interest more then the sheep
can yield, do lose the Principal. Neither have there wanted amongst us
shepherds those Alexanders the great, who to assuage their thirst of
Government, have not been ashamed to ask of God, that he would create new
Worlds. For in our Arcadia was one Menalcas, one that did always envy me, and
was my mortal enemy; who thinking he should be able to crush me if he could get
more sheep then I had, was not content with 500 sheep which he had, but that he
might make himself absolute Monarch of all the Shepherds of Arcadia, took up
money at use, sold the greatest part of his Patrimony, and having got together
a good sum of money, he sent for three flocks of sheep, each of them consisting
of 500 from Spain, France, and England, where he knew the best sheep were, and
paid excessively for their transporting; which being strangers, and not
acquainted with the Shepherd, nor yet understanding his voice nor whistle, they
were but ill-favoredly led to their pasture in the morning, and brought back
again at night to their folds. Wherefore Menalcas, to bring his sheep to better
obedience, which went still wandering up and down, set dogs upon them; which not
being known to the sheep, were always hated by them, and they were the more
incenst, for that to their natural hatred, they added offenses; which begot
such obstinacy, despair, and disobedience in the sheeps hearts, as they began
infinitely to abhor their shepherds, and the being guarded by dogs. Moreover
when they found they were to be milkt or shorn, they hid themselves in woods;
and then it was that all the shepherds of Arcadia, knew that despair may make
Conies turn Lions. Wherefore the Spanish sheep grew so enraged, as they even
ventured to bite the shepherds; the French kicked the pail down with their feet,
wherein they had been miklt; and the English sheep, that they might not obey
strange shepherds, nor have their wool torn off by unknown dogs, forbore to
graze, choosing rather to die for hunger, then to live in that slavery. It was
more strange to see, that the same profit of Cheese, Wool, and Lambs, which
those foreign sheep so willingly yielded to their own Country shepherds, were
with so ill will paid to Menalcas, as thinking they were not only ill treated,
but tyrannically massacred, they seemed to be glad that they were become
barren, and laughed to see their shepherd undone.

Menalcas being exceedingly afflicted at this novelty, was forced to send to
Switzerland for a new regiment of dogs, to bring his sheep to better obedience;
which remedy proved both chargeable and unfortunate; for these dogs growing so
cruel to the sheep, as even to worry them, and eat them up; this cruelty
wrought such effect in the sheep, as they began resolutely to throw off all
obedience. So as afflicted Menalcas fell at last into the misfortune of
listening to a Florentine, a damned Master of Policy, who told him, that wary
shepherds had no better way to make foreign sheep which were disobedient,
serviceable unto them, then by keeping them poor and lean; which as soon as it
was put in practice, proved so prejuditial both to the sheep and sheepherd, as
Menalcas could not get so much as one Cheese, nor half a tod of wool from his
sheep, and the sheep died for want of meat. And in one months space, Menalcas
lost both his Interest and Principal; and (which caused much mirth in all the
Arcadian shepherds) from being a happy shepherd of a noble flock, fell, through
his greedy ambition to be a woeful Merchant of sheepskins: A great misfortune,
wholly occasioned through the ignorance that men have of shepherds Arethmatick,
which differs so from the Merchant-like Arethmatick used in other affairs, as
Menalcas who gained 500 crowns a year by 500 sheep, fell far short of getting a
thousand, by a thousand. For it is true, that in common Arethmatick twice five,
makes ten, and thrice five, fifteen, and so forward; but in Pastoral
Arethmatick, twice five, makes three, thrice five makes one, and four times
five, makes that cipher which ruins as many as by grasping at too much, holds
fast nothing.

The XLVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Vertuosi of Parnassus, in the Assembly of Focide, decide the mystery of an
Host; and find the keeping of an Inn to be a Noble Heroi^k Virtue

IN the Assembly which some days past was celebrated in Focide by the
Vertuosi, for decission of some Controversies which arose amongst the Vertuosi,
it was resolved to the wonder of all men, that Inn keeping was not a sordid
occupation, but a most worthy Heroic virtue, only fit for such high spirited
men, and men of worth, who born to be liberal and splendid, cannot endure that
their purses should be strung with avarice, nor that the Coffers wherein they
keep their Gold locked up with the key of niggerliness; for they think that the
use of money serves for nothing, but the more to enable gallant men to do
gallant things. The wonder was yet the greater, for that it was said, the
Vertuosi concurred so unanimously in this Declaration, as it mist but a little,
that this vocation, held at first so sordid, was not added as an eight to the
seven Liberal Sciences. The meaner sort of the Litterati could hardly believe
that this Paradox was approved by the noblest sort of Parnassus: For Aristotle,
Plato, Averoes* and many other ancient Litterati of the first Classis, did
highly praise this resolution of the Assembly, confessing all, that no nobler
art, no more honorabler exercise, nor greater advantage could be had or made by
great men, then that of Inn-keeping: Always provided that they should be very
circumspect in lodging certain quallified passengers, who upon occasions which
daily occur, might with half a penful of ^nk* and one little word, make their
Host happy, and not only pay for their supper and horse meat, but make good the
losses he had suffered by such as feed upon other men's costs, and pass for
noddies.

Presently upon this Declaration, many generously minded men of Parnassus, and
who were formerly verst in the Noble Husbandry of sowing good turns, and
reaping gratitude, betook themselves to the chief highwaies, where they have
built commodious Inns to take Sturgeons with Pilcherts. And Alberto Pio, Conte
de Carpi, one of his Majesty's Council of State, dispatched away an express by
Post, to acquaint his Nephew Octavius Aquaviva, who was then in the Court at
Rome, with this news. This nobly minded Prince, and worthy successor to his
virtuous forefathers, as soon as he had read the Letter of so high
advertisement, took Post, and riding to^ds the highway which leads from Rome
to Tus^ny, did ^mmediately erect a public and Royal (...) in Viterbo, with the
sign of the blew Lion, where he nobly treated all the Princes, and other
gallant Gentlemen that past by that way; and did this with such Host-like
cheerfulness, as having twice lodged Cardinal Nicolas Sfondrato very* suddenly,
the said Cardinal being afterward made Pope, remembering how good cheer his
Host had made him at Viterbo, and considering the Noble blood, and great worth
and men's which did (...) so great a Prelate, he caused him to be sent for to
Rome, and discoursing with him of what he had eaten at his Inn, did gratefully
requite him with a sallet of boiled succory, a dish of delicate porredg, with
Wardens roasted in the embers, and with a Cardinals Cap, in despite of some
poorly conditioned fellows, who are not ashamed to give scurvy nic-names to the
accommodation which we receive by being well lodged, and which ought to be
esteemed a great happiness.

The XLIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
A Litterato severely punished for saying that Duels were sometimes necessary.

THe Argumentation had three days ago between certain Litter^ in the
Peripatetick Portico, whether his Majesty had done well or no, to forbid Duels
upon so severe penalties, was very remarkable for the m^fortune it occasioned
to some: For the Disputation was no sooner ended, but those who had held that
oft-times such differences might arise between soldiers and other persons, as
not being to be decided but by the sword, Duels were necessary, were seized
upon and condemned to the Galleys. The wonder of this so sudden sentence was
increased, it being clearly seen, that even Justice her self, which was never
known to show any passion in any whatsoever occasion, did not at this time
conceal her anger against those that were sentenced.

Some of the wisest of this Court say, that she had much reason to appear so
incensed, since her reputation was so deeply concerned by those who had dared
to affirm that it was possible for some differences to fall out amongst men, as
were not to be decided by her Laws, without the use of Duels.

The L. ADVERISEMENT.
The Dukes, Marquisses, and other Titulati of Parnassus, complain grievously to
Apollo, that their honorable Title of Excellency, should be given to Doctors of
Law, and Physic.

THe Duke of Aganippe's wife fell sick the last week of a dangerous Fever; he
therefore forthwith called together a College of the best Physicians of this
Court, wherein for his better satisfaction, he would be present himself. And it
fell out, that whilst these Physicians were arguing the business amongst
themselves, they gave the Title of Excellency to one another: Whereat the Duke
was so scandalized, as not being able to endure that so high a Title, and which
in this our age is so ambi^ously coveted by great men, should be frequently
used by those threadbare Doctors; not tarrying to hear their result, departed
from them, and went to find out diverse Princes to whom the Title of Excellency
is given; and told them they must make head, and no ways tolerate that so
^ignal a Title should be abused by Doctors of ^aw and Physic. The Princes were
so well pleased with this motion, as ^y immediately presented themselves before
Apollo, and complained grievously that the Princely Title of Excellency should
be used by those Doctors, for whom the Title of Sir, or Master, was too much.
Apollo gave them no other answer, but that they should send for the parties to
appear; which was done. So as the Doctors of both these professions appeared
the next day before Apollo, who (the Princes their adversaries being present)
said it was well known to all men, that Lawyers and Physicians were in the
world long before there were any Dukes or Princes, who had their beginnings
only since the Goths, and other barbarous Nations passing into Italy, divided
it amongst them, into petty Principalities, till when the names of Dukes,
Marquisses, and Earls were never heard of; and that the Doctors of Law and
Physic, from the first plantation of Learning, had the Title of excellency
given them, which they had ever since peacefully possessed; and that those first
Titolati which were seen in Italy, took upon them the Title of Excellency, as
being a thing which was highly esteemed of by Lawyers and Physicians; and that
since the Titolati were of much later standing then Doctors, no Justice would
permit that the latter should deprive the more ancient, of the Title of
Excellency: and that if the Princes their adversaries thought that that (...)
was of less repute for being used to Sholars, they might leave it, and take to
themselves one which they should like better; but that they were very sorry,
that in these Modern times the Liberal Sciences should be of so small esteem,
as it should be accounted a dishonor that Physicians and Doctors of Law should
use the Title of excellency, which the ancient Dukes took from Doctors, as a
thing which they did much value. And then they added, that for the eternal
glory of Learning and to encourage men to learn the Liberal Sciences, the
rewards of honorable Studies ought rather to be increased then diminished. To
this the Princes answered, That the first foundation laid by the Doctors, that
the Titolati had taken the Title of Excellency from them, was false* for that
the most of them had purchased it at deer rates from Supreme Princes.

To this the Doctors replied, That if to enjoy the Title of Excellency at dear
rates, made for any advantage in this dispute, the Doctors of both these
professions might say that they had paid dearly for the degree of Doctor, which
brought with it the ^itle of Excellency to the College which had given them
that Degree. The Princes replied with a great deal of contempt and derision,
that it was very strange that Doctors should pretend to parallel their
excellencies which might cost them 50 crowns, with that of Dukes and Princes
which required many thousands; and that the difference between the one and the
others excellency, was easily discerned by the difference of the price. It
appeared strange to Apollo, that the Princes should presume to enjoy the name
of Excellency at a dear rate: and he told them, that they by their moneys had
purchased the substance of the Estate which they possessed, not the vainglorious
Title. But that Doctors who did first possess the substance of learning by
their perpetual labor and watchings, might justly say that they had purchased
the Title of Excellency, when they parted with their moneys for the Degree of
Doctor. To this the Princes answered with a deep sigh fetched even from the
bottom of their heart, that his Majesty was in the wrong; for many of them had
purchased the Title without any State; when to a Castle or place wh^ they had
enjoyed from their Supreme Prince with the Title of Baron or Lord, they had
purchased the Title of Duke or Prince, only that they might be honored with the
Title of Excellency. Apollo was so much distasted hereat, as he presently made
an Edict, whereby he commanded all Kings and Emperors, that for the future they
should abstain from such like Mercandize, as from a thing unlawful; and
granted all Privileges and Prerogatives which the Law by way of charity does
afford to Widows, Orphans, Idiots, and other miserable people in demanding full
restitution ex capite enormissimae saesionis, to those silly people who would
throw away their money to buy smoke without roast-meat. Then to rid himself of
this troublesome controversy between the Princes and Doctors, he referred it to
the Tribunal of the sage Grandees of the Liberal Sciences, who upon hearing of
the fact, were to determine it: Before whom when the Dukes and Doctors appeared,
after two hours dispute, those Judges gave sentence, that though the Title of
Excellency which was used by Doctors, and given to Princes, was of the same
matter, quality and substance, yet it was the goods of Fortune which was
honored in Princes with the Title of Excellency, and in Doctors, those of the
mind. The Dukes thought then that the sentence was favorable on their behalf;
wherefore with a scornful smile they said to the Doctors, These Judges have
cleared the question once for ever. At the hearing whereof, the Doctors, who
smiled inwardly at the simplicity of these Titolati, not to give themselves any
further trouble, answered nothing. But when the Princes had conferred with
their Learned Council, who told them that the sentence made for the Doctors,
they pressed his Majesty that they might be suffered to appeal: Apollo troubled
at the Princes pressures, bad them be quiet; for they vilified the Title of
Excellency, who bought it with their moneys; not they who had won by their
labor and study: And that if the Dukes, and other T^tolati would purchase
infinite honor to themselves, they should open their purses, and by rewarding
the Professers of Learning acquire unto themselves the Title of Liberal; which
with men of sound judgment, and perfect understanding, was thought to be much
above that of Excellency, Highness, nay even that of Cesars sacred Imperial
Majesty.

The LI. ADVERTISEMENT.
A Marquess who caused his Genealogy to be made by Scipio Ammerati, found
himself so ill dealt with by him, as he redemands the reward he gave him.

AT Scipio Ammerato's first entrance into Parnassus he opened a public shop,
where he still professes the mystery of making Genealogies, and Pedigrees for
principal Families, at which he is so expert, as he has the chief work in this
Court of that nature. Wherefore some months ago a Marquess of some condition
desired him that he would draw a Pedigree of all his Family, and endeavor
carefully to find out the first original thereof, for which he would not be
unthankful to him, and in part of payment he presently gave him 200 crowns of
Gold. Ammerato spent diverse months in this business, and at last found all that
was possible to be found of that Lords Family, and drew it up into an exact
form. By that Genealogy it was seen that this Lords Predicessors had been
Marquisses for above one hundred years, and that the first of his Family that
possessed any Estate was a Captain, who for his good service done to an Emperor
of Germany, had a Castle given him, which was called Marquess. Ammeratus found
that this Captains Father was a Physician, that this Physician was the son of a
Notary, that the Father of this Notary was an Oylman, descended from a
Sergeant, who for some roguery was hanged; that this Sergeant was son to a
Matrix-maker, who was descended from a Gentleman of Savoy, who for having
conspired against his Prince, was put to death: Whose son, when he was very
young, being sent by the Prince of Savoy to shift for himself, was taken into
the house of mere charity by the said Matrix-maker, who having taught him his
Art, adopted him his son. The Gentleman of Savoy was son to a great Count,
whose Father, Grandfather, great Grandfather, and great great Grandfather
had been of good esteem in that County, which was purchased by a Courtier, a
great favorit to the Prince of that time. This Courtier was found by authentic
Records, to be the son of a certain Jew, whose name was Salamon, who becoming
afterward a Christian, was called Arnoldo; and this Jew being come from
Rhodes, his pedigree could be no further pried into: Ammirato having arived at
this, presented the Lord with this Genealogy; who seeing the great bulk
thereof, not looking into the contents, seemed to be well satisfied, and gave
Ammirato a thousand crowns. But when he read the loathsomness of his Family,
and the mean condition of diverse who were registered in his Genealogy, he
returned to Ammirato, and told him that instead of an honorable pedigree which
he had desired him to make, he had composed an infamous Libel against him. Then
giving him back his Genealogy, re-demanded the moneys which he had given him,
saying, he used to reward those who would cover his shame, not those who would
lay it open to the world. But he was soon quieted, when Ammirato told him he
should do wisely in not being overcurious in seeking far into the Antiquity of
his house; for that the wheel of this world turning continually round, and in a
short space of time laying those low, who a little before were at the highest
pitch, they who were too ambitiously desirous to know who their progenitors
were from the flood, would find many in their Genealogy stained with the like
blemishes as his was.

The LII. ADVERTISEMENT.
A dispute arising amongst the Vertuosio touching the truth of certain Sayings
and Speeches of wise men, their true meanings were argued and resolved in the
General Diet celebrated in Helicon.

THe Sayings, Sentences and Answers of the wise, are the Laws, Acts, and
Statutes which are observed by the Vertuosi in this State; and therefore Apollo
is very careful that they may be perfectly true, and exactly good. And because
many days since a great dispute arose amongst the Literati touching the truth
of some of them; according to custom, in a business of so great weight, the
General Diet of the Vertuosi was intimated in Helicon: Wherein the first thing
that was called in question was, whether or no the common saying was true, That
wise men and fools are cozened by fair words and foul deeds. Many were for the
Affirmative, saying, that the cunning of diverse modern wits was arrived at that
height of double dealing, as there were many good people, who being fed with
good words, were afterward paid with bad performances; and that it was daily
seen, that double dealers did by their fallacious speeches turn and wind plain
meaning men as they listed, and led them by the nose at their pleasure, though
they were held generally to be wise men. Yet it was resolved by the major part
of the Diet, that in times past the saying was allovv'd of with much reason,
and practiced as a true one; but that now adays by the overdaring boldness of
dissemblers, who were openly seen to cheat and cozen the eyes of the
simplest, and very Idiots were so opened, as believing only such things as
they savv plainly by noonday, and touched with their hands, none but fools
were cheated with good words and bad deeds; for wise men who were aware
of these wicked men's vvays, did not only not at all believe them, but holding
them to be Crosbiters and Cutpurses. shunned them as they would do the Plague:
So as such as these being upbraided with their double dealing, durst no longer
show their faces amongst honest men; but like Ovvls and Bats, appeared only
by night, to hide their shame by darkness. It was next taken into
consideration, whether the proverb, Omne solum Forti patria est, To a stout
man all the world is his Country, were absolutely true or no. The first day,
which was wholy spent in hot disputation upon this point, the Diet seemed
to think it was a great error to question a Sentence, which till then was
held undeniable by the unanimous consent of all Schools; since it was plainly
seen, that gallant and worthy men were cherished and welcome wheresoever they
came; and that no Prophet being approved of in his own Country, men highly
minded, and of generous spirits, had reason to account that their Country,
where their vvorth was valued; and where, without being envyed by their
neighbors, every man was valued according to his true vvorth, that they only
should esteem that for their Country wherein they were born, whose foolish
behaviors abroad made them be accounted odious foreigners; yet the adverse
party had the better, so as the saying was repealed as false: For by the
Vertuosi of the Diet, it was found to be directly contrary to the Divine will
of God: For God being pleased, for reasons unknown to man, to make the whole
fabric of the earth of a like fertillity and pleasantness; and yet it being
his will, that the most barren mountains should be as well inhabited by men, as
the most fruitful valleys, and the scorched and frozen climates, as well as the
Temperate, he with wisdom worthy of himself, did infuse into the heart of man
so excessive a love unto his Country, thereby obfuscating his judgment and
understanding; as he has taken from man the knowledge of better, who still
thinks that Country the most delicious where he is born: A love so necessary,
as were humane creatures deprived thereof, they would abandon the Craggy Alps,
the frozen Northern parts, and the scorched Southern ones, and with infinite
confusion flock all of them to the temperate Countries of Europe and Asia; and
that wild beasts, and all other creatures did clearly evidence this, who
governing themselves by natural precepts, were seen to live perpetually in
those Countries wherein they were bred; and though they were swift of wing, and
fleet of foot, yet they were contented with the small circuit of their own
Country. That therefore Hares, when hunted from their seats by dogs, in flying
from them are so frighted with the sight of new Countries as fearing new
places, more then the hounds teeth, they return to dye where they were first
started. That the curiosity of man had observed, that Swallows by so long a
Tract both by sea and land, return to build their nests in the same place from
whence they went the year before. After this averdment, it was much disputed by
the Deputies of the Diet, whether the proverb Festina lent, were true or no?
And it was said, That it being impossible at one and the same time both to run
and walk slowly, the proverb contained contrarieties, and was therefore
impossible to be put in practice; for slowness could not consist with
swiftness, and that it was impossible to use mature deliberation, where
precipitation was wisdom. And in this particular Tacitus his opinion was much
approved, who freely said, that Nullus cunctationis locus est in co concilio,
quod non potest ^duri, nisi peractum: quia non cunctatione op^s ubi per^tior
fit quies quam Temeritas. Tacit. lib 1. Histor. there is no room for delay in
that advice, which admits not of praise till it be executed; for where pawsing
is more dangerous then rashness, there needs no delay. In this variety of
opinion, the Diet that they might maturely resolve the business, caused the
Emperor Flavius Vespatianus to be sent for, whom they demanded in what sense he
who first used that saying Festina lent, dict understand it; and whether by
those words he would teach others Mature haste. To this Vespatian answered,
That he did not set up the Impress of the Anchor and the Do^phin, with the
motto which was so well known, in that sense which was afterward commonly
given unto it; for he very well knew, that many occasions might happen, wherein
precipitation was to be esteemed great wisdom, and according to the French,
first to act, and then to argue and resolve. But that by Festina lent, he
would have wisely admonished his Romans Lent Festinare, to be flower in making
feasts, for that in Rome where there were many Beagles which were very well
sented to find out wild beasts, though in never so secure a harbor; and great
store of swift-Greyhounds, and abundance of those two legged Animals, who being
of a wild nature, Fiunt occupantis, have no certain owner, the too frequent
use of feasts was nothing else but to hunt for Horns, and fill ones budget with
them. After this Interpretation of his impress, given by Vespatian, which was
fully satisfactory to the whole Diet. It was propounded, whether the usual
proverb, Rosso Mal pel^, beware of a red head were true or no? And because of
all men, those that have red hair drink most, and therefore are accounted brave
fellows, jovial companions, truth tellers, and pleasantly disposed, no ways
revengeful nor cruel, but much given to pastime; red hair seemed to be best,
for those who desired to appear before men with countenances which might
purchase them good will and credit amongst men. The Diet did unanimously vote
for the repealing of the proverb, and with a joint vote declared it to be
false. When at the very instant that the decree was entering, the virtuous Lady
Victoria Colonna, who in the Diet represented the whole University of
Poetesses, briskly opposed it, and caused the whole Diet to alter their
opinion. For she told them, That they had revoked the truest saying that ever
proceeded from the mouth of any wise Philosopher: For (said she) the proverb
Rosso mal pelo, did not vvarn men (as it was commonly believed) to bevvare of
red hair, but women, and especially married wives, that they should by all
means avoid it, as a treacherous hair. For there being but fevv men of that
complexion, if one of them chance to be more then ordinary gracious with a
Lady, he is sooner taken notice of for a Whore-master, then those whose more
ordinary hair serves to cloak their knavery. The interpretation given by the
Lady Victoria, appeared to the whole Diet to be true, and worthy the
judgment of so noble a Poetess. So as when this controversy was ended, the
great Delfick Chancellor questioned the saying, Ubi Bonum ibi patria, great
diligence was used in the discussing a business of such importance: and the
Literati said, That the greatest part of Humane felicity, consisting in the
wealth which men possess, they knevv not v^hy that should not be esteemed a
man's happiest Country, where his greatest riches lay, for the Country where
men live by their labor, and by wages purchased by sweat, was by wise men
esteemed an unfortunate abode, not a delicious Country. It was
notvvithstanding unanimously agreed upon, That in former times the proverb was
held to be very true, but that in these days, wherein the ravenous nails of
Fischi, Promoters were grown longer then Vultures clavvs, or Lions pavvs, and
wherein great revenues, upon occasion of any Delinquency imputed to vvealthy
men, served of times for conclusive proofs, and undeniable arguments, to enrich
Princes Treasury by confiscasions, it was a blessed thing to live in Italy,
and have a man's estate in Iapan.

The LIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo at last grants admittance into Parnassus to Francisco Sforza, Duke of
Milan, which he had long denied to do, upon a hard condition, which he accepted
of.

COunt Fr. Sforza, he who by his extraordinary military valor purchased the
Dukedom of Millan, whereby he rendered his Family as famous and honorable as
the like of the greatest Princes. Though 140 years be past, since at the great
desire of the Soldiery and Literati, he came to the confines of this State,
yet he was never suffered by Apollo to enter into Parnassus; and though the
chiefest Princes of this Court, who did always admire the great worth of so
gallant a man, have perpetually interceded for him, his Majesty
notwithstanding, without ever making the cause known, has always denied him
that favor. But being pressed thereunto much more then usually eight months ago
by Lodowick the eleventh, King of France. Apollo answered resolutely, That he
infinitely loved Sforza's worth and extraordinary merit, but that for good
respects he would not admit so scandalous a man into Parnassus. To this that
King, who was so knowing, courageously answered, that in respect of the Dukes
extraordinary military valor, his excellency in council, his singular
dexterity, his quick dispatch, his continually uncorrupted faith, and his other
heroic virtues, wherein he did so abound, he thought that the true Patron of
worthy Commanders, and the Idea of a Prince greatly wise in peace, and
infinitely valliant in war, was rather to be admitted into Parnassus, then any
thing that was scandalous. To this reply Apollo answered, That he did not
gainsay the Dukes great deserts; but that man beginning happily already to
discern the false Alchimy of the Militia, and the unhappy use of the Soldiers
craft, he would not, by admitting of the Duke into Parnassus, renew the
reputation of rash and hiddy giddy men; and so much the rather, for that the
foolish sort of men, for their greater calamities, were more encouraged to
despise the danger of Navigation, for one only ship that returned safe into
the haven, then they were terrified for 1000 that were sunk in the sea. Apollo
added, that he was more desirous to admit the Duke into Parnassus, then the
Duke was to be there: Wherefore he wished King Lewis to tell him, that he would
very willingly grant his request, if at his entrance into Parnassus he would
only bring such with him, as had come to an unfortunate end in the pay they
took from the Sforzeses Militia. The Duke thought this condition to be hard and
shameful; and was long in dispute with him self, whether he should accept of it
or no; for the desire of glory pleaded on the one side, but then he was deterd
to know that the Militia promising so fairly, and coming off so ill, he was to
bring with him the unfortunate attendance of those that were miserable, and
much to be bemoned. In this so great doubt, this Heroes endelss desire of glory
got the upperhand; wherefore he signified to Apollo by his Secretary Simonetta,
that he willingly accepted of what was proffered him in his Majesty's name; and
Apollo immediately appointed a day for his entrance, which was the 19 of this
present month. When the Princes and famous Commanders of this Court knew this
the Dukes resolution, they were much troubled thereat, and left nothing undone
to make him change his resolution, which they knew was to bring great prejudice
to the whole Militia. But the Duke, standing still steadfast to his resolution,
resolutely answered those Princes, that he was fully resolved to purchase a
place in Parnassus at what rate soever, let whatsoever mischief befall the
mystery of war. For that Fisherman was not to be esteemed ungrateful to his
occupation, who being grown very wealthy by the great gain he had got by
Fishing, burnt his boat, and tore his nets. He presently therefore called for
such as he did most confide in, whom he commanded to muster together all those
Soldiers who had miscarryed in the Sforzese Militia, which were a very
infinite number; and the next Wednesday about 6 a clock, the Duke all armed
made his entrance: never was there a sadder nor more woeful spectacle beheld:
For it exceeded all the greatest miseries, and made tears to fall even from the
hardest hearted men, to see an infinite number of young men, well provided of
fortunes, who lived at ease, enjoying all delights in their fathers houses,
dead of hunger, and starved in Hospitals; some lying dead in ditches, many on
the highways, and an infinite number drowned, serving for food to dogs and
fishes, others all rent with wounds, some trod to death by horses, others
begging their bred by the highway, not having received sufficient recompense
from those Princes in whose service they had lost their blood, and exposed
their lives to a thousand dangers, to carry them back to their own houses,
which they had so unfortunately forgon. And every one wept when they saw a young
Gentleman of about twenty years old, who being shot into the eye by a cross-bow
arrow, whereof he dyed, and who having been told by Guido Bonati, a famous
Astrologer, that if he would be so wise as to keep in his own Country, he
might assuredly live to be fouscorce year old; the same Guido Bonati tenderly
embracing him, said, O unfortunate young lad, Why were thou so foolish as to
sell 60 years of life for sixpence? Then fearful curses were heard against the
first introducers of war. The next day after the Dukes entry, the most
accomplished Literati came to Apollo, and told him, he very well knew that
there was no difference between the miseries of war and Courtiers unhappiness.
For if war were miserable, Courts were nothing but afflictions; if Soldiers
were unhappy, Courtiers were unfortunate; that therefore since the sad
spectacle of Duke Sforza's entrance into Parnassus had infused such dread into
all the Militia, as it was abhorred by all men, it would be equally
advantageous to the world, if when any Courtier were admitted into Parnassus,
who was risen from a mean condition to the supremest dignities, he should (as
the Duke had been) be accompanied by all those miserable Courtiers, who
suffering under the Avarice and ingratitude of several Princes, dyed
despairing. This advice was rejected by Apollo as pernicious, who said, that
men had more need be encouraged to go to Court, then terrified from going
thither; for though but few came by any dignities, wealth or honor, yet all of
them enriched their souls with the purchase of several virtues; which was so
true, as he thought he deserved not the name of a complete Gentleman, who
having spent many years in Court, had not been Scozzonato, had not learnt his
lesson well.

The LIVE. ADVERTISEMENT.
A dangerous contention which arose amongst the Pedagogs in Parnassus upon a
very ssight occasion, is appeased by Apollo.

YEsterday about eight of the clock a great alarm was sounded in the Gramarian
Quarters, which made all the Vertuosi run to see what the matter might be: and
they found that the Schoolmasters, Panegyrical writers and Commentarors, were
fallen so foully together by the ears in Brigadoes, as there was much ado to
part them The dispute which arose between them was, Whether the word Consumptum
were to be written with a P, or only with a T. Apollo was much troubled at
this dispute, not only for the mean cause of the quarrel, but for that Paulus
Manutius (who was thought to be a chief actor in this brabble) hit Lambino in
the face (who stiffly maintained the contrary opinion) with a Roman stone,
vvhereon Consumptum was written with a P, vvherevvith he broke his nose.
Apollo, who was at first much incensed at the Pedanticks mean folly, was so
highly scandalized at this new excess, as he commanded the Praetor Urbano to
rid Parnassus of that Sottish crew of Pedants. But afterward, at the
entreaties of Cicero, Quintillian, and others of the chiefest Literati of this
Court, who interceded for those bravvling people, saying, That those
Pedanticks could not fall out for any matter of moment, who were only
acquainted with slight affairs, his Majesty was appeased.

The LV. ADVERTISEMENT.
For remeady of many disorders which are found in History, a General Assembly
of Historians being summoned, Apollo publishes a severe Edict against them,
and many Historians are reprehended for their errors.

THe General Assembly of all Historians, which was intimated some months ago
by the Censors, by express order from Apollo, to meet in Delos, was ended two
days ago, much to his Maj. satisfaction, by reason of the excellent orders that
therein were established in a business, wherein the eternal Fame of those
things consist, which are composed by gallant men. This caused the more general
content in all the Vertuosi, for that modern Writers have strayed far from
those laws which they devoutly promised to observe when they took the oath of
Historians before Apollo; and because the importance of the business does
deserve it, Menante will not grudge to give you the very Edict which was
published yesterday morning in his Majesty's name by the sound of Trumpet in
the Market places, and afterward posted upon all the College gates of this
State.

We Phoebus, by the Grace of God Emperor of the fixed Stars, King of Planets,
Prince of the Zodiac, Duke of Light, Marquis of Generation, and Earl of all
visible things; To all our faithful Vertuosi, and well-beloved Literati,
health. We having much to our displeasure found, that many modern Historians
have much wandered from that way of truth, which was walked in to the public
good of others and their private honor, by our faithful Penmen Dionysius,
Livy, Salust, Tacitus, and many others; to the end that future Ages which do so
eagerly read History, may be sure to find truth from the pens of faithful
Writers, and not be abused by lies given out unto them by flattering and
malicious ignorant Historians, do by this our Edict, which is to continue for
ever, call into the memory, and give notice to all those who undertake the
noble work to eternize by their writings the actions of famous men, that they
must always remember, that being to write, not to the present, but to those
that are to come, they publish writings full of that Historical truth, which
renders the names of sincere Pen men glorious and eternal to future ages: And
that they should value the blame and threats of such as are justly taxed for
their unworthy actions, but as dung; there being no more woeful folly, then
continually to labor with pen in hand how to shame themselves, by writing
falsehoods, without any advantage to those whom they flatter, declaring, that
to publish false Histories, is to assassinate the Vertuosi who read them: And
therefore our will and pleasure is, That those who run into so enormous
excesses, be irremissably punished by the like assassination. And because it is
apparent that Princes have arrogated so much authority even over the free pens
of Historians, as not to suffer any thing to be written of them, though it be
true, which is not fully to their satisfaction (a pretension which has so
banished historical truth from the pens of writers) as the great wits of our
choicest Vertuosi being frighted by the base fawnings whereby modern Princes
will be flattered, the weighty employment of writing History, reserved only
for the choicest Penmen, is now adays (to the great shame of the present age
and infinite damage of the future) fallen in the hands of ignorant people: We
therefore by reason of this foul disorder, are forced to put Princes in mind,
That their Authority ceasing with their lives, they are fools if they believe
they are able after their deaths to hinder our Vertuosi from writing the truth
of their actions to future times. And we do more particularly advertise the
same Princes, That their valliant carrying of themselves in affairs which
require freedom, is the cause why our faithful Historians, esteeming themelves
offended by so much severity, out of mere rage of revenge, after he lives of
such Emperors, write rather Invectives then Histories, as the Emperors
Tiberius, (...), (...) and (...), have to their great shame ^ound. And to
obviate the great inconvenience, occasioned by their ignorance* who in these
modern times do (...) the worth of History by their Sottish writings, o^ will
and pleasure is and we do expressly command, That hereafter no man, of what
degree o^ condition soever he be, shall dare to write History, unless he be
first approved of for purity of language, by Julius Caesar; for ^ence by Livy;
for policy, by Tacitus; for the good understanding of Princes interest, by
Guicchardin. And more over under pain of perpetual infamy, we do expressly
prohibit for the future, the writing particular Histories of any whatsoever
City, unless it be the Metropolis of some Empire, Kingdom* or great Province:
And this we do, to the end that the precious jewel of Time be not misspent in
mean things, both by him that writes, and by him that reads. And for the same
reason we ordain, That it shall not be lawful for any writer, to publish the
life of any Commander, unless he have commanded in chief in some Armies, or had
deserved his pay twenty times told, won some Provinces, besieged and taken some
strong holds, and have sought two set battles at least in open fields. And to
take away all abuses that may be committed by ambitious men, we declare, That
those whose lives any one shall undertake to write, have the same requisite
parts as were in Bellisarius, in Narsetes, in Godfrey of Bullen, in Alexander
Fernese. And to rid the world as much as may be of a certain arrogant Ambition
which is known to reign in many, we likewise command. That it be not lawful to
write any particular History of any Family, unless it be made appear to our
College for History, that it has maintained it self famous and illustrious in
the world for full five hundred years, with plenty of Personages who have put a
period to important wars, and honorable undertakings; and that in this
particular they take our glorious and well-beloved Families of the Orsina's,
Caietans and Collenesses for their examples. And because it is well known by
many former examples, that to suffer an ambitious man to write his own acts, is
to put a naked sword into a mad man's hands, we do expressly command, That it
shall not be lawful for any one to write any Commentary or formal Story of his
own life, unless he have given in sufficient security to contain himself within
the terms of modesty and truth; and unless he be declared by our College of
Historians to be so eminent a Personage, as his actions deserve to be
consecrated to Immortality for the good of future ages. And to extirpate the
wicked vice of Flattery out of the world, to the which (to our infinite grief)
we see our Vertuosi are much inclined, we do expressly command, That it be not
lawful for any writer to publish the life of any whatsoever Hero, though he be
Emperor or King, before he be dead, allowing mention of men whilst alive to be
only made in general Histories, or in some short particular Elogies. Moreover,
to shun the infinite follies which are daily seen in many Histories, our
express will and pleasure is, that it be not lawful for any writer to compose
the History of any particular foreign Nation, unless he have lived for the
space of twenty years in that Country, whose Story he will write. And for the
like reason we do forbid any whatsoever Vertuosi to undertake to write History,
unless he have traveled many Provinces; unless he have been Secretary or
Counselor to some great Prince, or be not Senator to some famous
Commonwealth; and chiefly unless he have spent two third parts of his life in
following Courts, which we have judged to be the more requisite, for that in
our Delfick Library we find some Histories written by Courtiers, who are
altogether ignorant of the purity of Languages and of all the most important
precepts of the Art of writing History; but so abounding in smart politic
precepts, as they make clearly appear that it is the particular virtue of
accomplished Courtiers to publish to posterity, not such things as they have
gathered up by hearsay, but the most hidden intrinsical meanings of Princes,
which they by their quick speculative wits have known how to penetrate into.
And because in many volumenous Histories, we read bitter invectives against the
Nation which is an enemy to the place where the Author of the History lives, we
do here renew our Edicts published in this particular some years ago; wherein
for the indemnity of Historical truth from the blames imputed by one Nation to
another adverse Nation, we have ordained, That an abatement shall be allowed of
60 per cent. And because we are assured, That the sad loss to learning, of the
greatest part of our beloved Livies pretius Dechads, is occasioned soly by
Lucius Florus, we do expressly command, That from henceforth it be not lawful
for any one to epitomize or write a breviate of the writings of any whatsoever
Historian. So also, with all the plenary power that we have over learning, we
forbid all our Vertuosi, at any time hereafter to write the universal History
of the world, or of any particular Nation, which like the famous Romans, French
or Saracins have done gallant acts, compendiously, or in small volumes; as many
have done to little or no purpose, who have written the actions of all Nations,
from the beginning of the world to their own times, in a few sheets; experience
having taught all men, that the reading of things so succinctly written, is
altogether unuseful, it being unpossible to reap that abundant fruit, which is
tasted in particular Histories, where not merely res gesta, the thing done is
related, but the reasons and counsels thereof. In the last place, we put the
reverend Preisthood in mind, that they attend to the reading and writing of
sacred things; and leave the writing of profane Histories to those lay people,
who think it a meretorious truth not a sinful murmuring, to asperse the actions
of Princes, or private men, who have done things amiss. Given at our Zodiac,
the 20 day after our entrance into Libra, the year of our laborious course,
5570.

After the publication of so severe an Edict, it was whispered in this Court
(but because the business was carried very secretly; and Menante, who
advertiseth nothing but truths, tells it not for an assured verity) that many
Historians, yea even of the first Classis, were severely reprehended: For it is
said, that Julius Caesar was commanded, that within twenty days he should not
fail to add the breaking open of the Roman Exchequer in his Commentary,
punctually as it passed; and that he should therein mention certain other
particulars, which being more then meanly loathsome, he had forborne to relate,
lest it might entrench too nearly upon himself. That uetonius Tranquillus was
severely reprehended, for that having made more open profession then any other
Literato, to be very circumspect in his writings, he had notwithstanding
recounted such obscene lasciviousness of Tiberius, of not forbearing in his
lust to make use of sucking caildren, pollutions which howsoever ought not to
be spoken of, not only in respect that Historians cannot affirm those lewd
actions for truths, which in point of lust are done in the dark, when doors are
shut; but for that such things (though truths) ought not to be touched upon,
which for the great scandal which they occasion, ought rather to beburied in
oblivion, then divulged; it being the end of all Historians to insert virtue
into men's minds, not to instruct vice. It Is said indeed, That Dion was told in
milder terms, that History, which ought to be wholly real truths, the very
pitch of politic instructions, needed not to be filled with the so often
reiteration of those prodigies, with which he had so heaped up his writings, as
they did even choke those that read them. And which was the more tedious, for
that they had exceeded the bounds of discretion, both in their numbers and
qualities: For Apollo his self smiled to see him write of so many showers of
blood and stones; he not remembering that he had ever exhaled such Meteors,
which were afterward congealed into blood, or turned into stones. It is said,
That Titus Livius, the father of the Roman Histories, blushed not a little at
this reprehension which was given to Dion; perhaps, because he found himself
guilty of the like errors: But it is certainly affirmed by all, that Lampridius
was severely proceeded against; for by order of the whole congregation, his
Histories were turned back upon his hands, and he was freely told, That he
should go and teach those execrable lusts in the public Classis, wherewith he
had so delighted himself to fill his shameful papers, wherein he had written
the lives of Heliogabalus, Caracalla, and other lascivious monsters of nature:
It is also noised that Machiavel was reproved for his mad and desperate policy,
with which he had so freely filled his Histories, and other writings, as he
openly manifested his desire was to draw his Readers into the same ditch of
Impiety whereinto himself was shamefully fallen. It Is said, that in the next
place the Congregation found fault with Guicchardin, for his having spoken
amiss of the Venetian Commonwealth, the which was called by the whole Assembly,
the Sanctuary of the Vertuosi, the true seat of perfect liberty, the Bulwark
against Barbarians, the Mint of Libraries, the salt of humane wisdom, glory of
the Italian Nation; and many do believe, that Guicchardin in the face of the
whole Congregation, did not only acknowledge, but bewail his error, alleging
for his excuse, that mere envy to see the State of Venice grow daily more
glorious in her eternal liberties, whilst the Florentines, by their domestic
factions, lost their freedom, had made him so foully prevaricate; but that the
Fame of Venice, the glory of that excellent council, whereby she did (as a rare
and only example) daily increase both in State and reputation, was arrived at
that height of splendour, as was not to be obscured by the pen of whatsoever
passionate writer. It is also said, That Ialiano Goselini. Secretary to the
Senate of Millan was sent for by the Censors; who told him, that certainly he
thought he spoke to drunken men, when in the life wihich he writ of Don
Ferrante Gonsaga, where he makes mention of the Apostolic sea, he did not
stick to say, That her greatness was Caesar's particular care; and whilst
Goseleni was about to defend what he had said, he was bid to go make Ballads,
invented for flattery, it being the business of History to write real truths.
And because Girola^o Conestaggio, Conestaggio, Gentleman of Genua, had taken
his History of Portugal out of the Delfick Library, which had been there many
years before, and had in lieu thereof given in another edition of the same
History, which (as he said) was corrected in some places: The overseers of the
Library, finding that he had rather abused then corrected that edition, which
he had not reprinted (as he gave out) for the general good, but to give
satisfaction to some, whose reputations were deservedly taken by him, he was
told, That if he did not bring back the first edition into the Library within
eight days, the Assembly would put some affront upon him. For the ruin of the
Portugueses being occasioned by those who had the care of instructing King
Sebastian in his youth, it was very necessary, that by the unhappy end of so
great a King, and by the miserable calamities of the Portugueses, Princes
should be taught to know, that the learned masters which are to have the care
of breeding up their children in their youth, ought to be Commanders of tried
valor, and Senators of known Politic prudence.

The LVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo, to secure the rivers of his State from Pyracie, makes Bernardo Capello
General of the Ionick Sea, and gives him excellent directions.

APPOLLO being desirous to provide against many evils which Learning suffers
under by the Frigots of ignorant Pirates, in the rivers of Corinth, declared
Bernardo Capella two days ago, in the great Senate of Litterati, to be Admiral
or General of the Ionick Sea; whom he strictly commanded, that to that purpose
he should levy foot, and was content that he should take along with him some of
the best born young Poets of that State; who to begin the mystery of bearing
arms, did offer themselves to serve his Majesty upon this occasion. Apollo
afterward sent for Capello, whom he strictly commanded, under the pain of
being declared to be woefully ignorant, that he should molest none with his
Galleys, but the Frigots of ignorant Pirates; and that he should suffer
Merchants ships, of what Nation soever, to go free, together with their
Merchandise, to do them all possible honor; and that he should be ayding to
them upon all occasions, as they well deserved, for that by theirnoble
industry, men enjoyed the commodities of the remotest Countries; to the end
that the zeal that his Majesty desired to show unto the world, of defending
his subjects and their faculties from the rapine of Pirates, might not be turned
into a greater inconvenience by his filling the Seas with new and a worser sort
of Sea Robbers.

His Majesty then said, It would be too shameful a thing that the robbing of
public Merchants ships should be done in the name of the most exquisitely
virtuous Prince, who should be much to blame if he employed his prime Nobility
in such an exercise, wherein they should begin their Militia with shame enough,
if their first action should be to pillage Merchants ships. And to the end that
all the world might know, that his Majesty had no interest in a business of
such weight, save only the public good; he charged Capello to kill as many
Pirates as he should take; not only the more to terrify so pernicious a race of
men, but that so useful a work might not by taking of ransoms, be turned into
a public prejudicial Merchandice; it being proved by many things which had
happened, that such Pirates as had first been prisoners, and had afterward
purchased their Liberties, did very willingly expose themselves afterward to
all sorts of danger to reimburse the money which they had paid for their
ransom. The last and chiefest order which his Majesty gave to Capello, was,
that his charge being only to guard the Rivers belonging to Parnassus, he
should keep himself from going out of them at any time* as he would do from
fire, lest he might fall upon the same shame as those fools do, who forsaking
their marriage bed to commit adultery with other men's wives, became cuckolds.

The LVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Prince of Epire's first son being born, he is thereat so afflicted, as he
forbids that any shows of joy be made for it in his State.

THe last Letter that came from Epire, bears date the 22 of this present month,
and they tell us of the birth of a son to the Prince of Epire; and say that he
being the firstborn, the people of that Country were not only exceedingly
joyed to see their Prince his succession secured, but that they and many of the
neighboring Lords prepared to make extraordinary demonstrations of gladness.
But the Prince was the only man who in this public rejoicing was so very sad,
as he forbad the Steward of his house, who went to take order for the expense
of bone-fires, fireworks, and other expressions of joy for the birth of their
young Master, to show any signs of jollity; and bad him make the Fountains run
with. Wi^e, to proclaim open Court for forty days in his house, spend a
hundred thousand crowns in Tilt and Turney, when he himself should have a son
(...); the Lord Steward wondered much at this the Princes answer, to whom he
said, What means this, Si^, is not the child that is bo^ your son, your wife
having brought him forth twelve months after you were married* I now find, said
the Prince, that private me^ are not much acquainted ^ith the Interests of
Princes. But to let you see that I have reason for what I say, tell me how old
I am* Eighteen the twel^th of (...) month* replied the Steward. Confess then,
said the Prince, that the child (...) now born, is my brother, not my son; for
private men (...) children from their brethren by their birth^; but Pri^ by
(...) age: and know that those shall be my best beloved sons, who shall be
(...) ^o me when I shall be 50 years old; and when any such shall be born, I
will be content that extraordinary joy shall be shown: For when sons are born
to a young Prince as I am, bells should rather toll out for sorrow, to Funerals,
than Trumpets sound for joy: A Prince who marries whilst he is young, runs
hazard of having a multitude of sons, which is the true stone of offense, of
whatsoever State; this is so great a truth, as a King can receive no greater
blessing from heaven, than to have but one only son alive. Moreover, a Prince
who has many sons whilst he is young, ought not to covet long life; for as
Fathers desire to die with Supreme power in their hand; so sons, when they come
to certain years of age, have not patience to wait till the Fruit of Government
grow to be ripe by their Fathers death: for many great Kings have had sons, who
blinded with a desire of reigning, would rather hazard their healths with
eating green Grapes in June, then tarry till they should be ripe in September.
If it be so, said the Steward, I must confess the condition of Princes is to be
deplored in that, wherein we private men do envy them. Know then, said the
Prince, that when my son* who is now born, shall come to be one and twenty
years old, and I shall not put him into full possession of this my
Principality, if he shall then chance to contrive any thing against my Person,
or my State, it is I that shall therein have erred more then he. For it will be
as great a discourtesie in me, not to resign over unto him my State then, as
it would be inhumanity in me, if when I should be eating at a plentiful Table,
I should see him stand by, ready to starve for hunger, and not bid him eat.

The LVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo erects a new Tribunal in Parnassus, for the punishment of flatterers;
but succeeds very unfortunately therein.

THe civil and virtuous life which the Litterati lead in this State of
Parnassus, is not so much to be attributed to the severe punishment threatened
to such as are vitiously given, as to the great rewards held out to such as are
virtuous; nor yet to the good genius which the Litterati are generally of, as
to Apollos wisdom, who has appointed several distinct Tribunals for every
vice, for every fault omitted, and Judges thereunto appropriated; for his
Majesty has learnt by the late disorders, that when his Ministers are
troubled with but a few affairs, they dispatch them accurately well; whereas
those that have great store of business upon their hands, are neither speedy,
nor very just in their dispatches. Nor was Apollo aware, till six months since,
of the great disorder which reigns in this State, wherein many severe
Tribunals being erected against all such principal vices whereinto men do most
usually fail, there was no Judge nor punishment set apart for the vice of
flattery, which his Majesty does so much detest, and which is so pernicious
both to Princes, and private men. So as his Majesty thought that disease was so
generally diffused amongst men, chiefly because there was neither Physician,
nor Apothecary appropriated thereunto: Wherefore his Majesty who is always
vigilant in the extirpation of all vice, and in procuring indemnity to his
Vertuosi, thought it very necessary to correct so great an error, and to curb
so wicked a vice. He therefore of his own mere motion, erected a Tribunal six
months ago in this Court, under severe punishments against flatterers: For his
pleasure was, that such as should be found guilty of so foul a fault, should be
tied to the infamous Chain which is in the chief Marketplace, and flead live by
Marsia, who was very skilful thereat, having learnt it at his own charges: And
for the more severe punishment of so enormous a vice, he chose the chief
Satirical Poets of the State, as the greatest enemies of flatterers, to be
their Judges. Peter Aratine was made Lord Chief Justice, Iuvenal the first
Advocate; Ariosto Attorney General; Francis Berna, chief Notary, who had
Nicholas Franco, and Caesar Caporali for his substitutes; and six months being
past since the erecting of the Tribunal, in all which time no complaint came in
against flatterers, though flattery were seen to be daily used in Parnassus;
Apollo, that he might have occasion to punish those wicked persons, made use of
a great many Spies, who diligently watching over them, might accuse them before
the Tribunal. This remedy wrought good effect* for ere long they found
Bartolomeo Cavalcanti, who flattering a foolish Prince; given to hunting,
wantonness, all sorts of delights, neglecting the Government of his State so
far, as he had transferred the care thereof into the hands of one that was
mercenary, ignorant, and very passionate, he termed him vigilant, indefatigable
in taking pains, an enemy to all pastime, which he had wholly placed in
following business. Cavalcanti was suddenly seized upon; who upon examination,
presently confessed all that could he desired. Wherefore the Judge using all the
mercy to him that could stand with Justice, allowed him three days to make his
defense, and Martia brandisht his knife about, and put all other things in
order; when the Judge coming to examine the Prince who was flattered, found,
that though he was notoriously known to be what was said of him, he pretended
notwithstanding, that Cavalcanti had not only spoke truth, but that in the
praise which he with reason gave him, he came short of his deserts: So as being
asked if he had any thing to alleadg against Cavalcanti, or whether he thought
himself offended by his gross flattery, the Prince being much incenst,
answered, that he had no reason to complain of one that had said truth, and
that he did not esteem those praises which he ought to reward, injuries: and
added, that he did very much wonder, and was greatly scandalized at that new
Tribunal, which seemed to be invented rather to defame men of honor, then to
punish cheaters. Aretin being much moved at this answer, with more freedom then
became him, asked with what face he could pretend that Cavalcanti had not lied
basely in praising such a blockhead as he was, so notoriously stupid, unfit for
Government, which he had totally turned over to a vicious favorite of his? The
Prince hearing this, advanced with unexpressible rage, and told Aratine,

Tune dirai, e farai tante, e tante
Lingua Fracida, marcia, senza sale,
Ch'al fin si trovera, pur un pugnale
Meglior di quel d'Achille, epiu calzante.
Saggio son Io, et tu sei un Fortante
Nutrito del pan d'altri, del dir male,
Un piede hai in Chiasso, l'altro allo spedale
Stropecciato, ignorante, et arrogante.
Thou Wilt talk, and do so many sottish things,
With that thy rotten, base, unworthy tongue,
As that a Dagger will be found ere long,
Better then that Achilles with him brings.
I Am wise, and thou a rascal underling
Bred up at others Tables, men to abuse,
One foot in the Hospital, the other in the Stews:
Thou art an arrogant sot, Aratine.
The Attorney General, the Notaries, and all the other Officeres, were so
incenst to hear such words given to a Judge, the Court sitting, as they all
fell with violent hands upon the Prince, to carry him to prison. But he that
was better at his hands than headpiece, did not only defend himself, but
assisted by his attendance, struck one of Aratines eyes almost out, broke
Iuvenals arm, and Berna's jaw bone; and poor Ariosto, who betook himself to his
heels, when he saw the scuffle begin, fell down the stairs, and bruised himself
terribly. When Apollo heard of this disorder, he was not so much grieved at the
affront done to the Tribunal, nor the harm done to his Poets, as for that he
now evidently saw, that there was no cure for flattery, nor no punishment to be
found for it, since men were become so blind, as they esteemed the fawnings of
flatteries, not injuries, but favors worthy of reward. Whereupon, much to his
grief, he abbrogated the Tribunal, and confessed it was impossible to punish a
fault which no body would complain of.

The LIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo being very far in love with Torquato Tasso's good conditions, creates
him Prince Poet, and Lord High Constable of Italian Poetry.

TOrquatus Tasso being every day more and more admired in Parnassus; for his
Heroic and Lyrick Verses, for his Prose, Poetry, and finally in all sorts of
Compositions, Apollo was so i^mar'd of the smoothness of his pen, of the
newness of his conceptions, his easy vain, and of his pleasant wit, as he used
the other day, extraordinary signs of affection toward him: For of his own
mere motion, he created him Prince-Poet, and Lord High-Constable of all Italian
Poetry: And at the same time with great solemnity, gave him the Royal Ensigns
used to be given to Poets Laureat, of being allowed to keep Parrets in his
windows, and Apes at his gate. It is strange, that upon this occurrency, Tasso
did not only make himself known to deserve the honor which his Majesty had
done him, but worthy of much higher preferments. For he did not as many others
do, who being exalted by Fortune, or by the pleasure of Princes, from a mean
condition, to Supreme Dignities, think it is sufficient if they put on the
Stately Robe of that new Magistracy, though they leave their souls covered with
an old base jacket, made of course cloth, and all tattered; but he immediately
after having received so high an honor* clothed his soul with those Heroic
and Royal Virtues, which becomes a Poet Laureat. For at the very instant that
he received those Royal Ensigns from his Majesty, he kept open Court in his
house for 40 days together; in all which time, the Vertuosi of all professions
were fed with such abundance and curiosity of delightful Viands, as there was
not any one Litterato in all Parnassus, who did not gorge himself with virtuous
Composures, more then his stomach could digest, and who was not drunk with his
savory conceptions. And all this with so great plenty of all exquisite Science,
as his Majesty and all the Muses marvailed very much how the unexhausted
multitude of so many elegant conceits, disht in with the choicest phrases, and
smoothest way of delivery, could be served out by so fruitfuul a wit. But
during this Jubilee, and this Feassio'^ celebration, which gave general
satisfaction, some pilfering Poets broke open Tassos most private desk, where he
kept his choicest Compositions, and stole away Aminta, which they divided
amongst themselves; an injury whereat Tasso was so much grieved, as it
imbittered all his past delights. And the Authors of so shameful a theft being
discovered, and pursued by the Sergeants, they fled into the house of
immitation, as into a secure sanctuary; from whence they were taken by the
Provost Marshal, by Apollos express command, and shamefully led to prison. And
one of them being found with the Prologue of the said Pastoral about him, he
was forthwith punished according to the Sergeants custom, and questioned super
aliis, and complicibus. Whereupon the wretch having the rope on, named 40 of
his companion pick pocket. Poets, all of them base people, who being given over
to play, and to all lewdness, tend nothing else but to steal away the conceits
of others labors, making themselves merry therewithal, abhorring to live
gloriously in the world by the labor of their own studies. Urbanus the chief
Justice, using the due rigor of the Law upon these saucy companions, sentenced
them to the Gallows; and the other morning many Gibbits were set up in the
chief Marketplace, at the number whereof Apollo being much moved, he told the
Judge, that though those thieves deserved the utmost punishment, he should
notwithstanding give them some other severe exemplary chastisement; for the
detested cross-bars of Gallowses, made Justice be interpreted cruelty: They
therefore deserved the name of good Officers, who made themselves known to be
well sighted in forbidding faults; whereas such as thirsted after blood, seemed
to take delight in having Gallowses often seen in the Piazzas, thinking that
they had betterd their condition, when they had got the name of being great
Hangmen.

The LX. ADVERTISEMENT.
A Litterato desires of Apollo, the Art of Memory, for which he is laughed at by
his Majesty.

ON last Tuesdaies Audience, a poor threadbare Litterato presented himself
before Apollo, and told his Majesty, that by reason of his small learning, he
durst not appear in the common Schools; and that his ignorance in Sciences
proceeded from his very bad memory; for he remembered but very little of what he
read: And that having a great desire to be a Scholar, he humbly craved some
remedy which might produce in him as tenacious a memory as those great
Litterati have, who remember whatsoever they do read: And be chiefly desires
the gift of Local memory, whereby he had heard that they reaped great honor who
had it. Apollo told him, That the lovers of Learning got good Memories by
perpetual reading; and that Local Memory was a thing only practiced by
Mountebanks, and by the common sort of Litterati, who are sed with ostentation,
and a certain vainglory to appear more then what they are; and not by sound
and well-grounded Scholars, who esteemed it a ridiculous thing, good only to
make the common people wonder. The Petitioner replied, That if it were so, he
desired to better his memory by usual means. Apollo said again, That memory
could not be better perfected, then by continual study, and assured him, that
thereby he might compass his desire. The Scholar replied again, He had found
the contrary: For having lately been very diligent in studying Virgil the
miracle of the Latin Poets, he remembered but very few of those infinite
delicacies which he had observed in him, all which deserved never to be
forgotten. Apollo was not pleased with this answer; for with some show of
anger, not usual with him in giving audience, at which times he puts on
miraculous patience; he bad him go study Virgil again, and that he would
remember much more the second time, than he had done the first. Then turning to
those that were near him, he said, he hated their impertinances, who having
been but a quarter of an hour in a Mill, would come forth as much bemealed, as
those Millers who keep there day and night all the days of their life.

The LXI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Juvinal refuses a Challenge given him by Francisco Berni, to contend with him
in Satirical Poetry.

SOme Latin and Itallian Poets fell some few days ago, a comparing the
Itallian and Latin Poetry, when Lodovico Ariosto thinking that the Latins did
too much undervalue Itallian Poetry, by too highly exalting their own, said
that the Itallians yielded to the Latins for the Heroic Verse, which was grave
and stately in the Latin tongue, and did observe a delightful cadence, by
coupling the Dactils and Spondeas so excellently well; but that in Lyrick
Poetry, he was of opinion they might march hand in hand together; and that for
what concerned Satirical Verse, the Itallians were so far advanced, as in the
tartness of their pleasant conceptions, in the mordacity of their more grave
affairs, and in their easy expressing their conceits, they far exceeded the
Latins. The Latins approved not of Ariostos opinion, and said in their own
defense, they saw not why the Italian Poets should so much presume upon their
skill in Satirical Poetry, there not being any one of them who might deservedly
be compared to Iuvenal, nor who durst vie with Persius. Francisco Berni was
present at this discourse, who having gone beyond all the terms of the bitterest
backbiting, had so wounded even Aretines self with his cutting Verses, as he
bore the shameful badges thereof in his face, breast, and hands. This man told
the Latin Poets, that Iuvenal in respect of him, was an ignorant fellow in
Satirical Poetry; and that he would maintain this truth which he had spoken,
fairly and freely, the first and second time, and even till blood came, in a
bush of Briars, not only against Iuvinal, but against whatsoever other
Satirical Poet, yea though he had the advantage of a Commentator. It is not to
be said how highly all the Latin Poets were incenst at the hearing of these
words; who to abate the edge of this arrogant man's too great presumption, and
to maintain the name of Latin, so much injured, they had like to have used
superchery to him; but Horatio Venosino, desirous that this question might be
fairly and honorably decided, appeased the incenst minds of the Latin Poets,
and told Berni, that he lied in all that he had said to the prejudice of
Iuvinals honor; and that he had slandered a Poet whose pens he was not worthy
to make clean, and that he in Iuvinals name accepted the challenge. He
therefore wished him to appear the first day in Bellona's field, with eights and
thirds, where Iuvinal should give him a good account of himself, with his
Heroic Verses in his hand. This being said, Berni, accompanied with his
brother-Poets, went to arm himself, and Horatio hasted to find out Iuvinal,
whom he acquainted with all that had past between him and Barni. Iuvinal being
astonished at the novelty of the business, pawsed a good while, then said,
Horatio, if you have accepted the challenge in my name, try you the business
with him, for I dare not. As for Latin Poets, I fear no man's face, neither do I
care a fig for a thousand; but I tremble at the very naming of an Italian
Satyrist. Horatio seeing his own honor, and the like of all Latin Poets in such
danger, encouraged Iuvinal, and bad him remember that he was the Prince of
Satirical Poets, and that such a one as he, who had deserved the happiness to
have Commentators, a thing so much coveted by learned Poets, ought not to be
afraid of Bernies railing; and told him there was no proportion to be held
between the powerful weapons of Heroic Verse, between the excellent blade of
the Latin tongue, and the faint Italian Verse, made by chance, and so strictly
tied to rhyme, as Italian Poets having their hand bound up with the cords
thereof, they could make no downright blows, nor lead a straight stockado, as
occasion should require, as was clearly seen by Mauro, who in the dangerous
combat which he had, when laboring in the beanfield, he was set upon by an
enemy, and thinking to make a full and mortal thrust at his belly, his rithme
forced him to give it him on his back, which purchased him the name of
Treachery. The more the Venetian Poet encouraged and inheartned Iuvinal, the
more did his fear increase. The news of this challenge was by this time so
spread abroad amongst the Vertuosi, as it came to Apollos ears, who was very
much pleased thereat, for he delighted exceedingly to see two Litterati buckle
together in fury, and wound one another reputation handsomely; for, for the
most part, the Vertuosi speak and write, but so so in cold blood; but when
heated and chafed with anger, they do things beyond human wit, in defense of
their reputation, and to purchase renown. Wherefore hearing of Iuvinals
backwardness, he caused him speedily to be sent for, and sharply upbraided his
cowardliness, and recommended the reputation of Latin Satyrs unto him. Then
Iuvinal said thus in his own defense to his Majesty; Sir, I have the same
courage that I formerly had, nor do I fear to encounter a dozen Latin
Satyrists; I beseech your Majesty to remember, that the excellency of Satirical
Poetry consists not in having a bold wit, quick spirit, a detracting Talent, in
sharp bitter reparties, handsome Sonnets, and ready replies; but in the
condition of the times wherein men live: for in corrupt times, the vein of
Satyrs is very fluent; and the times wherein I lived, cannot any ways be
compared to the wickedness and cosenage of this present age. If Berni should
appear within the Lists, and should assail me within the lance of modern
vices, such as were not known in my days, would he not drive me out of the
List? Apollo hearing this answer, had no more to say, but declared, that though
Iuvinal baulked the quarrel, he suffered not in his honor, nor did he do any
thing misbecoming an honorable Cavalier Poet; for it was not Bernis wit that
he feared, but his corrupt times, too unequal to those of Iuvinals.

The LXII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Domitio Corbulone being severely prosecuted by the Quarantia Criminale, (a
Venetian Magistracy consisting of forty men) for some words spoken by him in
his Government of Pindo, which were formerly declared by Apollo's public
Edict, to be Tyrannical; Is at last acquitted with much praise.

THe City of Pindo, and all its large Territories, being filled by great store
of Murderers, and dangerous factions (by the too much lenity of some of its
late Governors) which did greatly anoy the peace of good men; Apollo, to curb
the licentiousness of his most seditious Subjects by exemplary punishment, sent
severe Domitio Corbulone some two months ago to that Government: Who so carried
himself, as in a short space the people of that State were reduced from mighty
seditions, into a peaceful condition. And enquiring of some of his Confidents,
what the people thought of him, they freely told him, that his rigorous
proceedings against many, had so affrighted the Uuniversality, as he was hated
by all of them. Corbulone was overjoyed at this answer, and replied to those
his beloved friends in the well-known saying, Oderint dum Metuant: Let them
hate, provided they fear. This was suddenly reported to Apollo, as a capital
fault. His Majesty liked not this accusation, and committed the examination
thereof to the Quarantia Criminale: for it had been long before published by a
Decree from his Majesty; That whatsoever Prince, were he either legitimate,
natural, or hereditary, who should dare to use such insolent and rash words,
should be held and reputed an abominable Tyrant; and that if any Officer
should, though at unawares, let them escape his mouth, he should suffer capital
punishment, Corbulone was therefore cited to appear before the Court; which he
did the next day; where the cause was severely canvast by the Judges: And
whilst all the people of Parnassus expected to see some rigorous sentence pass
upon Corbulone, he was by his Majesty's approbation, graciously absolved, and
sent back to his Government with more plenary Aurhority then before: For the
Judges declared, That such words were abominable, and altogether Tyrannical in
Princes which have the means to be gracious, but very honorable in an Officers
mouth, who has nothing in his power but the detested lash of Justice: That
Prince being truly to be admired, who could make himself be beloved by his
Subjects, and reverenced: That Officer to be reputed very sufficient, who had
the genius to make himself be feared and obeyed.

The LXIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Chair of private Tranquillity being void by Diogenes the Cynicks promotion
to a higher degree; Apollo offers it to the famous Philosopher Crates; who
refuses it.

THe Cynick Diogenes, he who for so many years, to the general advantage, and
his own particular glory, had the public Chair in these Schools, wherein his
Office was to praise Poverty, Solitariness, and Peace of mind: By whose
persuasion, Atalus, the very King of Treasures, put on that admirable
resolution, of forgoing all his riches, and become a Stoic in Parnassus, was
by reason of his great deserts, exalted two months ago to the sublime Dignity
of the Muses Arch-Flamming; so as so noble a place being void, his Majesty
bestowed it upon the famous Crates; who went yesterday to Apollo, and contrary
to all men's expectation, refused so noble a Chair; saying, that the charge of
poverty, and of the souls peace, being greatly injured by Diogenes his
promotion to that immense dignity, he could not discharge his duty with that
fervency, with that purity and integrity of heart as the place required: For
the very first day that he should undertake the employment, he should
necessarily be so puffed up with ambition, and should have so great a desire to
obtain the same dignity which his Predecessor had obtained, as would drive from
out his mind, though never so well composed, that sincerity which makes an
Orator speak from his heart, not from his mouth; and that the necessity of his
ambition, and his violent desire arose not from any vice, but from that
laudable zeal of reputation, which is most intense in even the most mortified
Vertuosi of Parnassus: For if in process of time he should not receive the same
honor from his Majsty as Diogenes had done, the world would think that the
whole had happened, not by reason of his humility, not for that he preferred a
private life before public Magistracy, quiet before business, or poverty before
riches, but because his Majesty had not found such deserts in him, as he had
done in Diogenes. So as having his soul perturbed by the violence of ambition,
he could not hope to reap any advantage by exagerating the praises of Humility,
the contempt of Riches, and of the vanity of worldly Greatness; it being
impossible that any man should be so efficatiously eloquent, as to be able to
persuade others to that sort of life, which the standers by must needs say, was
abhorred by the perswader.

The LXIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Many people having wasted themselves in keeping great Tables, and going
gloriously attired, desire their Princes to make a Pragmatical Law for the
Moderation of such expenses; but obtain not their suit.

PEople subject to Princes who live in Parnassus, learning by experience, that
luxury and vanity in apparel, are so much increased, as that there is no
patrimony, how great soever, which may not be quite consumed in a short time by
women's vanity, and men's ambition; and plainly seeing, that bravery was grown to
so great a height, as a whole portion, though very great, was not sufficient to
buy Jewels for a young maid that was to be married; which was the cause why
parents could not marry off their daughters: It being likewise known that
delicacies for the pallat, were oflate years so prodigiously doted on, as
modern gormandizing has quite ruined those Families, which were made great by
ancient Parcemony: They by joint consent presented themselves all, some few
days ago before their several Princes, whom they earnestly desired that some
remedy might be found out to prevent this their so apparent ruin. All the
Princes were very well pleased with this their peoples Petition; and then it
was that they knew it to be true, what many have written, That peremptory or
pragmatical Laws ought only then to be published to the people when they
themselves desire them: For if they be inacted against their wills, they seldom
produce good effects; the reason is, because prodigality never frightens
scapethrifts, till they have been acquainted with the hideous and dreadful face
of poverty. All the Princes therefore by common consent, caused many excellent
pragmatical Laws to be made by understanding men, wherein luxuriousness and
superfluity being abridged, nothing but decency was seen in apparel, and men
did eat to live, not to ruin both their lives and fortunes by gluttony. And
because a thing so much desired, might be brought to pass, the Princes gave
order that this Law should be proclaimed on the 18 of this present month; but
the preceding night the Farmers of the Customs, Toll takers and Excise-men,
came all of them to their several Princes, and told them, that if they
published the pragmatical act, which they understood was penned, they desired
to have abatements made of the great rents which they paid; for the greatest
revenues of the Custom house, and of all Gabels arising out of Silks which came
from Naples, Gold-thread from Florence, rich Draperies made at Millan, and
other accoutrements belonging to apparel and the livelihood of man, which were
brought from foreign parts, the price of the Customs would fall infinitely by
reason of this Law.

The Princes were so confused to hear this, as when the Deputies of the Nations
came the next day to receive the Edict which was to be proclaimed, they told
them, that having heard the just appeals made by the receivers of their
Customs, who were better verst in that affair, they resolved not to impair
themselves for the bettering of others: That if they could invent any Law,
wherein the Princes interests were not concerned, they would give them all
possible satisfaction therein, to witness the fatherly love they bore unto
their Subjects; but that to empty the public purse, to the end that those of
private men's might be filled, was a fraudulent desire, and clean contrary to
charity, which thinks it a piece of cruelty to macerate ones self that another
man might grow fat. The people departed much unsatisfied, by reason of this
peremptory and interessed answer; and confessed, that to go about to cure the
peoples disorders, when the medicines touched upon the common Taxes, was to
undertake to cure an incureable Cancar.

The LXIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Johannes Bodinus presents Apollo with his six Books of his Commonwealth;
wherein it being found that he approves of Liberty of Conscience, he is
sentenced to be burnt.

JOhannis Bodinus, that famous French Litterato, was deservedly imprisoned in a
dark Dungeon the very first day that he presented Apollo with the six Books of
his Commonwealth; for his Majesty would by no means permit that the wicked
Tenet which he had published in his republic, that it made much for the quiet
of States, to allow of Liberty of Conscience, should pass without some
exemplary punishment; an opinion which was always held by his Majesty, and by
his best politic Litterati, to be no less wicked then false; as that which
makes her desciples rather seditious, then wise Statesmen; nothing being more
prejuditial to a Principality, then the want of unity. Severe process was
therefore made against Bodine, and he was yesterday condemned in the High Court
of Parliament, to be burnt, as a seducer of the people, a public stirrer up of
sedition in ambitions men, and as a notorious Atheist: Bodin craved mercy of
his Majesty, confessing his opinion to be false and wicked, and abjuring it as
such a one; but that being deceived by the Ottaman Empire, wherein with much
peace to the State, all religions were allowed of, desired them that they would
show some pity toward him. The Judges were then more incenst at Bodin, and
told him, that he deserved the greater punishment, for that he being a
Christian, had dared to publish the wicked precepts, especially in matters of
Religion, of those Turks, who ought to be abominated for their wicked
impieties, not only in profane, but in sacred things. Yet before they would
proceed further with Bodine, the Judges were resolved to know of the Ottaman
Monarchy, how she governed her self in this particular; intending, by what was
found out afterward, to impose the same punishment upon her, if it should be
proved that she had given so scandalous an example unto the world, as to allow
her people Liberty of Conscience.

The Ottaman Monarchy was then sent for in great haste, who was asked by the
Judges, whether it were true, or no, that she had let the reyns of Religion so
loose in her State to her Subjects, as every one might believe what he listed?
The Ottaman Monarchy wondered much at this demand, and with great vehemence
answered, that she was not so unexperienced in the affairs of the world, as not
to know that the peace of States, and the universal quiet of the people, could
not be had by any more secure means, then by the unity of Religion; and that in
all her Empire, no other Religion was either preached or believed by her
Mossulmans, but only Mahometism. The Judges hearing so clear an answer, they
turned to Bodin, and in great anger said unto him, That if a Mohammedan,
ignorant of that true Divinity which discovers the greatness of God unto men,
and the truth of his holy Law, spoke so clearly of the unity of Religion which
was to be observed in an Empire, what ought he to do who was a Scholar, and
born in the most Christian Kingdom of France? To this Bodin answered, that the
Ottaman Monarchy confessed with their mouths the necessity of an unity in
Religion, which was not really practiced in their States, wherein were
Christian Catholics, Heretics, Grecians, Jacobines, Nestorians, Jews, and
people of many other religions, which was the cause of his mistake. Thou know
full little (said the Ottaman Empire to Bodin) of the proceedings touching
religion, which is used in my house; for thou ought not to say for all this,
that I grant my Subjects Liberty of Conscience, because men of all the several
religions which thou have named are seen in my Empire. Thou must know that I
having conquered innumerable Provinces for the space of 300 years and more,
most of which were formerly Subjects to several Christian Princes; and having
found by experience, that people newly assubjected, easily rebel, if they be
forced to change their religion, as those who are more obstinate in defending
the faith wherein they were born, then in defending their Estates, Country,
and lives; I, that I may govern in peace, have always used to suffer them to
live in the same Laws, as well sacred as civil, wherein I found them; bereaving
only the Christian Latins of their Religion, taking their Priests from them,
and forbidding them to rebuild their Churches which are fallen, or to erect new
ones. So by little and little the memory of their ancient religion failing in
them, together with their sacred exercises, their children, if not they
themselves, or at least their grand children, at last become Mahometans.
Wherein I have had so good success, as the many Provinces which I possess in
Asia, which were formerly full of Christians, are all of them now turned such
Mahometans, as my Emperors being used to take many children from their
Christian Subjects, wherewith to recruit their Janisary-souldiers, there are
now but very few to be found in Asia. I proceed otherwise in Greece, for I
grant them the free use of the Grecian rites; and the cause of this diversity
is, because there being no Grecian Prince who can cause jealousy to my
greatness, and consequently the Grecians which live in my Empire, not being
able to be fomented by any Prince of their own religion, they do not trouble me
so much as do the Latins, who have many and potent Princes, which is the cause
I take such care to annihilate their religion. But I am so watchful that all
my Mohammedan Subjects should punctually observe the Religion professed in my
State, as it is not lawful for any of them to prevaricate. I give you for a
clear example of all this, That I having the Persian, who is held an Heretic
by my Religion, no Turk that is my Subject, dare upon pain of life believe,
much less preach the Persian Faith; nor is that Heresy permitted in my States:
For though my last Emperors, by reason of the divisions of Germany, and the
great jealousies which are amongst all Christian Princes, might much to their
advantage have made War in Hungary, and so extend my Empire even to Austria,
the acquisition of which Province would throw open the Gates unto me, to
conquer Italy; yet they have been wisely better advised, rather to weaken the
Persian Heretic, then to make War upon the Christian Princes, who being so far
distant in point of belief, from my Religion, do not frighten me so much as the
Persian Heretics do; for there is a great difference between tolerating
Infidelity in a State (from which the passage to true belief is so hard) and
the permitting of Heresy, a plague which so easily infects any Kingdom, how
great soever; as the Germans, English, Flemmings, French, and others have seen
and tried. And know that I have rooted out all Sciences and Learning from out
my Dominion, only to the end that my Subjects may live in such simplicity as is
most requisite for my Religion; and to this purpose I have considerately, and
upon severe punishment, inhibited the translation of my Alcheron, which is
written in the Arabic tongue, into vulgar Turkish language; having learnt at
the cost of some Christian Kingdoms, what mischief the translation of the Bible
into vulgar languages has occasioned, which falling into the hands of ignorant
people, I hear that in those parts where this abuse is introduced, even poor
silly women spend more time in disputes about Religion, then in spinning.
Wherefore to free my self from the evil of Heresy, which may be introduced
into my Empire by ambitious men, I have commanded, that whosoever shall
propound any doubts in Religion, be answered by the Scimiter. Because the
Heresies which now reign in the Christian Religion, have opened all men's eyes,
so as they may discern, that those who have first sowed them, are more moved by
ambition of governing the earth, then out of charity (as they would make
blockheads believe) of sending men's souls to heaven by their new positions.

My Subjects sobriety, who are all of them bound to drink water, makes much for
the keeping of my Territories from the contagion of Heresy; and I say this,
for that I see the fire of Heresy amongst Christians, breaks most forth there,
where they drink merriliest. I very well know that all divisions in States are
very dangerous, but especially those which arise in point of Religion; because
people do not only not love, honor, or faithfully serve those who are not of
the same religion with them, but hold them to be beasts, and bear them that
cruel hatred which we see reigns amongst Nations of different Religion. Add
hereunto, That as it is impossible for a man to live without a head, so is it
for diversity of Factions; and where there are two Religions, there must of
necessity be two Heads; and every fool knows whether or no one Kingdom can at
one and the same time receive two Kings: And thou Bodin ought so much the
less to have published the seditious opinion which has caused thee so much
sorrow, for that thou know better then any other, that the modern Heresies
which now reign in many Chri^ Kingdoms, have been sowed and fomented by great
Princes, to whom Lutherans, Calvinists, and many others like thy self, have
served to seduce the people, and to be bawds to their ambition; only that they
may thereby be followed by the mal-content Nobility, who greedily embrace new
sects out of a desire to better their condition, and by Plebeians, who follow
them out of avarice, and a detestation which they bear to their own unfortunate
condition. And if for the quiet of Empires, all the people of one and the same
Kingdom, ought to be under one and the same human Law; how much more for the
same reasons, and out of the same considerations, ought this to be endeavored
in matters of Religion? which being bred with us in our mothers belly, has
taken such deep rooting in our hearts, as she is become the absolute Queen of
all our affections, and of all our passions; and therefore she ought to be so
much the better regulated in every State, for that we cannot live without her,
nor can we be touched in any thing which is more ticklish. These things are all
of them so true, as I will boldly affirm, that even bruit beasts, could they
speak, or could we understand their yelping, braying, and other noises which
they make, would be heard to praise God, even as we do, who has created them,
and who does feed them. I remember, that many years ago I heard a Politician
discoursing of this very Article; and because he esteemed it too wicked to
Godward, and seditious toward Princes, I desired to inform my self of him,
whether there were any Prince, or Commonwealth in the world, who did permit so
wicked a thing in their Dominions? And he freely told me, That even the most
modern Heretics themselves, who had cried up Liberty of Conscience in other
men's States, would by no means allow of it amongst themselves: For they hated
to see their own houses burn with the same fire which they by their seditions
had kindled in other men's habitations: And of this, said he, Geneva, which I
call the sink of all seditious impiety, is an evident example, where they who
endeavor to raise new Heresies, are condemned to be burnt. The same man told me
moreover, that in Germany, where so many modern Heresies were invented in their
Hans Towns, only to suppress the house of Austria, Liberty of Conscience was
permitted; but that it would be evidently dangerous to imitate them, for that
the example of others would prove unfortunate to those who had not all the same
requisite circumstances, as those whom they set before them for a President. He
said that the Hans Towns of Germany live without any apprehension of any
enemy-Prince, who might aspire to deprive them of their Liberty, that their
Emperors were weak, and that their Citizens were not only by nature far from
the ambition of Governing the Country; but were forced by necessity, to live
and die what they were born. For if it should so fall out, that any one to
better his condition, should presume to make himself head of any Heresy, the
power of all the other free Towns, who were jointly interessed in Liberty, with
that City where factions began to arise, would presently assist with arms in
hand to beat down that faction Moreover, that though the diversity of religions
occasioned in those Cities by the Liberty of Conscience, were less dangerous in
them, yet could it not be said that they were totally free, nor that the humor
was not pernicious, and apt to occasion deadly evils; and that no father of a
family was ever induced to set his own house one fire, for having the means of
quickly quenching it by a neighboring River: But that in Empires, and great
Kingdoms it fared otherwise; for in them there were oft-times brothers to him
who Governed in Chief, and other Princes of the blood; and there were always
therein great store of particular private men, eminent for birth, riches, and
adherents, who were all of them ambitious, and out of a thirst of reigning,
thought any enterprise, how desperate soever, easy: And that to boot with
these, they had potent foreign enemies, upon whom they confined, who were more
then ready to foment such heads of faction as should appear to arise; as had
lately been seen in France, and in Flanders; and that as well the lay Princes
Electors, as every other Prince of the Empire, who had embraced the present
Heresies, did not live with liberty of conscience, but with a particular
thirst, accommodated to human Interest: As appeared clearly in the Lutheran
impiety, which taking its beginning in the Dukedom of Saxony, to the end that
he who declared himself to be Head thereof, might not grow too great, the rest
of the Heretic Princes had introduced the new Sects of Calvin, Zwinglius, and
of others in their States, with such confusion to sacred things, as it might be
truly said that there was as many Heresies in Germany, as Princes and
Potentates that did rule there: And that which made me wonder most, was to
hear, that some Subjects in Germany were forced to alter their Religion at
their Princes pleasure; an inconvenience which was seen to happen so often
amongst them, as some Cities have past sundry times from one Heresy to another
in less then one months space. All which are things of very bad example, and an
excellent means to introduce that Atheism amongst men, which I said I thought
was not to be found amongst beasts.

Wherefore Bodin, as a horse which is long suffered to go without a bridle,
becomes fierce and unserviceable to man; so people, when they have the Reyns of
Religion let loose in their necks, grow wild, seditious, unruly, and no longer
apt to be governed or ruled by a Prince: For he who is not taught by a sound
and well regulated religion, to love, honor, and fear God, cannot obey, honor,
nor fear man. So great a truth, as it is the nature of all people, who always
err in the extremes, to despise Humane Laws, when they are miss-led in those
that are Divine: for the freedom which they have to offend the Majesty of God,
provokes them against their Prince, who gave them that liberty. This truth
which I tell you, is apparently seen in those who seduced the Flemmish to
change their religion, and to rebel against their natural Prince, who to bring
them to so wicked an enterprise, permitted them to plunder Churches, and
Churchmen; and when at last they would have refrained, and regulated them in
their highest Towering Tumults, they found that when God is despised, men are so
likewise. The Government of people is a weighty affair for any Prince how wise
soever, nor is it possible for him alone to support so heavy a burden; but
being assisted by Religion, it becomes so easy unto him, as one Prince may
govern many millions of men; for very many are so ill conditioned, as they
despise human Laws, yet do they often fear divine ones; and many who little
esteem the anger of an earthly Prince, dread the King of heaven, and live
peaceably.

Bodin was sorely cast down, when he heard the Ottaman Emperor speak so solidly
of the care which Princes ought to have of the unity of Religion; and was then
more grieved when the Judges told him, that it was wicked ignorance to maintain
that Princes are Lords of men's bodies, and not fit to rule their souls; as if
the Allegiance which by Gods command, Subjects owe their Princes, be not as
well a duty of the soul, as of the body; and that God has constituted the most
Christian Kings of France, and other earthly Princes, only that they might feed
their ambition by reigning, and pass away their time in delight, wallowing in
the plenty of so many earthly blessings, and had not made them his Lieutenants
on earth, to the end that they may observe his holy Law; for these reasons, all
the Lords of Parliament ordered that he might be immediately punished by fire,
who had published a Tenet fit only to set the world on fire.

The LXV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo punishes a Poet severely, for having been so desperate as to blaspheme.

APollo does so abhor Blasphemy above all other vices, as two days ago he
caused a Poets tongue to be struck through with a nail in the Delfick Temples
Porch, who had presumed to say that Nature had dealt injuriously with him, in
having endowed him with a Princely soul, and allotted him but a beggarly
fortune. And though many Litterati earnestly beseeched his Majesty that he
would in some sort mittigate this punishment, he did not only deny to do it,
but in a great rage said, that such wits deserved the severest punishments, who
being born to a poor fortune, consumed all their time in afflicting themselves
by seeking out new conceits which might make poverty appear unto them more
shameful and insupportable, which they should employ in seeking out such
Instructions as might make it appear less shameful, and more tolerable; and
that he would teach men of but mean fortunes, by this example, how to
accommodate their minds to their means; it being a hateful piece of petulancy
to envy great Princes fortunes; whilst others in tattered clothes died of
hunger.

The LXVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Vertuosi of Parnassus visit the Temple of Divine Providence, whom they
thank for the great Charity which she has shown to mankind.

THis morning, according to the ancient custom of this Court, all the
Prince-Poets, and the Litterati-Lords of Parnassus, went to visit the Temple of
Divine Providence, to whom Giovan Ioviano Pontano made a learned Oration,
wherein he highly praised the infinite Charity, and immence love which she had
showed to mankind in creating frogs without teeth: For it would have been of no
advantage to man, that this world, canopied by so many heavens, full of so many
stars, should not only abound in all things necessary; but even be fully
fraught with all most exquisite delitiousness, if gallant men who inhabit it,
should be forced to wear iron buskins to defend themselves from being bitten by
such fastidious and importunate animals; whereas now there needed no fence
against such rascally companions, who are composed of nothing but mouth and
voice, but a good pair of ears, which vallue not the noise which they know can
do them no harm.

The LXVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The most excellent Paolo Peruta, by order from Apollo, declares in the Public
Politic Schools, what the genuine signification is of that Precept in Policy;
That to reign securely, the people must be kept under.

THe usual Precept in Policy, That to Reign securely, the people must be kept
under, is as true, as it is wrongfully understood, and worse practiced by many
Princes; who out of their insatiate avarice, interpret the best politic
sentences, in such sense as makes most for their present advantage. Wherefore
Apollo being much displeased, that so singular a precept should be so grossly
abused, sent a few days sithence, for Paolo Peruta, who at this present time
reads the ordinary morning Politics in the public Schools in Parnassus; and
commanded him, that for the benefit of Princes, and the peoples profit, he
should declare publicly what was the true and genuine sense of so signal a
precept? Peruta obeyed, and on an appointed day, when the School was full of
all the greatest Princes of this Court, he took the Chair, and said, That as an
exquisite Prince could be likened to nothing better then to a good Shepherd, so
people might be very fitly compared to a very numerous flock of sheep; and that
to the end that one only Shepherd might commodiously govern a great many
sheep, the Divine Majesty had made them to be lowly minded, and had created
them without the weapons of Horns or Teeth: for otherwise, to the great
prejudice of mankind, every sheep must of necessity have a shepherd alloted
him: for God having armed the head and hands of man with a stout heart, and
wise genius, he became not obedient and submissive to his shepherd, as many
Princes did believe, by being often shorn and continually milked, or by being
hindered from growing fat in good pastures by angersome vexations; for the true
way to keep the people low, was not to afflict them perpetually by pinching
taxes, was not to reduce them to shameful poverty, by grating penalties, but to
avoid the arming of their head with that ambition of command, which people so
delight in, as the appetite is increased by satiety: Which true means, and safe
counsel, is only known, and succesfully practiced by the Ottaman Emperors, who
knowing very well how dangerous a thing it is for States to arm their subjects
with ambition, authority, or the attendance of many Soldiers, think it a
capital error, and the ruin of their States, to give any place of command to a
native Turk; certainly a most happy custom, and which plainly teaches Princes,
that the true meaning and genuine interpretation of so useful a precept in
policy, is only, That it is a dangerous thing to arm the head of subjects with
ambition, not their hands with swords; to keep them humble, by not giving them
places of too great attendance, not to desire their poverty by taking their
means from them; for that Almighty God not having made sheep humble and
obedient for any want they have of wool, milk or lambs, did thereby teach
Princes to use all means possible, that their subjects may increase in wealth,
and that they may abound in goods; it being very true, that people by
increasing their private patrimonies, make chains wherewith they keep
themselves fast bound up; for lest they may lose their wealth got by so much
toil, they did so religiously study peace, as the ancient Romans, who were true
masters of the reason of State, found no better means to make the warlike
French, whom they had newly conquered, quiet and obedient to their Republike,
then by affording them all possible means of growing rich; an advice which
proved so fortunate unto them, as that Politic Tacitus speaking of the French,
the most warlike people of all Europe, does not only call them Dites, and
Imbelles, lib. 11. Annal. but freely affirms, Gallos quoque in bellis
flo^uisses. Tacit. Vita Agric. which plainly shows, that great riches gotten by
the French, had brought that formerly warlike Nation into such a wretchless
slothfulness, as it seemed an old wives tale, that the French knew ever how to
manage arms; whereby we are made aware, that riches by disarming men, keeps
them submiss in the humility of peace; whereas on the contrary every one sees,
that the not being content with their present condition, makes men greedy of
novilties. For men are not abased, as ignorant people believe, by being poor,
but need begets in them such an immence desire of change of fortune, as makes
those that are in bad condition, venture upon any how desperate or dangerous
soever an undertaking; it having been often times experienced, that nothing
arms people more then poverty. Which produces desperation, not when it is
occasioned by the earths barrenness, by adventures at Sea, by men's
carelessness, by the misfortune of Factors, or other humane accidents; but when
caused by the Prince his avarice, who foolishly persuades himself he shall
become a rich shepherd by keeping his sheep poor. Wherefore that Chair man of
Politicians affirms, that to go about to reduce subjects to Loyalty, and
Principallities to peace, by keeping them poor, was neither better nor worse,
then to pretend to cure the dropsy, by giving the sick party over much drink.
To prove all which to be truth, it is daily seen in all insurrections, Princes
meet with no sorer enemies, then mal-contents, and such as have not wherewithal
to live commodiously; who in the garboils of commotions, prove always Devils,
whereas those who are wealthy are obedient and peaceful.

The LXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
A nobly born Laconick Senator, having committed a great fault, the Duke of
Laconia thinks it wisdom to pass by it.

YOu have formerly heard, how that the Laconick State is governed by an
Elective Prince; and how that the Laconick Senate is reputed and celebrated for
the best that is in Parnassus. The Duke of Laconia to supply the place of a
Senator that was deceased, advanced the second Son of the Prince of Mitilene to
that so high dignity. And not above a fortnight sithence, this Gentleman, much
to the Dukes regrete, committed a fault, which his Highness had severely
punished in other Senators; and he seeming not to take notice of it, many of
his Senators were troubled at it, and advised him to use the same punishment
for the same fault. To which the Duke answered, That the same punishments were
not to be inflicted for the same faults, where there was a disparity in the
Personages; and that God, whose will it was that no sublunary thing should be
without somewhat of amiss, had so ordained it, as that the finest Currel should
not be without its rubbish; and that in so famous a Senate as was that of the
Laconicks, eminent Personages added much to the Splendour of it, and were often
times of great assistance to the State upon urgent emergencies. But that this
advantage was counterpoised by a notable allay, that such persons were not so
easily governed, nor held in as others, over whom the whole power of command,
and absolute authority of the Law being to be exercised, they were not of the
same reputation, nor advantage to Elective Princes, as were Senators highly
descended; and that the Sithe of equal Justice did fortunately fell grass of an
equal height; but that the wary Mower, who spyed a great shrub amongst lesser
grass, hoisted his Sithe, lest he might break it, or blunt the edge thereof, a
piece of wisdom whereby elective Princes, whose prerogative it was to choose
Senators, were taught not to promote Personages of extraordinary birth to that
degree, unless they do formerly resolve to bear with many things in them, which
they would severely punish in ordinary subjects.

The LXIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Andrea Alciati finding himself injuriously persecuted in his place of
Magistracy, flies for help to Apollo, but finds none.

ANdrea Alciati, who was not only very well versed in the profession of Law,
but was in great esteem with Apollo, and all the Vertuosi of Parnassus, for his
great insight in all the choicest learning which makes men be so highly prized
in this Court; knowing the sour of obeying, and sweet of commanding; the
meaness of a priva^e life, and the gallantry of being, or of but personating a
Prince, applied himself from his very first entrance into Parnassus, to the
perilous practice of Gorvernment; till at last he was deputed a Trianual
President of the Isle of Negrapont, by the Prince thereof, where with undaunted
sincerity, he administered such exact and severe justice as is pleasing to God,
and hateful to proud and insolent people who though they be born to serve, will
notwithstanding Tyranize; and so it fell out, that those who had been severely
punished for their insolences by the rigor of the Law, waited for the coming
of the Sessions, a time usually longed for by the lewdest sort of men, that
they might revenge themselves of their President, and wherein they charged him
with bitter accusations. Alciati seeing himself so wickedly dealt withal by his
ill-wishers, had forthwith recourse to the Prince of Negrapont, who is at
present in this Court, and demanded such protection of him, as is due to those
Officers who discharge their duty faithfully. The Prince (as many others do)
that he might win his subjects good will, lent a favorable ear to the accusers,
increasing thereby their insolence, and Alciaties vexation; who for his last
refuge, appealed this very morning to Apollo, complaining that he had been
persecuted for doing justice; and did not only require his Majesty's
protection, but boldly prayed him, that he might have a new trial, but such
personages as were unconcerned, and not swayed by passion. Apollo, not only as
if Alciati had been a man of no merit, but even a public offender was much
incenst at him, and drove him away; wherefore many of the standers by, who very
well knew his worth, and how wrongfully he was persecuted, were witnesses unto
his Majesty of them both. But Apollo, continuing in his former opinion, bad
Alciati (though he was very submiss in his carriage) get out of his sight. His
Majesty's great wisdom being known to be such, as that all his actions pass for
necessary precepts for men to govern their lives by, the standers by wondered
why he should deal so hardly with one who deserved help; and not being able to
believe but that his Majesty concealed somewhat in his mind, that was worthy
to be known, they asked him, why he who always sought all possible means how to
comfort the afflicted, did now add to the affliction of this innocent person.
Then Apollo freely unbosoming himself said, that if Alciati were poor, he would
have taken him into his protection; but that he being wealthy enough, so as he
might compass his ends of coming to higher preferment a safer way, he deserved
to be treated thus, and worse, for betaking himself to an employment wherein
there was certain danger, and which was only fit for such, who not being able
to eat bread at home, were necessitated to take any the most hazardous course
to live; and that men who were well to live, and had honorable employments,
though they might be very expensive, ought only study how to win reputation
and glory. To this Alciati answered, That he, to the end he might be better
esteemed of in the world, and that he might not be pointed at, as a Plebeian
clad in silk, had carried himself with such reputation in all his honorable
employments, as would make any man, how meanly soever born, appear to be highly
descended. Apollo being still more incensed at Alciati's words, replied, With
what face can thou affirm that thou have gone about to join reputation to thy
means, having taken shameful ways to work thy intent? Do thou not know the
true attestat of Guicchardin, that Oracle of Italian Historians, that it is
more usual for an Officer to run hazard, then for a Merchant to break, or a
Seaman to drown? Do not thou know, that no Gally-slaves, nor any other men
how miserable soever, eat courser biscat, or swallow down more bitter distastes
then those who sit at the helm of Government? And know thou not that many
Princes after having highly displeased their subjects, by their avarice and
cruelty, use to quiet and appease them, and to purchase their good will, by
delivering up unto them such an Officer, as by his punctual performance of
justice, have well deserved their Princes protection? And art thou alone he
that does not know, that these men desire nothing but the pleasure of command,
and the profit of revenue? and that they abhor rumors, which they are so far
from believing, that they proceed from the execution of that true justice,
which is displeasing to him that tastes thereof, as they firmly believe it
proceeds from the Officers ignorance and wickedness? though nothing be more
certain, then that he who will administer upright justice, must as requisitely
make the people complain, as the Chyrurgion who will perfectly cure a wound
that is Gangrened, must make the sick party cry out: and neither Hipocrates,
nor yet my beloved Esculapius could ever yet find out any such medicine for a
malady, as would make the patient lick his lips; and the chiefest mischief is,
that a man who has his knee out of joint, would beat the Chyrurgion, who uses
all his best skill to put the bone again into its right place.

The LXX. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Lady Victoria Collonna begs of Apollo in name of all the Feminine Sex,
that such married men as are Adulterers may suffer the like Infamy, as unchaste
Wives do.

THe most excellent Lady, the Lady. Victoria Colonna, a Princess of exemplary
chastity, came before his Majesty three days ago, and said, in behalf of all
the feminine Sex, That all women did so affect Chastity, a virtue wherewith
they were particularly endued, as they did not any whit envy strength, which
was a virtue attributed to the masculine gender; for they very well knew, that
a woman whose soul was not chaste, was a stinking carcass, but that with much
reason they did bewail the great disparity which was seen to be observed
between the husband and the wife, in the particular of punishment for Adultery.
For wives could in no sort be contented that married men should think
themselves so much at liberty, as even the punishment of shame (which men of
honor had wont to apprehend so much) could not keep them from being false unto
their wives. In which disorders she affirmed, they were so far advanced, as
many husbands were not only not ashamed to keep concubines openly in their
houses, but were grown sometimes so hardy to take them into bed with their
wives: which excesses were occasioned, because the same severe punishments were
not provided for adulterous husbands, as were thundered out, and put in
practice against unchaste wives. And that in this particular the Laws were so
partial to married men, as if they should find their wives in adultery, they
would not be satisfied till they should have revenged the injury with their own
hands. By reason of which notorious grievances, the feminine sex were forced to
have recourse to the clear fountain of justice, to the end that they might
receive competent remedy for this their oppression, by the publication of
parity of punishment for the same fault; and that if his Majesty should not
like of this, that he would at least be pleased to allow women the like liberty
in point of adultery, as men pretended to lay claim unto: And that this like
liberty was not desired, to the end that women might make use of it, but only
that by the terror thereof, they might curb their lustful husbands. To this
request Apollo answered, that the Law of Loyalty ought to be alike between the
husband and the wife; and that the violation thereof ought to be no less
punished in the one, then in the other: but that the more exact chastity was
desired in wives, in the weighty respect that men might be sure to father no
children but their own, in which regard the excellent virtue of chastity was
given to the female sex: for the certainty of their issue was so necessary to
husbands in the generation of mankind, as were not their mothers endued with
chastity, their sons would lose as well their inheritance, as their fathers
affection; which was so great a truth, as wise Nature herself had given chaste
mates to all earthy Animals, where the male shares in hatching the eggs, or in
bringing up the young ones. To the end that Fathers might think the pains for
the welfare of their children, well bestowed, and value their costs as
consolations, and great gains. At this answer an honorable blush stole upon
the cheeks of the Lady Victoria, who with a Roman ingenuity confessed the
simplicity of her request to Apollo; and said, it would be too great a shame to
the female sex, if they should suffer themselves to be exceeded in chastity by
brute beasts who though they follow nothing else with greater propenseness then
their delight, yet not to berive the father of his ehildren, or the children of
their fathers by their Libidinousness, keep their chastity; and that husbands
had so great reason to desire their wives might prove chaste, as the Laws
against adultery in married women appeared to be too merciful; for the vvounds
which husbands gave their wives by their unchasteness, did only pierce the
skin; but that married women, by their adulteries did kill their husbands
with eternal infamy, and did dishonor their own children.

The LXXI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Caesar having taxed Marcus Brutus of ingratitude, in a full Assembly of great
Personages, they challenge one another.

SO great has the hatred always been betvveen Caesar the Dictator, and Marcus
Brutus, as there could never be any reconciliation made between them, though it
has been much endeavored by the prime subjects of this State. It Is true that
to avoid the displeasing of Apollo, they have both of them been so discreet as
to shun meeting in the streets, much less the having any intercourse between
them. But the flames of hatred long kept concealed in a passionate man's bosom,
in process of time must needs break forth. This is said, because in a great
assembly which was had the other day of the chief of this state, wherein Caesar
happened to be, it was impossible to persuade Brutus to withdraw himself, who
esteemed it poorness of mind to yield to that his capital enemy at this
meeting. Caesar (though in covered words) said somewhat which reflected upon
Brutus, taxing him with ingratitude; and (as it usually falls out where there is
not a perfect good understanding beween people) doubtful words being taken in
the worse sense, and small injuries being held heinous offenses; Brutus boldly
gave Caesar the lie, and at the same instant accompanied the lie with its
necessary correllative, laying his hand upon his dagger. Caesar slew like an
enraged Lion upon Brutus, and certainly some great mischief had been done, had
not the Princes that were present interposed themselves, and parted them. The
next day Caesar published a Manifesto against Brutus, wherein in high language
he said, That it was known to the whole world, that (...) civil wars he met
with no more cruel enemy then Marcus Brutus, (...) was worse to him then even
Pompey's self: and though he with the ^d of victory and revenge, which he had
in his hand, might by goo^ ^son of War, have secured his own life, by taking
away that of Brut^, yet choosing rather to use clemency then just rigor, he did
so clearly and fully pardon him that offense, which would never have been
forgotten by any other man, as (as if injuries had been great obligations) he
turned his hatred into love, his revenge into favor, and this with such
integrity as in his last will and Testament, he declared him to be his Heir,
with which magnanimity the people of Rome were so pleased, as after his
murder, they preferred the revenge of so great ingratitude before their own
liberty, which upon that occasion they might easily have recovered. And if the
common sort of people, who use rather to move out of base interest, then out of
any genurosity, did so much detest this ingratitude in Brutus, how much more
ought Brutus to do so, who had received the obligation? And that if Brutus his
behavior toward him was not open and shameful ingratitude; sure no man was
ever ungrateful; and he should be forced to believe that ingratitude was a vain
name in the Abstract, and that there was no such thing in the concrete thereof.
Brutus finding his honor much concerned in this Caesar's Manifesto, answered
him presently in a writing which he published, That since he had never deserved
ill at Caesar's hands, he could not acknowledge the pardon which he said he had
given him for taking up Arms against him, as a favor. For he who takes up arms
to defend his free Country from a Tyrant, did but what was his duty to do, and
did not therein misdemerit, but ought rather to be commended even by the enemy.
And that Caesar after his victory at Pharsalia, did not oblige those unto him
whose lives he pardoned; for he only won the good opinion of his enemies, who
pardoned injuries received not injuries done unto them. And if it were faults,
not merits which deserved to be pardoned, then they who took up arms to defend
the Roman liberty ought to pardon Caesar, not Caesar them. For the fault was
his, who would usurp upon his Countries liberty, the merit theirs that did
defend it. And that though it vexed his very soul to hear himself taxed of
ingratitude by Caesar, yet he was more troubled to think he should hold him for
so great a villan, as that, though with pardon of life for so doing, he could
forget the injurious usurping the Countries liberty, which all worthy Senators
ought to keep always deeply engraven in their hearts. And that that being only
true clemency which proceeds immediately from mere meekness, certainly Caesar
merited nothing at those Senators hands, whom he pardoned for defending their
liberties. For he did it not out of any worthiness of mind, but only to secure
his own Tyranny: for very well knowing, that to grow cruel after victory,
toward the chief Senators, was to incite the people of Romes public hatred,
and highly to incense the prime Senators, he gave other men their lives to
secure his own. That for his having declared him in his will to succeed in part
of his inheritance, he would have Caesar know, that he treated not with
ignorant people, or such as did not very well know his deep cunning, hid under
that feigned benevolence and false liberality, since it was not out of any
affection to him, that he had named him to be his heir, but only to man him
lay down his Arms, and to make him become an enemy to his ^ntrey, and to blot
out of his mind the desire of recovering liberty, a servitude which ambitious
Tyrants purchase at a contemptible rate from base and avaricious Senators; not
from such as he, who were so far from selling their or their Countries liberty
for any sum of gold, how great soever, as they sought to purchase it at the
expense of theit blood. And that the trick of basely lulling chief Senators
asleep, by sending them to be Ambassadors, was past from Caesar into Augustus,
whose will and testament: Tertio Gradu primores Civitatis Scripserat, plerosque
invisos sibi. Tacit. lib. 1. Annal. was not as Tacitus had formerly, but
foolishly affirmed, Iactantia, Gloriaque ad Posteros; but only that those
Senators, who were his sorest enemies, allured with hopes of reaping more
benefit in servitude, then in a free condition, might become instruments to
Tiberius, in training him up in that Tyranny, which they were bound to make
head against. Brutus concluded this his writing; saying, That he was so far
from acknowledging it a favor to have his life given him by Caesar, as he
would have taken it for a greater obligation from him if he had bereaft him of
it, since a worthy Senator cannot acquire a more glorious life, then to be torn
in pieces by the public Tyrant, such a Senators life being formidable unto the
Tyrant, for being a valiant defendor of liberty; and that Tyrants gave a
glorious life to such Senators as they were cruel unto, whereas they asperse
those with shame who too greedy of life, did interchange the base benefit of
their received pardon, with the shameful oblivion of the injury done them in
bereaving them of their public liberty. Caesar who was by nature haughty, was
so incenst at this answer, as he challenged Brutus to a single duel in Campo
Mart; which Brutus willingly accepted, but abhorring to fight with men half
dead, he bad him first go cure those wounds which he had given him in the
Senate, and then return to receive more with the same dagger, with which he
would be ready to wait upon him. To this scornful answer of Brutus; Caesar did
as sconfully reply, that the alleged impediment should not keep him from
meeting him in the field, for that Brutus very well knew, that those his wounds
were very well cured by his Nephew Augustus, and by the whole Triumpherate,
with the corresive of proscription. That therefore he should only appear armed
in the field, and leave behind him those Cassii and Caschi, and other
swaggering companions, which he was accustomed to make use of in his
supercheries and foul play to men of honor. To this Brutus answered, That his
custom was to put a great difference between enemy and enemy; and that such as
he, fought only with the arms of military worth, to propagate the Roman
Empire, against the Hanibals, Jugurthans, Mitredates, and other Foreign
Princes; but that Tyrants, and ravinous wolves clothed in lambs skins, ought
to be dealt withal with like Treachery, and to have traps laid for them, as is
usually done for crafty Foxes.

The LXXII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Certain Subjects desire their Princes that the infinite multitude of Laws
which they live under, may be reduced to a lesser number; and that the
Governors of Provinces may be forbidden to publish every day new Proclamations.

THe great abuse in some States is certainly much to be blamed, where not only
the Princes are prone enough in publishing every day new Laws, but do permit
the Governors of their Provinces to run into the same error. Which being often
changed, and all of them commencing their Government with an ardent desire to
mend the world the very first week, shame themselves with divulging certain new
Proclamations according to their own fancies, and full of those many
extravagancies which use to abound in them, who having framed new conceits in
their brains, are not so well advised as to weigh them with practice, which is
that true hammer whereby to discern between pure silver, and false Alchymie.
For zeal to the public good, not regulated by a perfect judgment, injures a
gallant man in his reputation, more then any bad intention. The liberty of this
manner of proceeding, causes those States wherein it is used, to abound so
much in Edicts, Proclamations, Constitutions, and an infinite medly of new
Laws, as men live therein in great confusion; it being very true, that
Corruptissima Republica plurimae Leges. Tacit. ter^io Lib. Annal. a most
corrupted Cou^rey abound most in Laws; and the worst is, that every Officer
being resolute in the observance of such Proclamations as are by him published,
foolishly forgets those made by his predecessors, so as the people not able to
discern in this so great disorder, what things are lawful, what unlawful,
receive the worser satisfaction thereby, for that they have ofttimes found,
that many of them, to vent their anger against one they hate, or to give a
purging pill to a rich Churmuggion, have made use of absolute Proclamations and
Edicts which have lost their validity, be contrary usance. To the end then,
that some cure might be found out for so many evils, the people who live under
them, chose certain Commissioners long since, to acquaint their Princes
therewith. These earnestly desired that the multitude of Laws, which bred
confusion amongst the people, might be abrogated; and that the Governors of
Provinces might be inhibited the making of new ones for the future. Most of the
Princes judged this the Commissioners request to be very just; and that they
might consult the better thereof, they met in Clios house, where some that were
zealous of their subjects good, were of opinion, that with as much brevity as
might be, all the ancient Statutes should be made an end of; and being made
void, new ones might be enacted, which might bring quiet, not confusion to the
people. But the Princes who were of a contrary opinion, were greater both for
number and quality; they freely affirmed, That those things which had been
tolerated by their ancient Predecessors, ought to be presumed to proceed
rather from wisdom, then from ignorance; for it was always to be believed, that
their forefathers had examined and digested matters concerning the Government
of their people, much more accurately then modern men do, who were then seen to
run into great disorders, when out of novelty they would abrogate those ancient
customs, which experience had found to be good; and that it was to be thought a
high presumption, that the world without ever being aware of, oramending her
errors, had lived long in those customs, which others would correct, as being
prejudicial. And that Princes, who ought to study nothing more then how to
dilate their own Authority, committed a mortal error, when they tied up their
ownhands, and made rods for their own breeches, becurtiling their jurisdiction.
Whilst the Princes were thus discussing the business, the Commissioners desires
to hear the result, made some little noise at the chamber door: At which the
Princes being very angry, they grew so hot, as having no other weapons, they
broke some forms which came first to their hands, and making use of the feet
thereof for cudgels, they beat away the Commissioners; who crying out, Help,
help, many Philosophers came from the Peripatetick School, who withheld the
Princes, and freed the others from being further mischiefed. The Princes
thinking it fitting to acquaint the Philosophers with the reasons which had
moved them to this resentment, said, Gentlemen, these Rascals, under pretense
of Grievances, Proclamations, Statutes, and confusion by new Laws, have dared
to come even within our doors, to assassinate us, adding insolence to their
impertinent demands; for we having out of our fatherly charity, given free
leave to these ungrateful people to keep as many Hounds and Greyhounds as they
please to take Hares and Goats withal, permission to lay gins to catch
Partridge and Pheasants, to make nets to take Finshes and Sparows, to lay
lime-twigs wherewithal to take Black-birds and Thrushes, to make hooks, pastes,
drag-nets, weels, and twenty other things, that they may want no fish: These
Rascals will not notwithstanding permit us poor Princes, who even consume our
selves in studying how to serve them, to take half a dozen fat Becchifichi, for
our own use.

The LXXIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Vertuosi of Italy beg of Apollo, that Philosophy may be treated on in the
Italian Tongue, and are denied their request.

THe Italian Litterati have these many years been very instant with his
Majesty, that he would be pleased to enable the Italian Tongue to treat of
Philosophical matters, and have used all the possible means they could to get
it effected: But Apollo would never grant it, saying, That the Liberal Sciences
were no longer esteemed, then when they were handled in Greek and Latin; for
the Metaphisicks, and the other Sovereign Sciences, would suffer an infinite
alloy, if the admirable secrets thereof being taught in Italian, should be
communicable even to Hosts and Hostlery; moreover, if all the Liberal Sciences
were suffered to be written in the Italian Tongue, the most noble Latin Tongue,
in which all men confess the true majesty of writing, and speaking elegantly
does consist, would go near to be lost. The Italians were not only not
satisfied with these alleged reasons, but continued still so fervent in their
former desire, as his Majesty seemed to be inclineable to give them content,
when all the Liberal Sciences doubting lest some resolution might be taken,
which would be displeasing to them, bad the Italian Litterati be quiet, for
they would by no means undergo the shame of being discust in insipid Italian
Circumlocutions, but would be argued in their ordinary Latin Terms. Alexander
Picolomini was there present, who freely said, That the Greek and Latin
Philosophers were Fools, if they believed that the Italian Writers were so ill
read, as that they did not very well know, that Philosophy being a natural
Science; and therefore known even to children, would wholly lose her
reputation, it being treated of in Italian, the world should know, that she
were wholly hid under Scholastical terms, which being neither Greek nor Latin,
seemed rather to be Slavonick words, which being translated into Italian would
discover the cheating tricks of Philosophers, who spend nights and days in the
study of Philosophy, to learn names more then realties.

The LXXIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo shows unto his Litterati the true meaning of the Latin Sentence, Homo
longus, raro sapiens, A tale man is seldom wise.

TO the wonder of Apollo, and all the standers by, above 300 Litterati, all of
them beyond the usual size of men, appeared on Tuesday last in the public
Audience. Every one knew that the assembling together of so many Vertuosi, all
of them of extraordinary stature and greatness, must needs have somewhat of
meaning in it, and so it had; for reverend Cino, Auditor di Rota in Parnassus
said, in the name of all his fellows, that all those Vertuosi who his Majesty
saw there, were known by the whole world to be well skilled in the Liberal
Arts, which his Majesty's Delfick Library might likewise sufficiently witness;
and that notwithstanding they were scoft and laughed at by most of the Litterati
in Parnassus, and held for fools and shallow witted people: Wherefore, such
injuries being altogether insupportable, they were forced to have recourse unto
his Majesty. And to the end that some remedy might be found for so great an
abuse, which might occasion many inconveniences, those Litterati of a more then
usual stature and greatness of body, demanded place and time (always provided
it might stand with his Majesty's Approbation) where and when, hand to hand,
two to two, three to three, or in what greater numbers the contrary party
should choose, they would dispute with the Vertuosi of small, and of middle
stature in all sorts of Sciences, and venture their reputations thereupon: But
that when his Majesty should think they had given sufficient Trial of
themselves, and should have proved themselves to be real Vertuosi; their humble
request was, That he would be pleased to dec^e the proverb to be false and
erronous, which says. Homo longus, raro sapiens, which was the rise of all
the scandal. His Majesty gave ear to Cino's complaint with a pleasing
countenance; and told him, That he was sensible of the rash judgment which
his Vertuosi gave of them; but that the proverb being true, he neither could
nor would declare it to be false; and that Homo longus was not to be
understood (according to the vulgar misinterpretation) for any extraordinary
proportion of body, but in respect of resolution and deliberations taken in
affairs; for too much delay and length of time in dispatching business, was a
clear evidence of want of wit, simplicity, and of a drousie understanding;
for he was only to be accounted wise, who was resolute in his affairs, and
who being able to resolve upon any sudden occasion, dispatched business with
admirable dexterity of wit.

The LXXV. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Ruota di Parnasso having decided a point in difference between the
Military men, and the Litterati on the Military means behalf, are aware of
their error, and withdraw their sentence.

THe precedence between Arms and Learning is still obstinately disputed on both
sides, between the Litterati and Millitary-men in Parnassus. And it was
resolved in the last Ruota, That the question should be argued, if at least the
name of Science and Discipline might be attributed to the exercise of War.
Which doubt was of such consequence, as the victory of the whole cause depended
thereupon; wherefore both parties were very diligent in informing the Auditors;
and Vigetius in particular was not sparing for any pains, in procuring that the
sentence might prove favorable on his side. The business was very subtly can
vast and argued, and the Court seemed wholly to incline to the Litterati; but
the Princes used such forcible arguments, as it was resolved, That Military men
in their exercise of War, might use the honorable names of Science and
Discipline. The Litterati were much displeased at this d^cision, who exclaimed
all of them, that Learning would be much defiled, if she, who adorns men's minds
with good precepts, should be forced to communicate her honorable names with
the Military Art, which fills the body with wounds, and the soul with the
^oulest vices. The Litterati were in this despair, when unexpectedly all the
Butchers of the world were seen to appear in Parnassus; which slovenly sort of
people, all besmeared with blood, with hatchets and long knives in their hands,
infused such fear into the Litterati, as apprehending some general slaughter,
and to be cut in pieces, they fled away to their own houses, where they
fortified themselves. But they were better pleased when those dreadful people
made signs of peace, and desired to be heard. Apollo that he might know what
they meant, sent some Deputies to them: To whom those Butchers stoutly said,
That hearing that the Court had decided, That the Art of sacking and firing of
Cities, of cutting their inhabitants in pieces, and in fine, that the cruel
mystery of killing men, and of dispeopling the world, and of calling with sword
in hand, mine thine, should be termed a Science and Discipline, they also, who
did not profess the killing of men, nor any thing that tended to the
destruction of mankind, but the kill^ng of Calves and Muttons to feed men
withal, demanded that their Art might be honored by the same illustrious
names. The Military-men appeared as if they had no souls amidst this rabble
rout, when they saw so base sort of people should desire that their so
opprobrious Trade, should be paralelled with the Art of Warfaring, which was
practiced by the greatest Princes, and prime Nobility of the world. And the
same Signori Auditori di ru^ta, when they saw the Butchers appear in the
Palace, and heard their demands, they were aware of the injustice which but a
little before they had done to all the Vertuosi by their decision. Wherefore
they again propounded the same question, and unanimously agreed, That the
mystery of War, though it were sometimes necessary, was notwithstanding so
cruel and so in humane, as it was impossible to honest it with civil terms.

The LXXVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Aristotle being besieged in his Countrey-house by many Princes, is by them
forced to revoke his Definition of a Tyrant.

ARistotle the Prince of Peripateticks, that he might the better attend his
study, withdrew himself some days ago, to his Countrey-house, where unexpectly
he was besieged by night, by some Princes, with a great number of foot and
horse, who after having with incredible speed made their Trenches and
Gabbiouns, prepared their Cannon to play upon the house. When Apollo heard of
this so great Novilty, he forthwith dispatched away the two famous Satirical
Poets, Lodovico Adi^sto, and Francisco Berni, with two Legions of Veteran
Saterists toward them, who with all military skill endeavored to raise the
siege, but in vain; for though the Poets let fly disfamatory Verses, yet the
Arms these Princes wore were so excellently well tempered, as they were proof
against every pungent Terzetta. So as no good being to be done by force,
Apollo, who would be sure that nothing might befall that excellent Vertuosi,
whereby the Peripatetick Philosophy might be any ways prejudiced, dispatched
away into the field that great lover of Learning, Federico Feltrio Duke of
Urban, who upon parley with those Princes, by his rare dextrousness obtained a
suspension of Arms; and at the first entrance into discourse, those Princes
complained greatly against Aristotle, for having given so malignant a
definition of a Tyrant in his Politica, as it included or comprehended every
good Prince; and in great anger said, That if (as Aristotle had been bold to
affirm) those Princes were to be esteemed Tyrants, who intended more their
own profit, then the like of their subjects, they knevv* not where that
Potentate, how good or ancient soever he were could be found, who might not
be concerned in that so universal definition. As if the end of every good
shepherd were not to milk and shear his sheep, but only so far to love them,
as to die of hunger themselves, so their flock might grow fat: and that
Aristotle discovered himself to be too grofly ignorant if he seemed not to
know, that gain was the end of all merchandising, and that the whole world
was but a great public shop. And that if the very law of Nature did so
commend well regulated Charity, as Fathers were seen to love themselves
better then their own proper children, with what ground of reason would
Aristotle oblige Princes to love the good of others better then their own. And
upon this occasion the Princes added, That the Litterati were grown to such
petulancy in many important particulars, as blinded by proud presumption, they
had not feared to intermeddle in the very greatest Concerns of Princes; and
even to give Laws to Reason of State; not knowing (poor people that they are)
that the insight into Politic affairs is so far from the common judgment of
any wit, how good soever, as none ought to discourse thereof, but men who have
spent their whole time in the Government of Kingdoms, and in the affairs of
great Princes, though they may peradventure want that Philosophy, Rhetoric,
and other Sciences registered by the Litterati in their Scribled Papers: For
Policy not having so much Theory, as that a Grammar may be thereout composed,
which may teach men the art how to govern States well, consisted wholly in
practice; of the which, none but such as had learnt it from great Princes
Secretaries, and in State-Councils, ought to discourse, lest they become
ridiculous for writing things which deserves the rod.

By these words, Duke Federico found that the Princes had just reason to be
incensed; wherefore he easily prevailed with Aristotle to revoke his former
definition of a Tyrant, and to make a new one, which might satisfy those so
highly offended Princes. Then Aristotle suddenly recanted, and said, That
Tyrants were a certain sort of men in the old time, the Race whereof was wholly
lost now. The Princes having received such satisfaction as they desired,
presently quitted their quarters: And being gone toward their own States,
Aristotle, being half dead with fear, returned to Parnassus, assuring all the
Vertuosi, that his Philosophical Precepts failed him very much against the fear
of death; and bad the Litterati attend their studies, and let alone the reason
of State, which it was impossible to treat of, without running evident danger
of being esteemed Criminal by Princes.

The LXXVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
By order from Apollo, a general Reformation of the world is published by the
seven wise men of Greece, and by the other Litterati.

THe Emperor Justinian, that great Compiler of Statutes, and Books of Civil
Law, some few days since showed a new Law to Apollo, to have his Majesty's
approbation of it: wherein men were strictly forbidden killing themselves.
Apollo was so astonished at this Law, as fetching a deep sigh, he said; Is the
good Government of mankind, Justinian, fallen then into so great disorder, as
men, that they may live no longer, do voluntarily kill themselves? And whereas
I have hitherto fed an infinite number of Philosophers, only that by their
words and writings they may make men less apprehensive of death, are things now
reduced to such calamity, as even they will now live no longer, who could not
formerly frame themselves to be content to die? And am I amongst all the
disorders of my Litterati all this while supinely asleep? To this Justinian
answered, That the Law was necessary, and that many cases of violent deaths
having happened, by many men's having desperately made themselves away, worse was
to be feared, if some opportune remedy were not soon found out against so great
a disorder.

Apollo then began diligently to inform himself, how men did live in the world;
and found that the world was so impaired, as many valued not their lives nor
Estates, so they might be out of it. These disorders necessitated his Majesty
to provide against them with all possible speed; so as he absolutely resolved
to create a Congregation of all the most famous men that were in his Dominions,
for wisdom and good life. But in the entrance intoso weighty a business, he met
with difficulties impossible to be overcome; for when he came to choose the
members of this Congregation, amongst so many moral Philosophers, and the
almost infinite number of Vertuosi, he could not find so much as one, who was
endowed with half those parts which were requisite to be in him, who ought to
reform his companion: His Majesty knowing very well, that men are better
reformed by the exemplary life of their reformers, then by any the best rules
that can be given. In this great penury of fitting personages, Apollo gave the
charge of the Universal Reformation to the seven wise men of Greece, who are of
great repute in Parnassus, as those who are conceived by all men to have found
out the receipt of washing Blackmoors white. Which antiquity, though still in
vain, has so much labored after. The Grecians were much rejoiced at this
news, for the honor which Apollo had done their Nation; but the Latins were
much grieved at it, thinking themselves thereby much injured. Wherefore Apollo
very well knowing how much the ill satisfaction of those that are to be
reformed, in their reformers, hinders the fruit which is to be hoped by
reformation; and his Majesty being naturally given to appease his Subjects
imbittered minds, more by giving them satisfaction, then by that Legislative
power which men are not well pleased withal, because they are bound to obey
it. That he might satisfy the Romans, who were much distasted, to the seven
wise men of Greece, he added Marcus Cato, and Anneus Seneca: And in favor to
the modern Italian Philosophers, he made Iacopo Mazzoni da Casena, Secretary of
the Congregation, and honored him with a vote in their Consultations.

The 14 day of the last month, the seven wise men, with the aforesaid addition,
accompanied by a Train of the choicest Vertuosi of this State, went to the
Delfick Palace, the place appropriated for the reformation: And the Litterati
were very well pleased to see the great number of Pedants, who with their
little baskets in their hands, went gathering up the Sentences and Apothegmes,
which fell from those wise men as they went along. The next day after the
solemn entrance, the Assembly being met to give a beginning to the business,
it is said Talete Milesio, the first wise man of Greece, spoke thus;

The business (most wise Philosophers) about which were are all met in this
place, is (as you all know) the greatest that can be treated on by human
understanding: And though there be nothing harder then to set bones that have
been long broken, wounds that are fistuled, and incurable cancars, yet
difficulties which are able to affright others, ought not to make us despair of
their cure; for the impossibility will increase our glory, and will keep us in
the esteem we are in; and (...) do assure you that I have already found out the
true Antidote against the poison of all these present corruptions: I am sure we
do all believe that nothing has more corrupted the present age, then hidden
hatreds, feigned love, impiety, the perfideousness of double-dealing men,
cloaked under the specious mantle of simplicity, love to religion, and of
charity; apply your selves to these evils Gentlemen, by making use of fire,
razor, and lay corrosive Plasters to these wounds which I discover unto you;
and all mankind, which by reason of their vices, which leads them the highway
to death, may be said to be given over by the Physicians, will soon be made
whole and will become sincere and plain in their proceedings, true in what they
say, and such in their sanctity of life, as they were in former times. The true
and immediate cure then for these present evils, consists only in necessitating
men to live with candor of mind, and purity of heart, which you will all
confess with me, cannot be better effected, then by making that little window
in men's breasts, which, as being most requisite, his Majesty has often promised
to his most faithful Vertuosi: For when those who use such art in their modern
proceedings, shall be forced to speak and act, having a window wherein one may
see into their hearts, they will learn the excellent virtue of being, and not
appearing to be; and will conform their deeds to their words, their tongus
which are accustomed to dissembling, to sincerity of heart, and all men will
banish lies and falsehood, and the infirnal spirit of hypocrisy will abandon
many who are now possessed with so foul a fiend.

Talete's opinion did so please he whole Congregation, as being put to the
vote, it was clearly carried for the affirmative; and Secretary Mazzoni was
commanded to give Apollo a sudden account thereof, who perfectly approved the
opinion, and gave command that that very day, the little window should be begun
to be made in man's breast. But at the very instant hat the Surgeans took their
instruments in hand to open men's breasts, Virgil, Plato, Aristotle, Averoes, and
other of the chief Litterati went to Apollo, and told him that he was not
ignorant that the prime means whereby men do with much ease govern the world,
was the reputation of those who did command; and that so precious a jewel not
being to be exposed to danger at any time by wise Princes, they beseeched his
Majesty to consider in what esteem of holy life, and good demeanor, the
reverend Philosophical Synod, and the honorable College of the Vertuosi, were
held by all the Litterati of Parnassus; that therefore they earnestly desired
him (as it became him to do) to have a care of their honors, who by the fame of
their goodness, increase the glory of Parnassus: And that if his Majesty should
unexpectedly open every man's breast, the greater, and better sort of those
Philosophers, who formerly were highly esteemed, ran evident hazard of being
shamed; and that he might peradventure find fowlest faults in those whom he had
formerly held to be immaculate. That therefore, before a business of such
importance should be taken in hand, he would be pleased to afford his Vertuosi
a competent time, to wash and cleanse their souls. Apollo was greatly pleased
with the advice of so famous Poets and Philosophers, and by a public Edict,
prorogued the time of making the wind ows for eight days; during which time,
every one did so attend the cleansing and purging of their souls from all
fallacies, from a hidden vice, from concealed hatred, and counterfeit love, as
there was no more honey of roses, succory, cassia, scena, scamony, nor laxative
syrups to be found in any Grocers or Apothecaries shop in all Parnassus: And
the more curious did observe, that in the parts where the Platonicks,
Peripateticks, and moral Philosophers did live, there was then such a stink, as
if all the Privies of those Countries had been emptied: Whereas the quarters of
Latin and Italian Poets, stunk only of Cabbadg-porrage. The time allotted for
the general purging was already past, when the day before they were to begin
making the windows, Hippocrates, Galen, Cornelius Celsus, and other the most
skillful Physicians of this State went to Apollo, and said, Is it then true,
Sir, you that are the Lord of the Liberal Sciences, that this Microcosme must
be deformed, which is so nobly and miraculously framed, as if any chief muscle,
any principal vein be but touched, the human creature runs evident danger of
being slain? and that so much mischief should be done only for the advantage of
a few ignorant people? For not only the wiser sort of men, but even those of an
indifferent capacity, who have converst but four days with any Quacksalver,
know how to penetrate even into the innermost bowels. This memorandum of the
Physicians wrought so much with Apollo, as he changed his former resolution,
and by Ausonius Gallus, bad the Philosophers of the Reformation, proceed in
delivering their opinions.

Then Solon thus began; In my opinion, Gentlemen, that which has put the
present age into so great confusion, is the cruel hatred, and spiteful envy
which in these days is seen to reign generally amongst men. All help then for
these present evils, is to be hoped for from infusing charity, reciprocal
affection, and that sanctified love of our neighbor, which is Gods chiefest
commandment into mankind; we ought therefore to employ all our skill in taking
away the occasions of those hatreds, which in these days reign in men's hearts;
which if we be able to effect, men will do like beasts, who by the instinct of
nature, love their own species; and will consequently drive away all hatred and
rancor of mind. I have been long thinking, my friends, what the true springs
head may be of all human hatred, and am still more established in my old
opinion, that it proceeds from the disparity of means, from the hellish custom
introduced amongst men of meum and tuum; the rise of all scandal; an abuse,
which if it were introduced amongst the beasts of the earth, I assure my self,
that even they would consume, and waste themselves with the self-same hatred
and rancor wherewith we so much disquiet our selves: The not having any thing
of propriety, and the equallity which they live in, is that which maintains
that peace among them, which we so much envy in them. Men, as you all know,
are likewise creatures, but rational; this world was created by Almighty God,
only that mankind might live thereupon, as bruit beasts do; not that avaritious
men should divide it amongst themselves, and should turn what was common, into
that meum and tuum, which has put us all into such confusion. So as it clearly
appears, that the depravation of men's souls by avarice, ambition, and tyranny,
has occasioned the present inequality, and disproportionate division. And if
it be true (as we all confess it is) that the world is nothing else but an
Inheritance left to mankind by one only Father, and one only Mother, from whom
we are all descended like brethren; what justice is it that every one should
not have a share thereof equal with his companion? And what greater
disproportion can there be imagined by those that love what is just, then that
this world should be such, as that some possess more thereof then they can
govern, and others have not so much as they could govern. But that which does
infinitely aggravate this disorder, is, that usually good and virtuous men are
beggars; whereas wicked and ignorant people are wealthy. From the root of this
inequality it then arises, that the rich are injurious to the poor, and that
the poor envy the rich, For pride is proper to the rich, to beggars
desperation. Hence it is that the rich man's oppressing the weak, appears to be
natural; and the ill will which poor men bear to the rich, is innate in them.

Now Gentlemen, that I have discovered the malady unto you, it is easy to
apply the Medicine: I therefore think, that to reform this age, no better
counsel can be taken, then to divide the world anew, and to allot an equal part
thereof to every one. And that we may fall no more upon the like disorders, I
advise, that for the future, all buying and selling be forbidden; so that
parity of goods will be instituted; the Mother of public Peace, which my self
and other Lawmakers, have formerly so much labored for.

Solons opinion suffered a long debate; which though it was not only thought
good, but necessary by Bante of Periandro, and by Pittaco, yet it was gainsaid
by the rest; and Senecas opinion prevailed, who with very efficacious reasons
made it appear, That if they should come to a new dividing of the world, the
great disorder would necessarily follow, that too great a share would fall to
Fools, and too little to gallant Men: And that the Plague, Famine, and War,
were not Gods most severest scourges, with which God, when offended, did
afflict mankind; but that his severest scourge for the punishment of man, and
which out of his mercy, he made not use of, was to enrich rascals.

Solons opinion being laid aside, Chilon spoke to this purpose; Which of you,
my fellow-Philosophers, does not know that the immoderate thirst that men now
adays have after gold, has filled the world with all the mischiefs which we
all see and feel? What wickedness, what impiety, how execrable soever, is it,
which men do not willingly commit, if thereby they may accumulate riches?
Conclude therefore unanimously with me, That no better way can be found out,
whereby to extirpate all the vices wherewith our age is oppressed, and to bring
in that sort of life which does best become men, then for ever to banish out of
the world the two infamous Metals, Gold and Silver; for so the occasion of our
present disorders ceasing, the evils will likewise necessarily cease.

Chilons opinion was judged to have a very specious appearance; but when it
came to the test, it would not endure the hammer: For it was said, that men
took so much pains to get gold and silver, because they are the measure and
counterpoise of all things; and that to make provision of all things necessary,
it was requisite for men to have some metals, or other thing of price, by
which he might purchase what was fitting for him; and that if there were no
such thing as gold or silver, men would make use of some other thing instead of
them, which rising in value, would be as much coveted and sought after, as gold
and silver now were; as was plainly seen in the Indies, where cockle-shels were
made use of instead of money, and more vallued then either gold or silver.
Cleobelus particularly being very hot in refuting this opinion, said, with much
perturbation of mind; My masters, banish iron out of the world, for that is the
metal which has put us into the present condition. Gold and silver serve for
the use which is ordained by God, to be the measure of all things; whereas
iron, which is produced by nature for the making of plow-shears, spades, and
mattocks, and other instruments to cultivate the earth, is by the malice and
mischief of men, turned to the making of swords, and daggers, and other deadly
instruments.

Though Cleobolus his opinion was judged to be very true, yet it was concluded
by the whole Congregation, that it being impossible to expel iron, without
grasping iron; and putting on Corslets, it would be a great piece of imprudency
to multiply mischiefs, and to cure one wound with another. 'Twas therefore
generally concluded, that the Ore of gold and silver should be still kept, but
that the refiners of them should be wished for the future to be sure to cleanse
them well, and not to take them out of the fire, till they were certain they
had taken from both the metals, that vein of turpentine which they have in
them, which is the reason why both gold and silver stick so close to the
fingers even of good and honest men.

This being said, Pittacchus with extraordinary gravity, began thus; The World,
Learned Philosophers, is fallen into that deplorable condition, which we so
labor to amend, only because men in these days have given over travailing by
the beaten road-way of virtue, and take the bywaies of vice; by which, in this
corrupted age, they obtain rewards only due to virtue. Things are brought to
that woeful state, as none can get entrance into the Palace of Dignity, Honor,
or Reward (as formerly they had wont to do) by the Gate of Merit and virtuous
endeavor, but like thieves, they climb the windows with ladders of
tergeversation; and some there are, who by the force of gifts and favors, have
opened the root, to get thereby into the house of Honor. If you will reform
this our corrupted age, my opinion is, That you should do well to force men to
walk by the way of virtue, and make severe Laws, that whosoever will take the
laborsom journey which leads toward the obtaining of Supreme Honors and
Dignities, must travail with the wagon of desert, and with the sure guide of
virtue, and take away so many thwart by-waies, so many little paths, so many
crooked lanes, found out by ambitious men, and modern Hypocrites, which
multiplying faster in this our miserable age, then Locusts do in Africa, have
filled the world with contagion. And truly what greater affront can there be
put upon virtue and merit, then to see one of these companions arive at the
highest preferments, when no man can guess what course he took to come by it?
Which makes many think they have got it by the magic of hypocricy, whereby
these Magicians do inchant the minds even of very wise Princes.

Pittacho's opinion was not only praised, but greatly admired by the whole
Assembly, and certainly would have been approved of as very excellent, had not
Periandro made those already almost resolved Philosophers alter their minds:
For this Philosopher lively opposing the opinion of so great a Philosopher,
said, Gentlemen, the disorder mentioned by Pittachus, is very true; but the
thing which we ought chiefly to consider, is, for what reason Princes who are
so quick-fighted, and interessed in their own State Affairs, do not bestow in
these our days their great places (as they were wont to do of old) on able and
deserving men, by whose service they may receive advantage and reputation; but
instead of them, make use of new fellows, raised out of the dirt and mire,
without either worth or honor. You know, Gentlemen, that the opinion of those
who say, that it is fatal to Princes to love carrion, and to employ undeserving
servant, in places of greatest trust, is so false, as for the least Interest of
State, they neglect their brethren, and wax cruel even against their own
children, so far are they from doting upon their servants in things wherein the
welfare of their State lies. Princes do not act by chance, as many foolishly
believe they do, nor suffer themselves to be guided in their proceedings by
their passions, as we do; but whatsoever they do, is out of Interest; and those
things which to private men appear errors and negligence, are accurate politic
Precepts. All that have written of State Affairs, freely confess that the best
way to Govern Kingdoms well, is to confer places of highest honor and dignity
upon men of great merit, and known worth and valor. This is a truth very well
known to Princes; and though it be clearly seen that they do not observe it, he
is a fool that believes they do it out of carelessness. I, who have long
studied a point of so great weight, am verily persuaded, that ignorant and raw
men, and men of no merit, are preferred by Princes, in conferring their chief
Offices and honors, before learned and deserving men, not out of any fault in
the Prince, but (I blush to say it) through default of the Vertuosi. I
acknowledge that Princes stand in need of learned Officers, and men of
experienced valor: But none of you will deny but that they likewise need men
that are loyal and faithful. And it is evident, that if deserving men, and men
of worth and valor were but as faithful as they are able, as grateful as they
are knowing, we should not complain of the present disorders, in seeing
undeserving Dwarfs, become great Giants in four days space, and should not
bewail the wonder of seeing wild gourds in a short space overtop the best
fruit trees, nor to see ignorance seated in the Chair of Virtue, and folly in
Valors Tribunal. It Is common to all men to think much better of themselves
then they deserve; but the Vertuosi do presume so very much upon their own good
parts, as they rather pretend to add to the Princes reputation, by having any
honors conferred upon them, then to receive credit themselves by his
munificence: and I have known many so foolishly blown up, and inamored of their
own worths, as they have thought it a greater happiness for a Prince to have an
occasion of honoring such a one, then good luck for the other to meet with so
liberal a Prince. So as these men acknowledging all favors conferred upon them,
to proceed from their own worth, prove so ungrateful to their Princes and
benefactors in their greatest necessities, as causing themselves to be
nauseated as very perfidious men, they are abhorred, and are causes of this
present great disorder, why Princes, in such as they will prefer to great
places, and high dignities, instead of merit, virtue, and known worth, seek for
loyalty and trust, that they may meet with thankfulness when they stand in need
of it; which they rather expect from those who pretending to no merit of their
own, acknowledge all their good fortunes to proceed merely from their Princes
liberality.

Periandro having ended his discourse, Bias spoke thus; All of you, most wise
Philosophers, sufficiently know that the reason of the worlds being so
depraved, is only because mankind has so shamefully abandoned those holy Laws
which God gave them to observe, when he bestowed the whole world upon them for
their habitation: Nor did he place the French in France, the Spaniards in
Spain, Dutch in Germany, and bound up the fowl fiend in hell, for any other
reason, but for the advantage of that general peace which he desired might be
observed throughout the whole world. But avarice and ambition (spurs which have
always egged on men to greatest wickedness) causing the French, Italians,
Dutch, Grecians, and other Nations to pass into other men's Countries, have
caused these evils which we (I wish it prove not in vain) endeavor to amend:
And if it be true, as we all confess it is, that God has done nothing in vain,
and that there is much of mystery in all his operations; Wherefore think you,
has his Divine Majesty placed the inaccessable Perenian Mountains between the
Spaniards and Italians; the rocky Alps between the Italians and Germans; the
dreadful English Channel between the French and English; why the Mediterranean
Sea between Africa and Europe; why has he made the infinite spacious Rivers of
Euphrates, Indus, Ganges, Tigres, Danubius, Nilus, Rheine, and the rest; save
only that people might be content to live in their own Countries, by reason of
the difficulties of Fords and passages? And his Divine Majesty knowing very
well that the harmony of universal peace would be out of tune, and that the
world would be filled with uncurable diseases, if men should exceed the bounds
which he had alloted them; that he might make the ways to such great disorders
the more difficult, he added the multitude and variety of Languages, to the
Mountains, Precipices, to the violent course of Rivers, and to the Seas
immenceness: for otherwise, all men would speak the same Language, as all
creatures of the same species, sing, bark, and bray, after one and the same
manner. It Is then man's boldness in boaring through Mountains, and in passing
over not only the largest and most rapid Rivers, but even in manifestly and
rashly hazarding himself and all his substance in a little wooden Vessel, not
fearing to cross the largest Seas therein; which caused the ancient Romans (not
to mention the many other Nations who have run into the same rashness) to ruin
other men's affairs, and discompose their own; not being satisfied with their
Dominion over whole Italy. The true remedy then for so great disorder is, first
to force every Nation to return home to their own Countries; and to the end
that the like mischiefs may not ensue hereafter, I am of opinion, that all
bridges built for the more commodious passing over rivers, be absolutely broken
down; and the ways made for passing over the mountains may be quite spoiled,
and the mountains be made more inaccessable by man's industry, then they were at
first made by nature; and I would have all navigation absolutely forbidden,
upon severest penalty, not allowing so much as the least boats to pass in, over
rivers. Bias his opinion was very attentively listened unto; and after being
well examined by the best wits of the Assembly, it was found not to be good:
for all those Philosophers knew, that the greatest enmities which are known to
reign between Nation and Nation, are not natural (as many foolishly conceive
them to be) but are occasioned by cunning Princes, who are great masters of the
known proverb, Divide, and impera. And that that perfection of manners being
found in all Nations joined together, which was not to be had in any particular
Province, men easily learn that exact wisdom by traveling through the world,
which was peculiar to great Ulysses, who having traveled through many
Countries, had seen and observed the fashions of diverse Nations; a benefit
which was much furthered by the use of Navigation; which was very necessary for
mankind, were it only for that God (as well became the immencity of his power)
having created this world of almost an incomprehensible greatness, having
filled it with precious things, and endowed every Province with somewhat of
particular navigation, which is the rarest Invention that could ever have been
thought on, or put in practice by humane wit, had brought it into so little a
compass, as the Aromaticks of the Molucchi, though above fifteen thousand miles
from Italy, do so abound in Italy, as if they grew there.

Thus ended Bias, when Cleobelus rising up, seeming with a low bow to crave
leave to speak; said thus, I clearly perceive wise Gentlemen, that the
reformation of the present Age, a business of it self very easy, becomes by
the diversity and extravagancy of our Opinions, rather impossible then
difficult. And to speak with the freedom which becomes this place, and the
weight of the business we have in hand, it grieves my heart to find even
amongst us that are here, that common defect of ambitious and slight wits, who
getting up into public pulpits, labor more to show the rarity of their own
wits, by their new and curious conceits, then to profit their Auditory by
useful precepts and sound doctrines: for to raise man out of the foul mire and
dirt whereinto he is fallen, what need we undertake that dangerous manifacture
of making little windows in men's breasts, according to Thales his advice? and
why should we undertake the laborous business of dividing the world into equal
partitions, according to Solons proposition? and the course mentioned to be
taken by Chilo, of banishing gold and silver from out of the world? or that of
Pittacchus, of forcing men to walk in the way of merit and virtue? or lastly,
that of Bias, that mountains should be raised higher, and made more difficult
to pass over then nature has made them, and that for the future the miracle of
navigation should be extirpated, which shows to what pitch man's ingenuity can
arrive, are they not sophistical fancies, and mear Chimera's? Our chiefest
consideration ought to be, that the remedy to be applied to the undoing evils,
may be easy to be put in execution, that it may work its effect soon and
secretly without any no^e, and that it may be cheerfully received by those who
are to be reformed: for by doing otherwise, we shall rather deform the World,
then reform it. And certainly not without reason; for that Physician deserves
to be blamed, who should ordain a medicine for his sick patient which is
impossible to be used, and which would afflict him more then his disease.
Therefore it is the requisite duty of Reformers, to provide themselves of a
sure remedy, before they take notice of the wound: That Chyrurgion deserves to
be punished, who first opens the sick man's vein, and then runs for things to
close it up withal; it is not only foolishness, but impiety, to defame men
with publishing their vices, and to show to the World that their maladies are
grown to such a height, as it is not in the power of man to cure them.
Therefore Tacitus, who always speaks to the purpose if he be rightly
understood, does in this particular advise men, Omittere potius pravallada, and
adulta vitia, quam hoc assequi, ut palem fieret, quibus flagitiis impares
essumus. Those who would fell an old Oak, are ill advised if they fall to cut
down the top boughs: Wise men do, as I do now, lay the ax to the greatest root.
I then affirm, That the reformation of the present world consists wholly in
these few words, Premiar I buoni, e punire gli scelerati, in rewarding the
good, and punishing the bad.

Here Cleobelus held his peace, whose Opinion Thales Mileseus, did with such
violence oppose, as he shevved how dangerous a thing it is to offend such
(though by telling truth) who have the repute to be good and wise. For he
with a fiery countenance broke forth into these words;

My self, and these Gentlemen, most wise Cleobelus, since you have been
pleased to reject our Opinions as sophistical, and mere Chimera s, did expect
from your rare wisdom, that for cure of these present evils, you had brought
some new and miraculous Bezoar fron the Indies, whereas you have propounded that
for the easiest cure, which is the hardest and most impossible that could ever
be fancied by the prime pretenders to high mysteries, Caius Plinius, and
Albertus Magnus. There is not any one of us, my Cleobolus, that did not know,
before you were pleased to put us in mind of it, that the reformation of the
world, depends wholly upon rewarding such as are good and punishing the wicked.
But give me leave to ask you, Who are those that in this our age are perfectly
good, and who exactly ill? And I would know, Whether your eye can discern that
which could never yet be found out by any man living, how to know true goodness
from that which is counterfeit? do not you know* that modern hypocrites are
arrived at that height of cunning, as in this our unhappy age, those are
accounted to be cunningest in their wickedness, who seem to be most exactly
good? and that such really perfect men who live in sincerity and singleness of
soul, with an undisguised and unartificial goodness, without any thing of
hypocrisy, are thought to be scandalous and silly? Every one by natural
instinct loves those that are good, and hate those that are wicked, but Princes
do it both out of instinct and interest. And when hypocrites, or other cunning
cheaters are listened unto by great men, and good men suppressed or undervalued,
it is not by the Princes own election, but through the abuse of others. True
virtue is known only and rewarded by God, and vices discovered and punished;
for he only penetrates into the depth of men's hearts, and we by means of the
windovv by me propounded, might have penetrated thereinto, had not the enemy of
mankind sowed tares in the field where I sowed the grain of good advice. But
new laws, how good and wholsome soever, have ever been and ever will be
withstood by those vicious people who are thereby punished.

The Assembly were mightily pleased with the reasons alleged by Thales; and
all of them turning their eyes upon Periandro, he thinking himself thereby
desired to speak his opinion, began thus, The variety of opinions which I have
heard, confirms me in my former Tenet* That four parts of five that are sick,
perish because the Physicians know not their disease; who in this their error
may be excused, because men are easily deceived in things wherein they can walk
but by conjecture. But that we, who are judged by Apollo to be the salt of the
earth, should not know the evil under which the present age labors, redounds
much to our shame, since the malady which we ought to cure, lies not hidden in
the veins but is so manifestly known to all men that it self cries aloud for
help. And yet by all the reasons I have heard alleged, methinks you go about
to mend the arm, when it is the breast that is fistula'd. But Gentlemen, since
it is Apollo's pleasure, that we should do so, since our reputation stands upon
it, and our charity to our so afflicted age requires it at our hands, let us, I
beseech you, take from off our faces the mask of respect, which has been
hitherto worn by us all, and let us speak freely. The great disorder has
always reigned amongst men, which does domineer so much at the present, and
which God grant it may not still reign; that whilst powerful men by their
detestible vices, and by their universal reformation, have disordered the
world, men go about to re-order it by amending the faults of private men. But
the falsehood, avarice, pride and hypocrisy of private men (though I must
confess them to be heinous evils) are not the vices which have so much depraved
this our age; for fitting punishments being by the law provided for every
fault, and foul action, mankind is so obedient to the laws, and so apprehensive
of justice, as a few ministers thereof make millions of men tremble, and keeps
them in, and men live in such quiet peace, as the rich cannot, without much
danger to themselves oppress the poor, and every one may walk safely both by
day and night with gold in their hand, not only in the streets, but even in
the highways: but the worlds most dangerous infirmities are then discovered,
when public peace is disturbed; and of this we must all of us confess, that
the ambition, avarice and diabolical engagement, which the swords of some
powerful Princes has usurped over the States of those who are less powerful,
is the true cause, and that which is so great a scandal to the present times:
It Is this, Gentlemen, which has filled the world with hatred and suspicion, and
has defiled it with so much blood, as men who were by God created with humane
hearts, and civil inclinations, are become ravenous wild beasts, tearing one
another in pieces with all sort of inhumanity. For the ambition of these men
has changed public peace into most cruel war, virtue into vice, the charity
and love which we ought to bear to our neighbors, into such intestine hatred,
as whereas all Lions appear Lions to a Lion, the Scotch man appears unto the
English, the Italian to the German, the French to the Spaniard, the German,
Spaniard, French, and men of all other Nations to the Italian, not to be men,
not brethren, as they are, but creatures of another species: So as justice
being oppressed by the unexplicable ambition of potent men, mankind, which was
born, brought up, and did live long under the Government of wholesome Laws,
waxing now cruel to themselves, lives with the instinct of beasts, ready to
oppress the weaker. Theft which is the chief of all faults, is so persecuted by
the Laws, as the stealing of an egg is a capital fault, and yet powerful men
are so blinded with the ambition of reigning, as to rob another man
perfidiously of his whole state, is not thought to be an execrable mischief, as
indeed it is, but an noble occupation, and only fit for Kings; and Tacitus,
the master of Policy, that he may win the good will of Princes, is not ashamed
to say, In summa Fortuna id aequius quod vallidus, and sua retinere privatae
domus, de Alienis certare Regiam laudem esse, li. 15. An. If it be true* which
is confessed to be so by all Politicians* that people are the Princes Apes, how
can those who obey, live virtuously quiet, when their Commanders do so abound
in vice? To bereave a powerful Prince of a Kingdom is a weighty business, which
is not to be done by one man alone. To effect so foul an intent (observe what
the thirst of Dominion can do in an ambitious mind) they muster together a
multitude of men, who that they may not fear the shame of stealing their
neighbors goods, of murdering men, and of firing Cities, change the name of
base Thief into that of a gallant Soldier, and valliant commander; and that
which aggravates this evil is, that even good Princes are forced to run upon
the same rocks, to defend their own estates from the ravinousness of these
Harpyes. For these to secure their own Estates, to regain what they have lost,
and to revenge themselves of those that have injured them, possess themselves
of their states: and being allured by gain, they betake themselves to the same
shameful Trade, which they did so much abhor before. Which has caused the art
of bereaving other men of their Territories, become an highly esteemed science;
and is the reason why humane wit, which was made to admire and contemplate the
miracles of heaven, and wonders of the earth, is wholly turned to invent
stratagems, to plot treasons; and hands, which were made to cultevate the earth
which feeds us, into knowing how to handle Arms, that we may kill one another.
This is that which has brought our age to its last gasp; and the true way to
remedy it is, for Princes who use such dealings* to amend themselves, and to be
content with their own present Fortunes; for certainly it appears very strange
to me, that there should be any King who cannot satisfy his ambition with the
absolute command over twenty millions of men. Princes, as you all know, were
ordained by God on earth, for the good of mankind; I therefore say it will not
do well only to bridle the ambition which Princes have of possessing
themselves of other men's estates; but I think it necessary that the peculiar
engagement which some men pretend their swords have over all estates, be cut up
by the root; and I advise above all things, that the greatness of
Principalities be limited; it being impossible that too great Kingdoms should
be governed with that exact care and justice which is requisite to the peoples
good, and to which Princes are obliged. For there never was a Monarchy
excessively over great, which was not in a short time lost by the
carelessness and negligence of those that were the Governors thereof.

Here Periandro ended; whom Solon thus opposed: The true cause of the present
evils which you with much freedom have been pleased to speak of, was not
omitted by us, out of ignorance (as you peradventure may believe) but out of
prudence.

The disorders spoken of by you, that the weak were oppressed by those of
greater power, began when the World was first peopled. And you know, that the
most skilful Physician, cannot restore sight to one that was born blind. I
mention this, because it is much the same thing to cure an eye that is infirm,
as to reform antiquated errors. For as the skilful Physician betakes himself
the very first day that he sees an illaffected eye water, to his clouts and
cauters, and is forced to leave his patient with a bleer eye; when if the eye
were quite blind, it were too late to seek for remedy; so reformers should
oppose abuses with severe remedies, the very first hour that they commence.
For when vice and corruption has got deep rooting, it is wiselier done to
tolerate the evil, then to go about to remedy it out of time, with danger to
occasion worse inconveniences; it being more dangerous to cut of an old Wen,
then it is misbecoming to let it stand. Moreover we are here to call to mind
the disorders of private men, and to use modesty in so doing; but to be silent
in what concerns Princes, and to bury their disorders, which a wise man must
either touch very tenderly, or else say nothing of them; for they having no
Superiors in this world, it belongs only to God to reform them, he having
given them the prerogative to command, us the glory to obey. And certainly not
without much reason; for subjects ought to correct their Rulers defects only
by their own good and godly living. For the hearts of Princes being in the
hands of God, when people deserve ill from his divine Majesty, he raises up
Pharoahs against them, and on the contrary, makes Princes tender hearted, when
people by their fidelity and obedience deserves Gods assistance.

What Solon had said, was much commended by all the hearers; and then Cato
began thus:

Your opinions most wise Grecians are much to be admired; and by them you have
infinitely verified the Tenet which all the Litterati have of you: for the
vices, corruptions, and those ulcerated wounds, which the present age does
suffer under, could not be better nor more lively discovered and pointed out.
Nor are your opinions, which are full of infinite wisdom, and humane knowledge,
gainsaid here; for that they were not excellently good; but for that the
malady is so habituated in the veins, and is even so grounded in the bones, as
that humane complexion is become so weak, as vital virtue gives place to the
mightiness of vice, whereby we are made to know clearly, that the patient we
have in hand is one sick of a consumption, who spits putrefaction, and whose
hair falls from his head: The Physician has a very hard part to play,
Gentlemen, when the Patients maladies are many, and the one so far differing
from the other, as cooling medicines, and such as are good for a hot liver, are
naught for the stomach, and weaken it too much. And truly this is just our
case; for the maladies which molest our present age, and wherewithal all other
times have been affected, do for number equal the stars of heaven, or the
sea-sands, and are more various, and further differing one from another, then
are the flowers of the field. I therefore think this cure desperate, and that
the patient is totally incapable of humane help: And my opinion is, That we
must have recourse to prayers, and to other Divine helps, which in like cases
are usually implored from God. And this is the true North-Star, which in the
greatest difficulties leads men into the haven of perfection: for Pauci
prudentia honesta ab deterioribus, utilia ab noxiis discernunt, plures aliorum
eventis docentur. Tacit. lib. 4. Annal. And if we will approve, as we ought to
do, of this consideration, we shall find, that when the world was formerly
fallen into the like difficulties, it was no thought of man, but Gods care that
did help it, who by sending universal deluges of water, razed mankind, full of
abominable and incorrigible vice from off the world. And Gentlemen, when a man
sees the walls of his house all gaping and runious, and the foundations so
weakened, as in all appearance it is ready to fall, certainly it is more wisely
done to pull down the house, and build it anew, then to spend his money, and
waste his time in piecing and in patching it. Therefore since man's life is so
foully depraved with vice, as it is past all humane power to restore it to its
former health, I do with all my heart beseech the Divine Majesty, and counsel
you to do the like, that he will again open the Cataracts of heaven, and send
new deluges of water upon the earth, and so by pouring forth his wrath upon
mankind, mend the incurable wounds thereof by the salve of death: but withal,
that a new Ark may be made, wherein all boys of not above twelve years of age
may be saved; and that all the female sex, of what soever age be so wholly
consumed, as nothing but the unhappy memory thereof may remain. And I beseech
the same Divine Majesty, that as he has granted the singular benefit to Bees,
Fishes, Beetles, and other annimals, to procreate without the feminine sex,
that he will think men worthy the like favor. For Gentlemen, I have learnt for
certain, that as long as there shall be any women in the world, men will be
wicked.

It is not to be believed how much Cato's discourse displeased the whole
Assembly, who did all of them so abhor the harsh conceit of a deluge, as
casting themselves upon the ground, with their hands held up to heaven, they
humbly beseeched Almighty God, that he would preserve the excellent femal sex,
that he would keep mankind from any more Deluges, and that he should send them
upon the earth only to extirpate those discomposed and wild wits, those
untnuable and blood thirsty souls, those Hetorotrical and fantastic brains,
who being of a depraved judgment, and out of an overweening opinion which they
have of themselves, are in truth nothing but mad men, whose ambition was
boundless, and pride without end; and that when mankind should through their
misdemerits become unvvorthy of any mercy from his divine Majesty, he would be
pleased to punish them with the scourges of Plague, Svvord and Famine, and that
he would make use of his severest and of all others most cruel rod, as it is
recorded by Seneca, of enriching mean men; but that he should keep from being
so cruel, and causing such horrid calamity, as to deliver mankind unto the good
will and pleasuree of those insolent wicked Rulers, who being composed of
nothing else but blind zeal, and diabolical folly, would pull the world in
pieces if they could compass and put in practice the beastial and odd
Caprichios, which they hourly hatch in their heads.

Cato's opinion had this unlucky end, when Seneca thus began:

Rough dealings is not so greatly requisite in point of Reformation, as it
seems by many of your discourses, Gentlemen, to be; especially when disorders
are grown to so great a height: The chief thing to be considered is to deal
gently with them. They must be touched with a light hand, like wounds which are
subject to convulsions. It redounds much to the Physians shame, when the
Patient dying with the potion in his body, every one knows the medicine has
done him more harm then his malady. It is a rash advice to go from one extreme
to another, passing by the due medium: for man's nature is not capable of
violent mutations; and if it be true, that the world has been falling many
thousand years into the present infirmities, he is only not wise, but a very
fool who thinks to restore it to its former health in a few days. And if a sick
man, who formerly being fat, and after a long sickness is grown very lean,
think in the first week of his convalessence to return to his former fatness by
much eating, he must surely burst: but he will happily compass his desire, if
he will eat moderately and have that patience which brings whatsoever knotty
business to perfection. For quae longo tempore extenuantur Corpora, lent
reficere oportet. Hip. lib. 2. Aph. Moreover, in reformation, the conditions of
those who do reform, and the quality of those that are to be reformed, ought to
be exactly considered. We that are the reformers, are all of us Philosophers,
learned men, if those that be to be reformed, be only Stationers, Printers,
such as sell Paper, Pens and Ink, and other such things appertaining to
learning, we may very well correct their errors: but if we shall go about to
mend the faults of other occupations we shall commit worse errors, and become
more ridiculous then the Shoemaker who would judge of colors, and durst
venture to censure Apelles his pictures. And upon this occasion I am forced to
put you in mind of a fault which is usual amongst us the Litterati, who for
four Cujus, which we have in our heads, pretend to know all things; and are not
aware, that when we first swarve from what is treated on in our books, we run
riot, and say a thousand things from the purpose. I say this, Gentlemen,
because there is nothing which more obviates reformations, then to walk therein
in the dark; which happens, when the Reformers are not perfectly well
acquainted with the vices of those that are to be reformed. And the reason is
apparent, for nothing makes men persevere more, and grow obstinate in their
errors, then when they find that he that reforms, is not well informed of their
defects who are to be reformed. And to prove this to be true, which of us is
it, Gentleman, that knows what belong to the false hook of Notaries, to the
prevarications of Advocates, the simony used by Judges, Proctors imbroylings,
the abuses of Apothecaries, Tailors filtching, Butchers thieving, and of the
cheating tricks of a thousand other Artificers? And yet all these excesses must
be by us corrected. And if we shall go about to amend such disorders, which are
so far from our profession, shall not we be thought as blind, as he who goes
about to stop a hogshead, which being full of clefts, scatters out wine on
every side? This is enough, Gentlemen, to let you know, that reformation is
then likely to proceed well, when Marinors talk of winds, Soldiers of Wounds,
Shepherds of sheep, and Herdsmen of Bullocks. It is manifest presumption in us
to pretend to know all things, to believe that there are not three or four men
of every Trade and Occupation, who fear God, and love their own reputation, is
mere malice, and rash judgment. My opinion therefore is, That three or four of
every Trade or Occupation, who are of known goodness and integrity, be sent for
by us, and that every one reform his own Trade; for when Shoo-makers shall
speak their opinion touching shoes and slippers, Tailors touching clothes,
Chyrurgions concerning Searclothes, Cooks of Lard and Pickel'd meats, and every
one shall correct his own Trade, we shall work a Reformation worthy of our
selves, and of the present occasions.

Though Seneca's opinion was mightily praised by Petacchus and Chilo, who
finding the other Philosophers to be of another opinion, entered their
Protestation, that it was impossible to find out a better means for the
reformation of mankind, then what had been mentioned by Seneca, yet did the
rest of their companions abhor it more then they had done Cato's proposition;
and moved with indignation, told him, That they much wondered, that by taking
more reformers in into them, he would so far dishonor Apollo, who had thought
them not only sufficient, but excellently fit for that business. That it was
not wisely advised to begin the general reformation by publishing their own
weakness; for all resolutions which detract from the credit of the publishers,
want that reputation which is the very soul of business, and that jurisdiction,
which is more jealous then women's honor, should be handled so prodigally by
such a one as he, who was the very prime Sage of Latin Writers; and that the
very vvisest men did all agree, that twenty pound of blood taken from the very
life-vain, was well employed to gain but one ounce of jurisdiction; and that he
is mad, who holding the svvord by the handle, gives it to his enemy to rescue
it from him by the point.

The whole Assembly were mightily afflicted, when by the refutation of
Seneca's opinion, they found small hopes of effecting the Reformation; for they
relied but little upon Mazzoni, who was but a novice, nor could they think
that he could speak any thing to the purpose; which though Mazzoni did by many
signs perceive, yet no whit discouraged, he spoke thus;

It was not for any merit of mine, most wise Philosophers, that I was
admitted by Apollo into this reverend Congregation, but out of his Majesty's
special favor; and I very well know, that it better becomes me to use my
ears then my tongue in so grave an Assembly as this, I being to learn and hold
my peace. And certainly I should not dare to open my mouth upon any other
occasion; but reformation being the business in hand, and I lately coming from
where nothing is spoken of but reformation and reformers, I desire, that every
one may hold their peace, and that I alone may be heard to speak in a business
which I am so verst in, as I may boast my self to be the only Euclide of this
Mathematick. Give me leave, I beseech you, to say, That you, in relating your
opinions, seem to me to be like those indiscrete Physicians, who lose time in
consulting, and in disputing, without having so much as seen the sick party,
or heard his story for himself. We, Gentlemen, are to cure the present age of
the foul infirmities vvherevvith we see it is oppressed. We have all labored to
find out the reasons of the maladies, and how to cure them, and none of us
has been so wise as to visit the sick party. I therefore advise, Gentlemen,
that we send for the present age to come hither, that we interrogate it of its
sickness, and that we may see the ill affected parts bare naked, and so the
cure will prove easy, which you hold so desperate.

The whole Assembly was so pleased at this Mazzoni's motion, as the reformers
immediately commanded the age to be sent for, which was presently brought in a
chair to the Delphick Palace by the four Seasons of the year. He was a man full
of years, but of so fresh and strong a complexion, as he seemed likely to live
yet many ages; only he was short breathed, and his voice was very weak: which
the Philosophers wondering at; they asked him, Why his face being ruddy, which
was sign that his natural heat was yet strong in him, and that his stomach was
good: why, I say, he was so full of pain? and they told him, That a hundred
year before, when his face was so yellow, as he s^med to have the Jaundice, he
spoke freely notwithstanding, and seemed to be stronger then he was now. That
they had sent for him to cure him of his infirmity, and bad him therefore
freely speak his griefs.

The Age answered thus, Soon after I was born, Gentlemen, I fell into these
maladies which I now labor under. My face is now so fresh and ruddy, because
people have pe^er'd it, and colored it with Lakes; My sickness resembles the
ebbing and flowing of the sea, which always contains the same water, though it
rise and falls; with this vicissitude notwithstanding, as when my looks are
outwardly good, my malady (as at this present) is more grievous inwardly; and
when my face looks ill, I am best within. For what my infirmities are, which do
so torment me at the present, do but take off this gay Jacket, wherewith some
good people have covered a rotten carcass, that notwithstanding breathes and
view me naked, as I was made by Nature, and you will plainly see I am but a
living carcass. All the Philosophers then hasted, and having stripped the Age
naked, they saw that the wretch pargeted with aparences four inches thick, all
over his body. The Reformers caused ten razors to be forthwith brought unto
them, and every one of them taking one, they fell all to scrape away the
pargeting aforesaid; but they found them so far eaten into his very bones, as
in all that huge Colossus, they could not find one ounce of good live flesh. At
which they were much amazed, then put on the Ages Jacket again, and dismissed
him* and finding that the cure was altogether desperate, they assembled
themselves close together, and forsaking the thought of all public affairs
they resolved to prepare for ^r indemnity of their own reputations.

Mazzoni writ what the rest of the Reformers dictated, a Manifesto, wherein
they witnessed to the world the great care Apollo ever had of his Litterati's
virtuous living, and of the welfare of all mankind* and what pains the
Reformers had taken in compiling the general Reformation. Then coming to
particulars they set down the prizes o^ ca^biges, s^rats, and pompions. And all
the Assembly had already underwritten the reformation, when Thales put them in
mind, that certa^ H^glers, who sold Lupins, and black cherryes, vented such
small measures, as it was a shame not to take order therein.

The Assembly thankt Thales for his advertisement, and added to their
reformation, that the measures should be made greater. Then the Palace Gates
were thrown open, and the general Reformation was read in the place appointed
for such purposes, to the people who were flockt in infinite numbers to the
Marketplace, and was so generally applauded by every one, as all Parnassus
rung with shouts and vociferations of joy; for the meaner sort of people are
pleased with every little thing; and men of judgment know that Vitia erunt,
donec Homines, Tacit. Lib. 4. Hist. As long as there be men, there will be
vices. That men live on earth, though not well, yet as little ill as they may;
and that the height of human wisdom lay in being so discreet as to be content
to leave the world as they found it.

The LXXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo hearing of the happy Alliance of the two Illustrious Daughters of
Charles Emanuel with the two Noble Princes of Mantua and Modena, commands that
extraordinary demonstrations of joy be made throughout his whole Dominions.

YEsterday about nine of the clock, the usual Guard of the Pegasean Tower gave
notice by two strokes of the bell, that two men were discovered on the
Castalian Plain, which hasted toward Parnassus; whereupon the Litterati ran
presently to the Walls and to the Gates, to see what the matter might be. And
soon after hearing the sound of a Horn, knew that it was one that came Post,
with his guide: The more inquisitive Litterati ran to meet him, and when they
heard that he was sent from Italy to Apollos Majesty, they all earnestly
desired to know whether he brought news of any gallant Italian product, or of
any taking Piece lately printed? To which the Post answered, only that he
brought dispatches to Apollo, of incredible joyful news; wherefore he was
waited upon to the Royal Palace by an infinite number of Litterati. When he had
presented his Letters to Apollo, all the standers by, who very attentively
observed his Majesty's face, found, that still as he read, his countenance
cleared up. Having read the Letters, he with incredible joy uttered these
words; O how happy Union! Let my beloved Queen of Italy know, that I desire her
to come speedily to me. These words caused various conjectures in the Vertuosi,
and diverse were the interpretations they gave thereof; but the most common was,
that the necessary League, which is so much desired by all good men, was at
last concluded in Italy, against that enemy to Learning, the Ottaman Empire.
This mean while the Queen of Italy was seen to come walking apace toward
Apollo's Royal Palace leaning upon her Bellisario. When Apollo heard she was
coming to the stairs, he ran with great joy to meet her, and having embraced
her in his arms; I heartily rejoice (said he) together with your Majesty, at
the happy news which I but now received by Letters from my Italian Academies,
of the Match which his Highness Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy has made of his
two daughters, with the most Noble Princess of Mantua, and Modena. What think
you of the conjunction of so Illustrious Princes, of the union so much desired,
so much wished for by me and you, of these your two beloved sons? Are not these
contentments which do fully counterpoise your late troubles? Yes indeed,
answered the Queen of Italy, and I confess unto your Majesty, that now all my
desires, all my consolations are accomplished: for I never did desire any thing
more earnestly, then that my Italian Princes should add the conjunction of
blood, as now they have done, to their joint important Interests of State: So
as I am wholly composed of joy, seeing that strong Gerion of many of my Italian
Princes, formed into one body, which may secure me from those future evils, the
fear whereof has hitherto so afflicted me. Then that powerful Queen, attended
by all the Princes and Nobility of Parnassus, went to visit the Temple of
Fruitfulness, which promised assured and happy offspring to these so fortunate
couples. Being returned to her Royal Palace, she was congratulated by all the
chiefest Princes reciding in this State, and in the presence of so many great
Heroes, she gave the honorable Title of first and chiefest Italian Warrier, to
Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, the Father of so fortunate offspring, and Author
of Italies so great felicity, to whom she immediately sent the usual signs of
Golden Lance and Trunchion. Apollo, to witness his joy for this so gladsom
news, caused it to be proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, that in respect thereof,
extraordinary signs of joy should be showed throughout all his Dominions; and
upon this occasion gave leave at the earnest request of his Litterati, the
which he had hitherto so resolutely denied, that Stage Players should be
admitted into Parnassus.

Tilting and Turney were in the next place proclaimed; and the first day the
Paladines of Spanish Romansas, Amadisi, Don Florestano, and many others
appeared within the Lists, who gave such proofs of themselves as did exceed;
and all men wondered to see Palaces made all of Diamonds, built by words. The
second day the French Paladins, and those of other Nations, Orlando, Rinalde,
Gradasso, Sacrapante, and many others appeared at Turney, who behaved
themselves so courageously as they made all men know, that Ariosto had writ
sparingly of them. The third day Caro, Molza, Sanga, and other polite Courtiers
appeared in the field, who valiantly challenged those other noble Champions to
the combat; but they, scorning to have to do with men who had not made
profession of Arms, refused the Challenge; wherefore those Courtiers did by
sound of Trumpet again denounce; they challenge a second time, which was still
slighted by the other Paladins. The Courtiers published a third defiance; which
not being accepted of, all the spectators fell a^ hissing at them. Wherefore
Apollo, seeing so great a scorn put upon those Paladins who had been rendered so
famous by the Poets, was much offended, and commanded them to put their Lances
in their rests, and to quell the over-daring of those Courtiers. The Champions
then suddenly obeyed; and it was a strange prodigious thing, to see how those
spruce Courtiers, did with a dexterous lie, with an ill turn done in time
unhorse those Paladins, though their Arms were enchanted. Then the courageous
Bradamante and Marsica, incenst to see those famous Paladins so dishonored,
took their Lance, and with more then manly fury, spurred on their steeds
toward the Cavaliers, so to recover the Military reputation which the others
had so shamefully lost; but both of them being incountred by great purses full
of gold, spread their legs abroad, forsook their saddles, and fell to the
ground flat upon their backs; by reason of these signal acts, the Prize of the
Tilting was awarded to the Courtiers, who had got the trick of unhorsing
people, and of setting them beside the saddle, not by their Lances or
counter-bufs, but only by mere words.

The LXXIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
The ancient Commonwealth of Rome, and the Modern Venetian Liberty, argue
together, what the true rewards of Honor be, by which well ordered
Commonwealths do acknowledge the worth of their well-deserving Senators.

THough the flourishing Commonwealth of Rome, formerly the Worlds Mistress, be
now reduced by reason of her great misfortunes, into a far differing condition
from what she was in; yet in memory of her pristine greatness she still lives
well esteemed, and much honored in Parnassus; not only for that her politic
Precepts are held by all men in power, as divine answers; but because she is
believed to be the true Oracle of Military affairs: as also for that nor
Princes nor private men, take any more praiseworthy or heroic examples
wherewith to adorn their minds more frequently, or more advantagiously from any
other place. And though so splendid a Princess has been sundry times deflowred
and ravished, as well by her own ungrateful and ambitious Citizens, as by her
barbarous enemies, by Augusto's and Silla's Proscriptions; as by the general
sacking of T^tilla and Atilla, and other Kings of foreign Nations; yet does she
excellently well recover her past dishonor, and her present misery, by the fame
of her ancient greatness. This so famous Princess, came some few days since to
visit the Venetian Liberty; a Lady of greatly famed Chastity, and the best
beloved and highest esteemed of as many as are in this Plebeian Court, for the
opinion of her great wisdom, and for the reputation of her unexhaustible
wealth. And whilst the Roman Liberty discoursed of her past greatness, and the
Venetian Commonwealth of her present felicity, it is known that the Roman
Commonwealth said to the Venetian Liberty, That she being purely
Aristocratical, and consequently the most perfect form of a Commonwealth, did
doubtlesly by her excellent Laws which promised her long life, surpass any,
either past or present Republic. But that though to maintain peace at home,
and war abroad, the orders she observed were excellently good, yet had she not
made such acquisition of States, as was expected from the wisdom, and as well
public as private wealth of so famous a Republic; which was thought to happen
by reason of her being very backward in giving such rewards as were usually
given by well ordered Commonwealths, to her well deserving Senators; and that
she, the Commonwealth of Rome, acknowledged all the glory she had in having won
the whole world in so short a time, to proceed wholly from the extraordinary
worth of her Senators, whereunto they were awakened, not by any wealthy gifts,
but by the rewards of eternal honor in erecting their Statues, by their
triumphant Vestments, Trophies, by the building and dedication of famous
Temples, Baselisks, and Theaters, and chiefly by that glory so much coveted by
those who do thirst after eternal fame of stately Roman Triumphs: Rewards which
raised such Military valor, such excellent civil virtue in her Citizens, as the
ensuing Nations did admire, but could not imitate: And that the Venetian
Liberty was so backward in rewarding the worth and merits of her honorable
Senators, with the memorial of perpetual honors, as she might very well be
termed ungrateful; and that infinite Noble men of Venice, having done things
worthy the sublimest triumphs, both in times of peace and war, and all those
rewards which eternize the memory of great Senators, she thought it very
strange to see a Narnesan Statue on horseback in Padua, and one of Bergamasco
in the midst of Venice, and that the famous services of Andrea Gretty, of
Sebastian Venieri, and of a thousand other famous Venetian Senators, who had
not only excelled the Gatta Melati, and the Colleoni, in parts both of soul and
body, but might deservedly be paralel'd with Pompey and Caesar, were not
recompensed with the reward of perpetual memory, which their glorious actions
had deserved.

Menante, who writes all these things with great integrity and faithfulness,
had it from a very good hand, that the Venetian Liberty, not any whit at all
moved, answered the Roman Republic; That she had not so enlarged her
Territories as the Romans had done theirs, not for that (as she gave her self
to believe) the thirst after glory and fame was wanting in her Senators; but
for the clean contrary ends which the two Commonwealths had propounded unto
themselves; for the Venetian Senators made peace the utmost bounds of their
ambition, whereas the Roman Senate made war theirs. And that she had clearly
learnt by her most unfortunate end, that too greatly disproportionate
achievements made by States, did disorder all the politic Laws of whatsoever
well-governed Commonwealth; but chiefly such as were Aristocratical, the
Nobility whereof being to consist but of a few, and not sufficient to govern a
great State, the wholesome Laws of living free, would be filled with confusion,
should the number of the Nobility be rendered immensly great. As her Majesty of
Rome had by her infinite calamities, made it appear unto the world, who by
adding people whom she had subjected to the number of Roman Citizens, did
happily aggrandize her State, but much lessen her Liberty. And that for her
part she was satisfied with so much Empire, as might serve to secure the
Venetian Liberty from foreign Forces; and that she did not covet the greatness
of State, out of an ambition to command, but out of glory not to serve: That as
for honorable rewards which well ordered Commonwealths ought to barter with
worth, and therewith to reward the merits of her Senators, she took her self to
be injured by being styled ungrateful; for eternal Trophies, and perpetual
triumphant Arches were seen in Venice, not made of brittle Marble, or metals
subject to the violence of fire, but of incorruptible materials, wherewith she
largely rewarded her well deserving Senators, as it very well became her to do;
to the end that the memory of their worthy actions might be gloriously conveyed
to futurity.

To this the Roman Liberty answered, That she had often seen all the rooms of
her Highness's Palace, and does not remember that she ever saw any Trophies,
triumphant Arches, or other things to perpetuate the memory of her Nobility.
Hereupon the Venetian Liberty caused many of her Nobility of all ages to enter
the room, whom she stripped naked, and then opened their breasts, and then much to
her astonishment, the Roman Liberty saw all those triumphant Arches, Trophies
Statues, and other stately triumphs, which they by their glorious actions had
merited of their Country, erected in the hearts of her Gritti, Venieri,
Capelli, Grimani, Bragadini, Basqualigi, and other of her deserving Senators:
and that which increased the wonder of the Roman Dame, was to see in the hearts
of those Noble Venetians, a fervent charitable desire to reward the egregious
works of so deserving Senators, in their posterity; and a fire of emulation to
imitate those worthy Heroes, and to do acts which they saw were so gloriously
rewarded. Then the Venetian Liberty with testimony of great affection, said
thus unto the Roman Lady; Such as we, ought to recommend the virtue and deserts
of our Citizens to posterity, by these triumphant Arches, and with these
demonstrations which you, Madam, see written in the hearts of my Senators.
These are the Statues, and other public Memorials which wisdom awakens in the
hearts of honorable Senators who thirst after glory. These are the places where
Trophies, and other public Memorials of deserving Senators should be erected,
and not in Piazza's: For the memory which the Nobility of a Commonwealth keeps
eternally in their hearts, of the deserts of such as have done glorious
actions, is that which awakes emulation and true virtue: Things which always
produce good effects tending to the service of a Free Country; whereas
Triumphs, Trophies, Statues, and such like things, which are so familliarly
seen built in your streets of Rome, in memory of your well-deserving Senators,
has served only to procure them that number of followers of the rabble sort of
people, which occasioned the ambition of Reign in your unfortunate Senators,
Silla, Marius, Sinna, Crassus, Pompey, and Caesar, which was that which put upon
you the unfortunate and shameful chain of servitude, which you now drag at your
heels: A great disorder, and from whence I know that you do acknowledge all
those evils to proceed, which have made you so famous even in calamities. And
know, that our Senators do very fitly resemble those young Virgins who marry,
being chaste both of mind and body,: For as those careless husbands hazard the
making of them whores, by sending them abroad to all Balls and Festivals; so
Free Commonwealths do imprudently infuse into the minds of their civil and well
composed Senators, a desire of becoming Tyrants, by the rewards of public
Memorials, which purchase popular breath, and the attendance of the rabble rout.

The LXXX. ADVERTISEMENT.
The People of Lesbos, after Cornelius Tacitus ran away from them, choose Anna
Momorancy, by Apollos appointment, for their Prince.

AFter the unhappy success which (as you heard by some of our last) Cornelius
Tacitus had in his Principality of Lesbos, and his flight from that State,
nothing was left unindeavored, neither by himself, nor by other Princes who
were his friends, to induce Apollo to work so with the people of Lesbos, as
that he might again return to his Principality, but all to no purpose; for his
Majesty was ever constant in his assertion, that no good was ever to be hoped
from the Government of Princes, who for such like offenses grew bitter to their
people. But for satisfaction to the men of Lesbos, who continually pressed him by
their Ambassadors, that he would propound unto them a new Prince; he nominated
Anna Momorancy, an honorable French Baron; who was received with great
satisfaction to the people of Lesbos, and proclaimed Prince of that State. It Is
certainly true, that some Vertuosi who were very well acquainted with the
affairs of Lesbos, made a long, and an exact series of many abuses which
reigned in that State, from whence they said grew great inconveniences, and did
accurately name the ways which were to be held to reduce the affairs of Lesbos
to a much better condition: And this they gave to Momorancy, who told those his
friends, that the amending of disorders in a Principality by new Laws and
Magistrates, was to be undertaken only in hereditary States, where the
children, and other successors of the defunct Prince, did usually so
tenaciously inherit their predecessors thoughts, as they esteemed it a secure
foundation of their Government, and a necessary piece of Policy, to be very
jealous in the observancy thereof; but that in elective Principalities, wherein
successors used often to undo what their predecessors had done, either out of
curiosity, or to cast dirt in the faces of former Princes, it was a difficult
business to begin to reform those things which wholly depending upon an
exquisite and exact observancy of giving orders, required that many successive
Princes should be of the same mind; which being hard to be found in elective
States, he said that the best advice which could be given to such an one as he
in the Government of Lesbos, was to shun novelty, and resolve to live according
to the ancient Laws, whatsoever they were; and to leave things as he found
them; for in houses that are rented, wise men are contented to live in the old
rooms; and they are overcurious who build new apartements, which it is ods but
that they will be thrown down, either out of the caprichiousness or ill will of
the next comer.

The LXXXI. ADVERTISEMENT.
The excellent Bolognian Physician, Jovanni Zecca, sels in Parnassus the true
Antidote against the French Pox.

THree days ago certain papers were posted up in all the public places of
Parnassus, wherein were written these words; The famous Bolognian Physician
Iovanni Zecca, is arived in this City, who having found out the true and secure
receipt to keep men from taking the French Pox, incites all men to provide
themselves thereof; the rich shall have it for reasonable rates, the poor for
Gods sake. This stirred up great curiosity amongst the Litterati to have a
receipt so necessary for these times; and so much the rather, for that they knew
Zecca to be one of the rarest in his profession, and an excellent good writer.
And believing all that the receipt consisted of Oils, Electuaries, Powders, and
other such Medicinal ingrediences, they wondered exceedingly when they saw Zecca
show them a Picture drawn by the life, of a gallant Gentleman whose nose was
eaten off with the French Pox; telling them the way how to use this receipt,
was, that just as they were about to lie with a woman whose health they
suspected, they take this Picture out of their bosom, which he gave them, and
which as many as should fixedly look upon, and seriously contemplate, they
might be confident that this medicine taken in by the eye, would have such
operation, as they should never be infected with that loathsome disease. Some
were so curious, as they suddenly ran to make experience of this new receipt;
and they say they found it to be exceeding good: For they who in the greatest
height of lust did fixedly look upon, and attentively contemplate this Picture,
cashiering their carnal thoughts, and calling to mind how shameful a thing it
was for a man to lose his nose, which was the ornament of the face, the seat
and proper place of reputation; whilst they considered that men ran hazard of
encouraging so great a shame, by eating a bit, which though it was savory in
the chewing, proves stinking and unpleasant even to a man's very imagination,
when it is swallosed down, it did so dead all carnal desire in men who valued
their reputation, as the self inconsiderate instrument of lust, though it be
wholly void of judgment and discretion, was so apprehensive of the danger
which his beloved correllative ran by that act, as preferring the health
thereof before its own pleasure, it withdrew more speedily into its habitation,
then do Tortoises when stones are thrown apace at them.

The LXXXII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Litterati of Parnassus do with great solemnity celebrate the Holy day
dedicated to the lowdable Lawrel-Leaves.

YEsterday the solemn Festival dedicated to the Laurel Leaves, was celebrated
by all the Litterati with great pomp and joy; a Festival instituted in
Parnassus ever since Dafne's memorable accident, to exhilerate his Majesty,
who was much afflicted at the remembrance of so sad a Metamorphosis; on which
solemn day, only Poets, Emperors, and other Heroes are permitted to come into
the stately College of the Litterati with Garlands on their heads, whilst those
that have not deserved so great a prerogative, are not suffered to stir out of
their own doors, lest they should profane the solemnity of so great a day by
their naked heads. Petrarch, who had of old obtained the honor of that
employment from Apollo, made a Learned Oration in praise of those so honored
Leaves; but whilst he was making his Oration, a strange chance befell that
worthy Poet; for after having by his Encomium exaggerated the praise of that
Plant so dearlypriz'd by his Maj. as that it is respected even by Thunder; and
having spoken of the noble Prerogative which it enjoies, of being that where
with the Temples of Emperors, and glorious Heroes are only surrounded; he fell
to make a long and bitter invective against the ignorance of the present times,
wherein Learning having lost much esteem, those very selfsame so famous Leaves,
which in better time were held in such esteem, was now so basely and scornfully
used by the ignorant modern men, as they did not only make use thereof for the
signs of their base Tiplinghouses, but were not ashamed to put it into their
provocative sawces, gellies, Eels, and even into their roasted Olives. Petrarch
was so very fervent, and had such commotion of mind, and compunction of spirit,
in recounting these so strange neglects, as he fell down in a swound ere his
Oration was perfected, nor could they bring him to himself again, till the fair
Lady Lawra, all sorrowful as she was, was thrown into the bosom of her beloved
Poet. Petrarch was much honored for this accident, which made the whole College
of the Vertuosi plainly see how entirely and intimatly he loved that honored
Laurel which he had praised with such elegancy in his Italian Verses. But it
happened that presently after this swouning, a very bitter disticon, or caplet of
Verses were fixed upon the Delfick Porch; wherein it was said, that that
swouning fit had not befallen Petrarch for any sorrow for the injuries done to
the Lawrel-leaves, but for remembrance of those savory Olives; and this was the
Disticon:

Non Amor hunc Laurae, sed amica jecus^ula Lauro
Quem Memori spirant, examinavit Odor.
'Twas not the love to Lawra made him swound,
But scent of Laurel broths did him confound.
The public garblers of Poetry, by express order from his Majesty, brought
these two Latin verses to the test, and found clearly that they issued from
Martials abundant fancy, who was soon after imprisoned. Then Petrarch
accompanied with a squadron of Italian Poets, ran toward the Royal Palace; and
it being feared that he came to complain of Martial, he was met by Catullus,
Tibullus, and Propertius, who first embraced him, and then earnestly entreated
him that he would add to the glory which he had received by the accident which
befell him whilst he was making his Oration, the great good will he should get
of all the Vertuosi, if he would pass by Marshals Disticon as but a merriment.
And they moreover told him, that all men knew that injuries written by
loquatious Poets, did not touch to the quick, when those that were concerned
could laugh at them; and that truths did only nettle and seek revenge. Petrarch
would not be advised by the Poets, but angerly answered them, that he in his
reading had learnt the virtue not to offend any; but that when he found himself
so nearly touched, he could not forgive; wherefore enraged with anger, and
desirous of revenge, he came to Apollo, and with bitter words exaggerated the
injury done him by Martial, and did so incense Apollo against him, as his
Majesty banished him for ever out of Parnassus, and the Precincts thereof; and
the Sentence was ready to be put in execution, when Martials Advocate produced
a Motu Propriae, which had been published many years before by his Majesty,
wherein it was ordained, that a Jest, though it were bitter, provided it were
witty, eloquent, quick, facetious, and that it had salt in it, and that it were
not spoken out of premeditated mischief, but had escaped from a lively and
ready wit, suddenly at unawares, deserved praise rather then punishment, as a
fault which sprung rather from the vivacity of wit, then from the malice of
mind; for that even the wisest men could not forbear breaking a witty and
facetious jest, which proceeded from a ready sharp wit; and that though for
many respects it ought neither to have been written nor said, yet it deserved
to be listened unto, and read by men given to curiosity, for the quick vivacity
thereof.

The LXXXIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo having highly commended the King of Spains Decree, That no Advocates
nor Proctors should go into the Indies: The Doctors of Law quarrel grievously
with his Majesty for it.

THe abode of Parnassus owes not its happiness only to Apollos excellent
Government, nor to its being inhabited by the prime select Wits of the world,
but to the virtuous living of her inhabitants, the perfection of their manners,
and to the exquisiteness of all the best Laws which cul'd from out the whole
world, are diligently introduced, and observed in that State. For those who
live there, are bound to bring with them the best Customs of their Countries: A
thing which has been so advantageous to every private man, and has brought so
great reputation to the Public, as it appears evidently, that the Country is
to be esteemed happy, which lives not only by her own Laws, but by choice Laws
picked out from all other civil Nations. Wherefore Apollo being informed that
the Potent Kings of Spain have upon several penalties prohibited the passing of
any Proctors or Advocates into the Indies, entitled it a most holy Edict, and
highly praised the piety of those Monarchs who have showed such charity to the
new world, as to preserve it from that disease which has filled the old world
with so many sad controversies. His Majesty moreover gave present order that
so excellent an Edict should be registered in a Table of Brass, which should to
eternal memory be fixed in the chief Marketplace, next to the twelve Tables of
the famous Roman Laws. I must not forget to let you know that the Doctors of
Law were mightily scandalized hereat, who earnestly recommended unto his
Majesty the indemnity of their reputations; saying, that if they might not
obtain so much favor, as that this Law might not be published, it would afford
occasion to many to imitate the Anconitans, Norcinans, Recanetesans, and
others, who, with no little dishonor to Learning, had banished those professers
of Law, who were held in so great admiration by other people, as they verily
believed nothing could be well said, or done, without the liking of a
learned-Lawyer: And that they did the more earnestly beseech his Majesty to
consider their case, for that the indemnity of the sacred Liberal Sciences,
wherein the Students of Law had spent so much time and moneys, was therein
likewise concerned. Apollo, contrary to the opinion of all men, was strangely
offended at this their pressure, and in great anger answered those Doctors.
That he could not but very much wonder at their boldness, who durst affirm in
his presence, that they had spent both time and moneys in learning the Liberal
Sciences, as if the Delfick Law were not sufficiently known to the whole world,
wherein the study of the Law was declared to be no Liberal Science, but a mere
mechanical mystery, introduced in the world to afflict manking, studied without
any delectation of the soul, or speculation of the understanding, and without
the assistance of the sacred Muses, which was so necessary in all good
Sciences, and only practiced for mere avarice of gain, to fatten a fowl filthy
beast with moneys, who though he wholly wanted that vivacity of wit, which is
so much loved by learning, it was sufficient to become a great Advocate, if he
had but an Oxes brain, and a Porters complexion.

The LXXXIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
The chiefest Litterati of Parnassus desire Apollo that Tacitus may re-compose
those Books of his Annals, and Histories which are lost.

YEsterday the chiefest Litterati of Parnassus met together in the public
Schools, and after having discoursed long together, they all of them presented
themselves unanimously before Apollo, to whom the learned Florentine Pietro
Vittorio, in the name of all the rest, said, That those Vertuosi whom his
Majesty saw there, did most humbly desire a favor of him, which would be the
greatest and most acceptable that he could ever grant to his Litterati; who
bitterly bewailing the infinite loss which Learning has had of the greatest
part of the Annals and Histories of that Father of human wisdom, and true
inventer of modern Policy; Cornelius Tacitus did humbly beseech his Majesty to
command that so excellent Personage, that he would amend the wrong which the
injury of time had done to his honor, and to the public profit of the
Vertuosi, by re-making whatsoever is now found wanting of those his most
excellent labors. Apollo, contrary to expectation, startled at this request
which appeared so reasonable, and with an appearance of dislike, answered, O my
ignorant Litterati! do not you think that the Princes of the world are
sufficiently known in State Affairs, that you would have them more learned in
that Science, in which, to your misery be it spoken, they already know too
much? Since it is clearly seen that some of them by practicing a devilish and
infernal reason of State, have brought both sacred and profane things to utmost
confusion. Has not the common miseries and scandals occasioned by the severe
and wretched Government of some Princes, made you see, that modern Policy,
wholly framed by your so beloved Tacitus, has like a contagious disease,
infected the world? Do not you already sufficiently know that the now practiced
reason of State, by which the people are rather flead then shoarn, rather sucked
dry then milkt, rather oppressed then governed, is now grown so exorbitant, as it
is great folly to desire it should rage yet more? Think you not that some
moderate Princes have learnt precepts enough to pill and poll their people from
Tiberius his cruel Government, and Nero's ravenous life, so exactly written by
your Tacitus, that you would have them see whether they could pick out some
concealed precept to imbitter the fifth Act of your sorrowful servitude, in the
lives of Caligula and Domitian, which God out of his great goodness to you,
has raced out of the world, only that the obscenity and cruelty used by those
monsters of Nature, might be for ever forgotten? The loss of the greatest part
of Tacitus his labors, O my Vertuosi, has been a happy gain unto the world:
How happy would men be, if the unfortunate remainders of them, preserved for
the utmost calamity of mankind, were no ways to be found; and that the world
were governed according to the modesty and integrity of ancient Monarchs, who
thought men to be rational creatures, not beasts with two legs (as many modern
Princes by their usages seem to think them) created so by God for their good,
as if he had made mice only to fatten cats. But you, Monsieur Vittorio, whom I
find to be one of those that desire that ^acitus should be rendered entire; give
me leave to have a word or two in private with you, who have spoken in the name
of the rest; Do not you think that your Princes are become learned Physicians
to cure cancar of the Florentines seditian, by reading the very first page of
Tacitus his Annals, which they have so well studied and put in practice? Happy
had the world been, if Tacitus had been always tacit: Therefore fare you well,
you and your posterity, I am sorry to see that men are no wiser then Thrushes,
whose excrement proves their own ruin; ^urdus Malum sibi Cacat.

The LXXXV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo being advertised that ignorant men took up arms against Learning, puts
himself in posture to defend his Vertuosi.

THe suspicions of War which the Litterati have had for these diverse months
past, are at last proved true; for the Post which came to Apollo on Tuesday
night last brought Letters from diverse Princes well adicted to Learning, which
said, that for certain the ignorant took up arms against the Litterati; and
that they had already raised many thousands of Barbarians, mortal enemies to
the Liberal Sciences. Upon the hearing whereof, Apollo forthwith reinforced the
Garrisons of the chiefest Towns of Phosides, Pindus, and Libetrus, and then
commanded Ori^sto and Berni, that they should presently take into pay, two
Brigadoes of Italian Satirical Poets, and that the Brigadoes of the Latin
Poets, Perseus, and Iuvenal, being muchlessened, should be recruited with Poets
from Itally, who did abound in that sort of Militia: And then declared
Torquatus T^ssus to be Leader of the Heroic Italian Poets, who chose his
Father Bernardo for his Lieutenant, and that good old Father thought himself
much honored in obeying so gallant a son. Virgil was made General of the
Heroic Latin Poets, and Lucan was his Lieutenant. Hanibal Caro in a great
Assembly of Poets, all of the first Classis, assisted therein more by the
favors of the house of Fernese, then by his own deserts, was declared General
of the Italian Lyrick Poets; which place would have been bestowed on Petrarch,
Guidicchion, or Monsieur de la Casa, if their habit would have permitted them
to have worn a Murrion, or Breast Plate. Horrace had the free voice of the whole
Army, to be General of the Latin Lyrick Poets. Vigetius was made Camp-Master
General of the whole Army, and Julius Frontinus Sergeant Major; John Francisco
Pico, Count of Mirandola was made Standard Bearer, and in his Standard-General,
bore the famous Ensign of an open Book; Ovidius Naso was made
Treasurer-General; and afterward all necessary provisions and expedition for
War were made: In so much as Apollo had already so formidable an Army of
Vertuosi in the field, as he held himself sure of the victory. But to so great
a body of Militia, the soul, money, was wanting: Some propounded the raising of
public Taxes upon the people, to provide for so urgent a necessity; but that
being found to be a pernicious way, and that it was dangerous to distaste the
people with new grievances, who ought to be eased, that they might become their
friends; and that it was impossible to preserve a State amidst the troubles of
War, when assaulted by a potent Army, if it be inhabited by ill affected
people: The care of providing moneys, was referred by Apollo, to his general
Council of War; who soon fell upon what is infinitely misliked by those who
understand little, but loved and commended by good Politicians, to wit, to lay
tribute upon places of small importance; but trusty, and far from the enemies
confines. So great was the love which every one showed to Learning, and their
hatred against the ignorant so intense, as the people of Parnassus, to keep
themselves from falling into their hands, and from seeing that horrid beast,
that dreadful monster of Nature, which is so displeasing to the Vertuosi, of a
man that can neither write nor read, as not only those places which were
appointed by Apollo, but even those that were not put into the List, ran to his
Majesty, and desired as a singular favor to be made tributary, and to pay
Composition: Only Ephesus refused openly to obey Apollo: whereat his Majesty
was so offended, as finding the more they were persuaded, the more obstinate
they grew, he thought it necessary to use force; which they of Ephesus being
made acquainted by some of the Vertuosi, who were their intimate friends, they
forthwith sent 20 Ambassadors to his Majesty, all of them noted men, and prime
Citizens; who told him that the Loyal City of Ephesus would so willingly run
with their lives and means to the defense of the State, as they would think it
a particular favor, and singular grace, if upon that occasion his Majesty
would cause the public and private goods of the men of Ephesus to be sold to
whom would offer most; and that what moneys might be thereby raised, might be
delivered into his Treasurers for the occasions of the War; and that their
denial of becoming feudatory, or of paying Composition, was not occasioned out
of any disobedience to his Majesty, or disaffection to Learning; but for that
they foresaw that they should assuredly be made feudatory to a cruel Tyrant,
whose Government, for the love they bore their Country, their lives and honor,
they were resolved to shun, though by the hazard of what they held dearest.
Apollo was so well satisfied by those of Ephesus, as he embraced the
Ambassadors one by one, and thanked them very much for their readiness to serve
him; and then told them, that to secure them from being ill dealt withal by
any new power; That though Seneca the Tragedian had offered high for their
Composition, yet he would make-them feudatory to Ovidius Naso, who was so
affectionate to the Country of Ephesus, as was well known to the Vertuosi, from
whom they might expect to be dealt withal with all humanity.

To this the Ambassadors answered; That they beseeched his Majesty to remember,
that whilst Ausonius Gallus was their Prince, the people of Ephesus were at
perpetual variance with him, which ended with their sending him out of their
State sorely and shamefully wounded; and that now that his Majesty knew how
great reason the people of Ephesus had to abhor their new infeoffment, he might
use his pleasure; for they were resolved willingly to undergo any calamity,
rather then to give his Majesty any distaste. These reasons alleged by the
Ambassadors with such generous humility, did so convince Apollo, as he told
them they might live secure, that Ephesus should never be commanded by any but
himself; because he very well knew, that those who had driven their Prince out
of their State, and had dealt so ill with him, had much reason to apprehend the
being made Tributary a second time; for every new Prince, how meek or gentle
soever he were, must be necessitated to use severity, and exercise all those
cruel resentments which the seditious Neopolitan Baron received from the
austere Kings of Aragon, so to secure himself from being treated as was his
predecessor.

The LXXXVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Justus Lipsius, to make amends for his fault in having accused Tacitus, is so
intent thereupon, as he is accused before Apollo to have Idolatrized him; for
which after a feigned punishment, he is at last praised, and admired by his
Majesty.

THe most observing Litterati of this State, have often noted, That when any
Vertuosi has through human frailty committed an error, he does, for the hatred
he beats to vicious actions, amend it by falling into the other extreme: And
diverse affirm that Democrit^s did not put out his eyes for the benefit of
contemplation, but to make amends for a fault which he had committed in having
looked upon a handsome young woman with a more wanton eye then became a
Philosopher. And it is also reported that Harpecretes, to correct an error
which he had committed in having been too loquacious at a Feast, for which he
was greatly blamed, fell into the other extreme of never speaking again. Nor
ought the Poets Sentence to be held true; Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contr^ia
currunt: Since the dog which has been scalded with boiling water, is esteemed
wise for staying within doors when it rains: As also it is the council of a
wise man, to hate Eels after a man has been bitten with a Snake. This is said,
because Iustus Lipsius was so heartily sorry for, and did so repent his having
so unfortunately accused Tacitus, as to amend a fault for which he was much
blamed by all the Vertuosi of this State, he soon after went to Tacitus, and
humbly asked him pardon for the injury he had done him: Who knowing what honor
a man wins by being ready to forgive, which magnanimity becoming a Roman
Senator, did not only freely forgive Lipsius, but did heartily thank him for
having afforded him an occasion of doin^ so glorious an act, as sincerely to
forgive an injury received. The wonder of so great indulgency, and the easiness
in obtaining his so much desired pardon, being added to the ancient great
devotion which Lipsius (who was always very partial to Tacitus) bore to so
sublime an Historian, did so much increase his love and veneration, as he
frequented Tacitus his house more then his own, delighted to discourse with him
more then with any other of the Litterati, was not better pleased with any
other conversation, did not celebrate any Historian more, and did all this with
such partiality of inward affection, as he strove to imitate him in his
quaintness of speaking more by conceits then words, in his brevity of succinct
speaking, full of gravity, matter, sententiousness, and so as was only
perspicuous to good understanders, procuring thereby the envy and hatred of all
the Vertuosi depending upon Cicero, and the Cesarian Faction, who did not
approve thereof, and presumed by an Antonomasia, to call him his Author, and
not caring for what others said of him, he affected nothing more then to appear
a second Tacitus. This unusual affection amongst friends, not used to Masters,
and which did exceed all love born to consanguinity, begot such jealousy in
Mercerus, Beatus Rhenenus, Fulvius Orsinus, Marcus Antonius Muretas, and in
other of Tacitus his followers, as for mere envy, though under the color of
revenging the injury which Lipsius had formerly done their friend Tacitus, they
accused Lipsius before Apollo of the same impiety, which he had accused Tacitus
of: Saying to his Majesty, that he did not love Tacitus as a friend, did not
honor him as a Master and Patron, but did adore him as his Apollo, as his God.
This accusation, which as it fares in faults of high Treason, seems through the
atrocity thereof, to be sufficiently proved by bare allegation, did much
trouble Apollo; who esteeming himself offended by Lipsius, he made be forthwith
brought bound unto him by a Pretorian Cohort of Lyrick Poets; and with an angry
countenance, and threatening way, asked him what he thought of one Cornelius
Tacitus, an Oylmans son of Ternio? To this ^ipsius answered, That he held
Tacitus to be the chief of all Intelligent Historians; the Father of human
wisdom, the Oracle of the true Reason of State, the Master of Politicians, the
Coryfeus of all such Writers as had arived at the glory of using more conceits
then words in their Writings, the true rule whereby to learn to write the
actions of great Princes, with the learned light of their true occasion; a
great piece of art, and which was only known by the noblest sort of Historians,
as that which rendered them very glorious, who knew how to make use of it, and
him learned, who had the judgment to consider it, the Idea of Historical
truth, the true Teacher of Princes, Schoolmaster of all Courtiers, the true
touchstone whereby the world might try the genius of Princes, the Standard
whereby men might exactly weigh the real worth of private men, the Book which
Princes who would learn how to command Subjects well; who desired to know how to
obey well, ought to have continually in their hands. Apollo knew by this so
affected encomium, and by so exaggerated praises, that Lipsius did openly, and
with a bare face adore Ta^itus: Wherefore being highly incenst, he said, What
think you then of me, Lipsius, who am the Father of Learning, the supreme
Master of all Sciences, absolute Prince of the Liberal Arts, and the Monarch of
Virtue, if with such impiety and impudence you Idolatrize a Writer who is so
hateful to all good men, and so much detested by the professers of the Latin
Tongue, for the newness of his phrase, the obscurity of his speech, his vicious
brevity, and for his so cruel Political Doctrine, by which he rather forms
severe Tyrants then; just Princes, vicious subjects, then such as are endued
with that naked goodness which makes Government so easy to Princes; it being
clearly seen, that he by his impious precepts converts lawful Princes into
Tyrants, transforms natural subjects, who ought to be mild and obedient sheep
into, wily foxes, and creatures which Nature has wisely ordained without or
teeth or horns, into ravenous wolves and headstrong bulls; a great Doctor of
Fallacies, the only Artificer of Tyranny, a new Zenofon of a cruel and
execrable Tiberipedia; the true forger of cunning cheating, of saying things
which he intends not, of persuading that to others, which he himself believes
not; of seeming fervently to covet that which he desires not, and of appearing
to hate what he loves; an excellent Master to teach men the wicked Doctrine of
concealing what they think, and of speaking falsehoods; the Architecture of
Fallacies, and the only and so excellent Author of rash Judgments, as most
commonly he interprets men's wicked actions for sanctified ones, and their good
ones for diabolical? And will thou alone, amongst so many of my faithful
Vertuosi, even to my very face adore one for thy God, who by his Writings shows
he does not know that there is a God? who being composed of nothing but
impiety, has divulged that cruel and desperate Policy, which does so shame
Princes that practice it, and so much afflict people that make trial of it? Who
has taught Princes as well as private men, the wicked art of double dealing,
the fraudulency to do what they do not say, and to say what they mean not to
do; which is practiced by some, only that they may learn the wicked doctrine to
paint out that for black, which is white, how to wind people about by fair
speeches, and foul deeds; of deceiving all men by laughing when a man is angry,
and weeping when well pleased; and of measuring love, hatred, and all human
virtue, only by the wicked compass of self-interest; one who is read by good
men, only that they may know the new and deep fetches, by which unhappy
mankind in this present age, so miserably, and with such public calamity
vvhirld about, and to discover the execrable hypocrisy which many Disciples
of such a Master have practiced, that they may be esteemed by the simpler sort
of people, to live the lives of Saints, though by obeying Tacitus his precepts,
they do things which even the devils of hell would blush to do: Are not
you, Lipsius, aware, how since your Tacitus is so frequently read, many
Princes svverve from the wonted fashion of governing their people with meekness
and clemency, and many private men have forsaken their former purity of life:
many of ^acitus his Writings were not lost (as diverse ignorant people affirm)
by the deluge of Barbarians, which came to conquer Italy: they were missing
before then, not by the ignorance of people, who in those troublesome times were
busied in War; but for that those ancient people in whom the sincerity of soul,
and purity of the new Christian Religion did reign, did detest that Writer
which is now so much beloved; and set up by many (as I see he is by you) to be
adored for their golden Calf. Tacitus is in all his parts unworthy to be read
by honest men; for there be more impieties in him, then leaves, lines, words,
sillables, nay then letters: But it must be confessed that the life which he has
written of Tiberius (a fit Prince for the pen of such an Historian) is
altogether unsufferable; which to the great benefit of mankind, was for many
ages hidden in some secret parts of Germany, till by the pestiferous curiosity
of a German, which proved more fatal to the world then his compatriot, the
inventer of guns, it was brought to light at the same time when that Noble
Province began to be infected by the modern heresy; only that Tacitus might by
so great a prodigy subvert profane things, when Luther molested the sacred
ones: Writings integrally wicked, and lost for a while, because the ancients
liked them not: And now (to the great shame of the present age) only admired by
those Politicians, who being followers of so great impiety, have learnt from
the Master of fallacies, the doctrine of entertaining men with words as long as
they live, of feeding them with smoke; of filling them with wind, and of
bringing them by vain hopes to utter beggary. Certainly an infernal doctrine;
which being sowed by the husbandman, Tacitus, only for the benefit of Princes,
is now so greedily embraced by every private man, as Tacitus, who was formerly
esteemed an Author only fit for Princes, is now so frequently handled by all
men, as Shopkeepers and Porters, seem to understand nothing better then reason
of State; and to the great derision of an art so highly esteemed by gallant
men, the world is full of base teachers of Policy.

Lipsius was half dead to hear Apollo speak thus bitterly: Yet taking courage
at his very last gasp, he begged pardon of his Majesty for any other fault that
he had committed; and then freely said, That his obligations to Tacitus were
such, so great the honor, which by means of this his beloved Author, he had won
amongst the Flemmish, Germans, English, French, Spaniards, and Italians, as
though he should love and honor him as his earthly God, he thought he should
not do enough to discharge his duty to the full, and exactly show his
gratitude: For having left ordinary writings behind him in the world, they were
only his labors upon Tacitus, which had made him merit an admittance into
Parnassus, and immortal renown amongst men: And that if he who drove a great
Trade with another man's money, was to be born withal, if he did even adore
him, who at his pleasure might make him turn bankrupt; how much more did he
deserve at least to be excused, if not commended by his Majesty, if he were
extravagant, and did exceed the bounds of duty, in his loving and honoring of
Tacitus, since his whole stock of credit with the Vertuosi was founded only in
him? And that since his entrance into Parnassus, he had been so beloved and
respected by the Litterati, as his house had been as much frequented as those
of the most famous Writers; but that since he committed the gross fault of
offending Tacitus, Statim relictum illius limen, nemo adire, nemo s^lari:
Tacit. lib: 3. Annal. That therefore he would rather hate himself, and die,
then lessen the reverence he bore to that his Author: for he thought it a
lesser loss to lose his life, then the height of honor which by Tacitus his
means he was arived at. Apollo was scandalized to hear Lipsius speak thus; and
growing still more angry, blamed him, for that in his presence he had by so
impudent an asseveration, rather showed his stif-neckt stubbornness of
persevering in so wicked obstinacy, then repent and ask pardon for his fa ult:
And chiefly his Majesty could not endure that he should term idolatry,
gratitude, and obstinacy, constancy. Wherefore he commanded the same Cohort of
Lyrick Poets to drag him out of doors, who was not worthy to look upon his Lord
and Master, whom he had so highly offended; and that having first stripped him of
all his Learning, they should declare him to be shamefully ignorant, and then
burn him as a wicked Idolater. Lipsius was already brought to the place of
execution, when his dearest friends advised him to bethink himself better, and
save both his life and reputation, by craving his Majesty's pardon. Lipsius,
whilst in this very desperate condition, did so increase in constancy and
boldness, as he bad Apollo use his pleasure, he could not make him die
ignorant, who was possessed with gratitude, the Queen of all Human Virtues; that
therefore the flames which should consume his body, would give a greater
splendour of glory, then of fire; and that he protested at that very last minute
of his life, he was so far from acknowledging the fault which was laid to his
charge, of having loved and honored his Tacitus too much, that in commemoration
of the infinite obligations which he ought him, it grieved him more then death,
to think he should die ungrateful; and that the present agony which they might
all perceive him to be in, arose not from the terror of death, but from his
immense sorrow to have heard his Tacitus termed by his Majesty, a wicked
Atheist; an injury, which if it had been done to that most wise Writer by any
other then his Majesty, he would not, though in that his last moment of life,
have left it unrevenged, at least by words, and that with the liberty which
most properly belonged to him who desired not to live, he witnessed to all the
world, that Tacitus did so far know God, as being he alone, who of all the
Writers of the Gentiles, had by his great wisdom arived at the knowledge, How
much the faith of things unseen, avails in matters of Religion, or which cannot
be proved by reason, he had said, Sanctiusque, ac reverentius visum, de actis
Deorum credere quam scire. Tacit. de Morb. Germ. Most holy words, and worthy to
be considered by those Divines, who in their Writings were at a loss through
too sophistical subtilties. Apollo being full of wonder, and infinitely
astonished at the things he had heard, caused Lipsius immediately to be set at
liberty, and straightly embracing him, said, O my dear Vertuoso! with how much
consolation to my self, and how much to your advantage have I tried your
patience and constancy, and by the injurious speeches which I have uttered
against Tacitus, which are the very same which they accuse him with, who
neither study him nor understand him, have I made proof of your devotion
toward that excellent Historian, who even deserves my wonder. And by what I
have heard you say, I find that you have been delighted in reading him, and
long studied him to your profit: For I know that the defense, which so much to
your glory you have made, is your own, but taken out of my and your dearly
beloved Tacitus.

Apollo then turned toward the Vertuosi, who out of a curiosity to hear that
Judgment, were flockt in great numbers to the Hall; and said, O my beloved
Litterati! admire, and ever imitate the honored constancy of this my glorious
Vertuoso, and let the infinite love, and everlasting veneration of that Prince
be engraven in your hearts, who keeps up your reputation; and forget not that
his power precipitates more easily, who loses his Princes good will, then
houses do whose foundations fail. Therefore you who follow the Court, learn to
know, that Nihil rerum mortalium tam instabile ac fluxum est, quam fama
potentiae, non sua vi nixae. Tacit. lib. 13. Annal. A most certain rule which
teaches every one to imitate Lipsius in loving, honoring, and in ever
faithfully serving their Prince: For as it is great impiety in holy things, to
have any other God save him who created man, the heavens and earth, so ought
you never to have any devotion for any Prince, not expect or desire any good
from any other Lord, save from him who out of confidence in your loyalty, and
out of the extraordinary affection which he bears you, owns you to all the
world, not for his servants, but for his dear friends, and by the Supreme
Authority which he suffers you to exercise in his State, makes you appear unto
his Vassals no less Princes then himself: And because the wisdom of Princes out
of their jealousies of those that rule, is usually accompanied with suspicion,
and Court-favorits being always envied, always narrowly observed by their
rivals, and always persecuted by such as malign them. That you may overcome so
many difficulties, and still preserve your selves in the favors which you have
won, love your Princes with all your heart, observe them with all your soul,
and serve them with all possible loyalty: And like my Lipsius, choose rather to
die, then to think, much less to do any thing which may endanger the least loss
of their favors. And believe for certain, that then your ruin begins, when
you suffer your selves to be persuaded that you may better your condition, by
using simulation and falsehood with your Princes, who both know, see, and
understand more then is possible to be expressed: For those who think to live
securely by dissembling with Princes, who though they should know nothing
themselves, have so many who can put them in mind, and who want not a thousand
Malignant spirits to wake them when they are asleep, are like those fools who
think to confine Gypsies, and hope to cheat Mountebanks.

The LXXXVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Queen of Italy being much entreated by her chiefest Princes, and by
Apoll's self to pardon the injuries done by those Italian Commanders who took
up arms against her, in assistance of Foreign Nations, denies to do it.

DOubtlesly the Palace wherein the Queen of Italy keeps her residence, is even
by the testimony of Vitruvio's self acknowledged to be the most magnificent,
and richliest adorned Palace in all Parnassus. Here amongst other stupendous
and delightful things, is the fore Court to a large Amphitheatre, at the upper
end whereof stands the Statue of the Queen of Italy on horseback, all of pure
gold, dedicated to the great Bellizarius, a Grecian; and that of Narses, a
Grecian also, which was erected at the lower end of the Court, for his
perpetual glory, by the same Queen, but is now thrown to the ground, and is
broken all in pieces, for that notorious injury which she received from him; so
that whereas it was formerly the envy of great men, and served to put men in
mind of so great a Commanders merit, it now serves to show his shame, who out
of the rage of private disdain, did profane so great a merit, and observed that
glory which deserved envy.

On the right hand of the forefront of this so miraculous Court, are the faces
of those famous Italian Commanders, drawn by Apelles, and other prime Painters,
who having by their arms, and by their expense of blood, delivered Italy from
the slavery of Barbarians, are by their grateful Country kept in ever honored
memory. And on the left hand of the same Court, to the perpetual shame of
ungrateful persons, those Italian Captains are hung upon Gallowses, by the
heels, who forgetting the obligation due to a man's Country, which equals that
of children to their parents, took up arms in assistance of babarous Nations,
and foreign Princes, to put fetters upon their Italy. Then to the infamy of so
shamefully ungrateful people, the opprobries and reproaches are added, which
Poets in all sort of Satirical Verses, and Orators in daily invectives make
against such misdemeriting men; to the end that men may learn by those severe
resentments, to shun committing faults which I ring eternal infamy with them:
and to the end that Military men, who are wont without weighing what Princes
they serve, to run where they may have best and most ready pay, may learn to
love their Country so well, as that they may think it greater charity to kill
themselves, then to take up arms against her. Menante, who before he can send
this weeks Gasetta to his loving Customers, is bound to carry it to the Urban
Praetor, cannot give you (as he ought to do) the names of those Italians in his
Papers, who are painted in so ignominious a posture; but he tells you that the
posterity of those Soldiers who suffer the punishment of so long shame, when
they enter into that Court, blush to think that their Ancestors have so
shamefully villified their house, and do therefore with much compunction of
soul, continually bewail their predecessors misdemerits. These Gentlemen by
themselves, and by the intercession of the greatest Princes of this State,
have, and do still much importune the Queen of Italy that she will be pleased
at last to pacify her anger, and give way that those nobly descended Soldiers
may be freed from that shameful opprobry; and Apollo himself, at the entreaty
of the best Princes of Italy, did earnestly mediate the same, but all in vain:
For she still continuing her indignation, answered Apollo, and the other who
had entreated her, even with tears which for mere anger fell from her eyes;
that she had patiently born with the ruins, plundrings, affronts, and other
utter desolations which she had received from the Goths, Ostrogoths, Huns,
Vandals, and other barbarous Nations, which had so miserably torn and wasted
her, as being accidents which all Princes were subject unto, and more
particularly she, who by the pleasantness of her situation, fruitful soil, and
great riches which she had got in time of peace, did not only allure, but even
call in foreign Nations to her ruin; who thirsted after her wealth, and were
desirous to change their barren Countries with the fruitful fields of Italy.
But that her dearly beloved children, should take up arms against her their
tender mother, which they ought to have employed in her defense, were wounds
which perpetually cried for revenge, so wicked an ingratitude as was incapable
of pardon, so sad a wickedness as could not be outdone by any whatsoever cruel
hatred. That therefore finding her self so deeply wounded in the concernment of
her Liberty, their entreaties made her the more obstinate in her hatred, was
the reason why his Majesty's mediation did the more irritate her revenge, and
why their humility who begged her pardon, made her the more to glory and wax
cruel in her revenge, and that the very length of time made that injury
continually appear more fresh, which she neither could nor would pardon: Not
only for that she knew she had never deserved so ill at her Italians hands, but
for that she knew she had been wickedly betrayed, assacinated, and so
opprobriously made slave by those on whose neck she had trampled, only out of
their execrable avarice, who ought least to have done it, and from whom she did
least expect it: And that therefore every one might learn from the punishment
of others, and from her well put on resolution, That whosoever does offend his
Country in so shameful a manner, did not only commit an excess which was
impardonable, but did so shamefully stain his honor, as the blur thereof was
not to be washed away with any soap.

The LXXXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The whole generation of Sheep, send their public Ambassadors to Apollo, by
whom they make their desires known, that they may be allowed to have sharp
teeth, and long horns, and their desire is laughed at by his Majesty.

THe whole generation of Sheep have sent four Ambassadors to this Court; who
had audience given them this day by his Maj. wherein a great Apuleian Weather
said, That Sheep did very well know, that God the Creator of all things had
been so charitable to all creatures, and so just, as that he recompensed their
imperfections and defects with gifts equivolent. So as amongst so great a
multitude of bruit beasts, there was not any one who could with reason say he
was ill dealt withal by his Divine Majesty. Only the sheep thought he had
treated them like a father in law, and dealt partially with them; for having
created them with great imperfections, he had not bestowed on them any
equivolent virtue, whereby though they might not secure their state, they might
at least live in that peace and quiet in the world as other beasts did. For
though he had made Hares unspeakably timorous, had given them sharp teeth, but
not a heart to bite, yet he had made them so swift of foot, as he did thereby
secure them from being injured by any other beast, how fierce soever; and that
the Fox had no reason to complain of his want of footmanship, since God had
given him so wisely a pate, as he happily escaped the deceits of other wild
Animals; and that he had also recompensed the wolfs slowness, by indowing him
with so bold a heart, so sharp teeth, and with so circumspect a genius, as
being a terror to other bruit beasts, he made himself be respected even by man;
and that it was likewise clearly seen in the birds of the air, that his Maj.
had used the like charity; for he had given those larger wings, and made them
swifter of flight, to whom he had denied the use of feet, with which he had
endowed Pheasants, Partridges and Quails, in recompense for their short wings,
and want of feathers in their tails: that only sheep, being created with an
unspeakable stupidity of wit, heartless, slow of foot, and without those teeth
to bite with, which makes other creatures be so much respected, they thought
they were abandoned by that divine charity, which had showed great love even to
harmful beasts: And the Weather further added, That for the utmost and greatest
calamity of so unarmed sheep, God had given them Lions, Tigers, Bears and
Wolves, the most implacable and fiercest beasts that inhabit the world for
their enemies; so as sheep seemed to be created only to feed those enraged
beasts, who know not what satiety means. The same Ambassador also said, That to
these insufferable injuries which the sheep received from their enemies, the
ill usage was added which they received from their shepherds, which was only
occasioned by their being altogether unarmed; for had they teeth wherewith
sometimes to bite those indiscrete shepherds, who are so uncharitable in
milking them, and so indiscrete in sheering them, perhaps they would deal more
piously with them, and their sheerers would learn to handle their sheers
without cutting their skins. Wherefore the whole generation of sheep, that they
might no longer undergo such calamities and oppressions, did earnestly beglong
horns, and sharp teeth, wherewith to procure respect. To this request Apollo
answered, with a cheerful countenance, That the sheep had in this their request
showed their simplicity, since they knew not that of all the four footed beasts
that were upon the earth, there were not any that were more favored by God,
nor which received greater privileges from him then they: For whereas the rest
were forced to seek their meat with cark and care, and a thousand dangers, many
of them spending the night season, which was destined for sleep and rest, in
eating, for that it was not safe for them to be seen by day; pasture grounds
were reserved and bought at dear rates only for sheep, by men who had the
command of all beasts, and were Lords of the earth, that in the night season
they were with great care and diligence defended from their enemies in their
folds; and whereas other beasts were persecuted even by beasts themselves, and
by men; and that to procure their death, many did nothing but make nets, feed
dogs, and lay snares; sheep out of a particular grace enjoyed the noble
prerogative to have all these things done by men, to secure them from their
enemies: And that the Creator of the world having ^hewed exceeding great love
toward sheep instead of ravenous teeth, and swift legs, had granted them the
powerful weapons of wool, cheese, and of their riches wherewith they did so
aquire man's love, as that men did perpetually persecute Wolves, Lions, Tigers,
and all their other cruel enemies, with all sort of weapons, merely for the
affection which they bore to sheep. And that sheep being reputed the Worlds
delight and wealth, for the singular advantages which they afforded mankind,
they happened to be the most numerous of any sort of beasts; so as sheep being
fed and defended by their Shepherds vigilance and charity, they were foolish to
desire ravenous teeth and sharp horns. And finally, Apollo said, That they
ought to revenge themselves for the severity which some shepherds used toward
them, in milking and sheering them, only by their obedience and humility, by
yielding them great store of wool, and much cheese, and by studying how to be
fruitful; it being sheeps greatest felicity, that those Shepherds that dealt
ill with their flocks, were chiefly cruel to themselves; for it was a certain
truth, that wounds shamefully given to sheep, did usually kill the Shepherd.
Wherefore he wished them to keep more from being desirous to bite their
shepherds, then they would do from the Wolves teeth. For such sheep could not
esteem themselves so happy, who by their humility and obedience did secure
their Shepherds from all harm, as those were unhappy, who delighted to put them
in fear.

The LXXXIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Nicholas Machiavel being banished Parnassus upon pain of death, was found
hidden in a friends Library, for which his former sentence of being burnt was
excuted.

THough Nicholas Machiavel was banished Parnassus and the Territories thereof
many years ago, upon severe punishment; as well to whosoever durst give
receptacle to so pernicious a man in his Library, yet was he found the last
week secretly hidden in a friends study, where he was made Prisoner. He was
presently sentenced by the Judges of Assize, and was this day to have been
burnt, when he signified unto his Majesty his desire, that he might first be
permitted to say somewhat in his defense before the Tribunal-seat which had
condemned him. Apollo using his wonted clemency, bad him send his Advocates,
and he should have fair hearing. Machiavel replied, he desired to be heard
himself; and that Florentines needed no advocates to speek for them, and his
demand was granted. Machiavel was then brought to the Bar; where he spoke thus
in his own defense, Lo here, you Sovereign of Learning, That Nicholas
Machiavel, who has been condemned for a Seducer and Corrupter of mankind, and
for a dispercer of scandalous politic Precepts: I intend not to defend my
writings, I publicly accuse them, and condemn them as wicked and execrable
documents for the government of a State. So as if that which I have printed be
a doctrine invented by me, or be any new Precepts, I desire that the sentence
given against me by the Judges, be put in execution. But if my writings contain
nothing, but such Politic precepts, such rules of State, as I have taken out
of the actions of Princes which (if your Majesty will give me leave) I am
ready to name, whose lives are nothing but doing and saying of evil things;
what reason is there that they who have invented the mad desperate policies
written by me should be held for holy, and that I who am only the publisher of
them should be esteemed a Knave and an Atheist? For I see not why an original
should be held holy, and the Copy thereof beburnt as execrable; and why I
should be so much persecuted, when the reading of History (which is not only
permitted, but commended by all men) has the particular virtue of turning as
many as do read them with a politic eye, into so many Machiavels: for people
are not so simple as many believe them to be, but that those who by the
greatness of their wits have been able to find out even the most hidden secrets
of Nature, may not also have the judgment to discover the true ends of all
Princes actions, though they be cunningly hidden. And if Princes, that they may
do what they will with their subjects, will have them to be block-heads and
dunces, they must do as the Turks and Muschovites do, inhibit Learning, which
is that which makes blind understandings quick sighted, otherwise they will
never compass their ends; for Hypocrisy, which is now so familiarly used in
the world, has only a star-like virtue, to incline, not to force men to
believe that which likes them best that use it. These speeches wrought much
upon the Judges, and they were ready to revoke the sentence, when the Atorney
General told them, That Machiavel was deservedly condemned for the abominable
and execrable precepts which were contained in his writings; and that he ought
again to be severely punished, for that he was found by night amongst a flock
of sheep, whom he taught to put false teeth, dogs teeth in their mouths,
thereby indangering the utter ruin of all shepherds; a people so necessary, as
it was an indescent and angersom thing to think that they must by means of this
wicked Machiavel be forced to put on breast-plates and gauntlets, when they
would milk or sheer their sheep; and to what price would wool and cheese grow
hereafter, if shepherds were to be more aware of their sheep, then of wolves;
and if they could no longer keep their flocks in obedience with the whistle and
their wand, but must make use of a Regiment of murrions, and make no longer
hurdles of cords to keep them in by night, but walls, bulwark, ditches and
counterscarfs after the modern manner. The Judges thought these accusations to
be too weighty; wherefore they ordered, That the sentence should be executed
against this wicked man, and published a fundamental Law, that he should
henceforth be held as a Rebel to mankind, who durst teach such scandalous
things; all of them confessing, that it was not the wool, cheese nor lambs
which made men prise sheep so much, but their great simplicity and meakness,
and that it was impossible so great numbers of them should be governed by one
only shepherd, unless they were totally deprived of horns, teeth, and wit. And
that to go about to make simple men wickedly malicious, and to make those
moulds see, which out of a great deal of circumspection, wise nature had made
blind, would be to put the whole world in combustion.

The XC. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo visits the Prisons, and in his visitation dispatches the causes of many
Litterati accused of sundry faults, and imprisoned for debt.

BY ancient custom Apollo never intermeddles in civil affairs, but leaves them
wholly to be proceeded in by the Judges; for (as it has been said) he is so
exactly diligent in choosing his Officers, as every one in this State may be
sure to have justice rightly administered: but in criminal affairs, wherein the
life and reputation of his Litterati are concerned, he with great diligence and
exemplary patience, will understand, know and see into every the least
circumstance. So as his Majesty having reserved the whole power of Judicature
therein unto himself, his other Judges have little to do in this Tribunal, but
to give in information against the guilty. Certainly a most excellent custom,
and worthy to be known and imitated by those unwary Princes, who shamefully
abandoning the protection of the accused party, which they ought to take so to
heart, leave it to the discretion of one only Judge, who is often times corrupt,
sometimes ignorant, and always passionate; a thing so detestable, as where good
Laws are established, a hundred Judges are thought too little a number to judge
the life of one man. Hence it is Apollo many ages ago did very wisely in
Parnassus institute the custom of visiting Ptisons, where all criminal causes
of the Prisoners are decided by his Majesty, and the civil of such as are in
for debt. On Tuesday last then, his Majesty attended by all the criminal and
civil benches, went to the Pegasean prisons* where the prisoners appeared.

The first was Felino Sandeo, very famous in the Canonical Laws. Angelo de
Malefiis, who was to open the cause, said, That that Lawyer was two years ago
made Deputy of that Island by the Prince of Andro, where he shamefully suffered
some chief men of his Government to tyranize over, and to afflict the poor, the
widows and orphans, and that he suffered these insolent people, to pay
Artificers by bastonadoing them. This information being given in; Apollo turned
to Felino, and asked him, How it was possible such a one as he could commit the
excess which he stood accused of? Felino answered, That he had sufficiently
witnessed his knowledge in the Laws, and his resolution to punish tyrants, in
his other Governments which he had had of Focide, Pindus, Libetres and
Mittilene; but that in Andro he had omitted doing his duty, not out of
ignorance, but out of mere wisdom; and that the Prince of Andro's ill nature
had been the only cause of this his error; for having found that many
personages of singular worth, and gifts of mind, who had been Governors of the
Isle of Andro before him, had endangered themselves only for having
administered justice exactly, and done their duty completely well; and this
only through the malicious persecutions of those who were not suffered to
tyranize, he had of purpose neglected his duty, and what he knew he ought
chiefly to have done: and that the Prince of Andro was not only faulty in
easily believing all sort of wickedness in his State-Ministers, upon the very
first impression, but very desirous to hear accusations which malicious men do
often make against able and honest Officers, and appeared a friend to the
impeachers: Wherefore for such like proceedings, he had not only not feared to
treat his Prince so ill; but was glad to pay him with such (...) as he had
deserved. Apollo mightily admiring Felino's defense, did not only graciously
embrace him as innocent; but commended his error, as one who wisely knew how to
commodate his actions to his Princes genius, and judged him innocent of the
fault which he had confessed; and afterward said publicly, That Princes who
were not eagerly ^vent in protecting their Officers, and who were friends to
such informations as was made against them by the scum of people, deserved not
to be served by men of honor. Then because he turned his eyes upon (...) Baldo
dalla Rovere, Duke of Urbine, he remembered all men of the good Government of
his son Francisco Maria, and of the custom which he holds in his State, where
he punishes those Officers severely, who in the administration of justice hold
not the balance upright, as also those who persecute them without reason.

Next Cornelius Tacitus, who had been imprisoned some weeks before, upon the
accusations of the most famous Philosophers of the State, was brought before
Apollo, and accused for having spoke a miss of Poverty, since in his Annals he
had not stuck to call her summum malorum. Tacit. lib. 4. An. and Diogenes the
Cinick, who pleaded against him; told Apollo, That it being apparent that men
who were wealthy, hated to take pains, and sit up late to acquire learning, he
would have all men to know, that poverty was the true foundation of all
Science, which if it should be hated, would prove the greatest calami^y which
could befall the Liberal Arts. After Diogenes, the Attorney Bossio, demanded,
That Tacitus his fault being evidently true, his sentence might be pronounced.
And Apollo decreed, That Tacitus should first abjure the words which he had
said, and that he should be imprisoned for the space of four years in Saxum
Seriphum. Then Tacitus with his wonted vivacity of wit, and his usual liberty
of language, said, Sir, I know not why I should be commanded to praise poverty,
when these Judges who are to condemn me, think her to be so shameful a thing,
as they have not doubted to place her amongst the true tokens of torture which
they would not have done if a wealthy mind might have been found in a poor man.
This defense wrought such confusion in the minds of all the Visitors, as
Apollo, lest the world might take notice of the shame that was put upon the
Doctors, Judges and Tribunals, by an accused person, thought it a lesser evil
to let him have his Liberty.

Next to Tacitus, Nicholas Perenotta da Granuela was brought into the
Visitation; and it was informed, That he was imprisoned for publishing a volume
De bono Libertatis. Of the which (as it appeared in his process) he was so
capital an enemy, as that he was the chiefest cause why the Emperor Charles the
fifth, did inslave many famous Commonwealths of Europe. Apollo having heard the
relation, decreed, That Parenotto should be banished Pernassus for ever, as he
who had impudently gainsaid the Delfick Edict, wherein the Litterati are
strictly forbidden to write of such things whereof they do not make public
profession. For that the virtues of Sobriety, Chastity, and other honorable
moral Sciences were made ridiculous, when celebrated by men given to lust, and
glu^ony, and to other vices. As if such virtues had not power I enough to drive
vice from out the souls of men, and in lieu thereof to, introduce good and
honest life; and as if it were (...) which wicked men whisper continually up
and down the streets, that the Liberal Sciences are only learnt to be made
merchandise of, and to make men understand them, but neither believe nor
practice them.

Perenotto's cause being over, an unfortunate Doctor of Law, was brought loaded
with irons, before Apollo, who was imprisoned, for that not being only a very
excellent Advocate, but very skilful in all other choice Sciences; either
blinded by folly, or contaminated by lewdness of mind, he from being a gainful
Advocate in his Country, and a well reputed Litterato, was become a shameful
and wretched Soldier; changing by so unhappy a Metamorphosis his pen into a
sword, his book into harquebuses, the defending of men with his mouth, to
killing them with daggers, and the reading of good discipline in a famous
University, into the desperate exercise of assaulting strong holds. Apollo
being very much offended with so undeserving a man, in much anger said unto
him, Ah thou Traitor and Rebel to Learning, know thou not that the woeful
exercise of war is only fit for such ignorant people, who like so much
unuseful flesh, are only good for the ^bles of war; and altogether unworthy to
be followed by those to whom their deserving parents have left the rich and
honorable patrimony of the Liberal Sciences; which some Princes have
prohibited in their States, for no other reason, but that they open the eyes of
the blind, and enlighten the souls of foolish people, making them know the
cunning and imposturism which the Princes of the world have used to make an
occupation seem profitable and honorable, which is so much to be abhorred. And
this being said, his Majesty gave sentence, That that Doctor should for ever
be inhibited admittance into any Library, that he should be forbidden the
contentments of writing and reading; and that for the example of others, he
should be declared to be ignorant. The unifortunate Doctor hearing so sad a
sentence, pleaded loud for mercy; and said, That his error not having proceeded
out of malice, but out of mere ignorance, he was a subject fit for his
Majesty's pity; and that it was not the desire of riches, nor the thirsting
after man's blood, which had made him gird the sword about him, and betake him
to the mystery of war, but only that he might purchase glory thereby. Apollo
was then more incensed; and replied unto the Doctor thus, And what glory (thou
wicked one) could thou hope for, by the unhappy practice of killing men, of
plundering Countries, burning Cities, deflowering Virgins and in murdering
them that thou may make them consent to so barbarous dishonesty? knows thou
not that my Litterati are those that with their pen eternize the names of
military men? know thou not that all glory won by the sword, uniess when
taken up for Religion, or for the defense of a man's Country is false Alchimy
and merchandise, fit only for hair-brained fools? When the honor which my
Vertuosi win by their learning, and by handling their pen, is always the purest
refined gold which will bear the Test.

The Doctors cause having received this end, Giovan Giorgio Tressino that
famous Vicentian Poet, came before Apollo, and throwing himself down before his
feet; said, Sir, Your Majesty knows that unfortunate I, to amend the many
Inconveniences, which are in the Italian Tongue even to this day, was the first
who when I published my Poem of Italia Liberaia endeavored to bring the
Omicron, Eupselon, Omega, and other Greek Letters, which I thought very
requisite for that language, into my own Tongue; so to shun the frequent
equivocations which are evidently seen therein, for want of such letters; in
which enterprise having been at great charges, I contracted those debts for
which I am now imprisoned; for men who by natural instinct, Veteribus, etiam
quae ^sus evidenter arguit stare malunt did not approve of this my new
Invention. And unless your Majesty put in betwixt my misery, and my Creditors
rage, I, who have taken such pains for the service of Learning, am like to end
my days in the stench of this loathsome Prison. Apollo was very sensible of
Tressino's misery; and asked him, Whether he was in case to pay his Creditors
any moneys by the month? To which Tressino answered, He could not assign over
unto them more then five Crowns a month. Which Apollo, turning toward the
Creditors, desired them to be contented with. But they, who would have the
whole sum, answered discourteously. And Apollo asking them, Whether or no they
were so inhumane as to be paid by the price of blood? The Merchants with their
wonted incivility answered, That he must either resolve to pay the whole debt,
or that parting with his personal estate, he should according to the Laws made
against Bankrupts, wear a green hat, and they would be satisfied. Apollo was
so very angry at this their inhumanity, as rising up upon his feet, and turning
toward Tressino's Creditors; Will you then (said he) be paid by this
Vertuoso's shame, and loss of honor? What Law is that which you allege, which
will have men forgo their reputation, without which they are not worthy to
live? and if even amongst the most barbarous Nations which inhabit the earth,
there be no Law found that a man shoul lose his life for debt, how can there be
a Law in my State, where all exquisiteness of Law is professed, which bereaves
a man of his honor, which is much more dear to man then life? What crueller
wild beast can there be, what more venomous Asp or Viper, then he who regards
not his reputation? good Laws, and such as ought to be obeyed, do never
disrobe a man of his honor, but love that those who want it, should by all
means possible endeavor the purchase thereof, that they should covet it more
then any earthly Treasure, and set a greater valuation upon it. The Creditors
mightily affrighted at these words, ran from the Visitation.

Whereupon Cressino somewhat encouraged, told Apollo, That if his Majesty
would endow him with a power of making Knights, he was sure his Creditors
would take the honor of Knighthood from him in full payment of his debts.
Apollo at the hearing of this foolish request, broke forth into loud laughter;
and told Tressino, He was sorry to see him still pursue ridiculous novelties.
Tressino replied, That his request was no new invention, but a thing much
used; and that the famous Roman Republique, and after them many great Lords,
who might very well have paid their Creditors with ready money, paid the
obligations of blood, and debts due for long and costly service with Lavvrel,
and the Order of Knighthood. Then Apollo smiled again, and told Trissino, that
he built Castles in the art; for he must be another manner of man then he,
that would sell mere smoke for good Merchandise.

Tressino being dispatched, Process was read against a base humerous Doctor of
the Law, whose name the higher Powers will have concealed; where it was said,
That in Governments which he had had, he would often in public audiences, with
great pride and surquedry, behave himself insolently, even with noble and
honorably conditioned personages, saying that he would send them to the
Galleys, would have their heads taken off, and make them be hanged before the
Palace Gate. The Doctor said in excuse of this his error, that he did this to
make himself terrible to the people, and to make himself be obeyed. Apollo,
after he had put him in mind that good Officers, and men of honor, made
themselves dreadful to the people by an equally rigorous, and incorrupt
Justice, and not by insolent threats, gave order that that Doctor, whose genius
appeared fitter to command slaves, then men of honor, should be sent to be
Auditor of the Galleys.

Immediately after, Nicholas Franco Beneventano's cause was heard, who shooting
at a great Wolf with a gun charged with small hail-shot, the Wolf being lightly
hurt, flew upon him according to his custom, and with his teeth tore his left
thigh: Those that were present at the Visitation, wondered very much why he
should be questioned, who deserved rather to be comforted for the danger he had
run, and cured of the wounds he had received. But Apollo, who was not well
pleased that one of his Litterati should have committed so great a piece of
folly, since he had always told his Vertuosi that they must take off their
hats to cruel and dangerous beasts, and suffer them to pass by quietly, or else
shoot at them with a musket loaded with ram'd bullets, and so lay him flat on
his back, condemned the Litterato to the usual punishment of imprudency, that
none should excuse his error; none should pity him, and that all men should
laugh at him.

This cause was no sooner ended, but Cratippus, the Athenian Philosopher
appeared at the visitation, and the Information against him was, That the Duke
of Ephesus had given to him his only son to be brought up by him; to whom when
he came to mature years, he relinquisht the Government of his State, wherein
the young Prince proved as unapt, as he proved famous for Philosophy: for he
was timorous in the handling of arms, and incapable of State Affairs; and the
singular goodness and honesty which he had learnt of Cratippus, which would
have been greatly admired in a private man, was in him interpreted want of wit:
That therefore the Philosopher not having instructed that young Prince in such
things as were to be known by one who was to govern so numerous a people, the
Duke of Ephesus re-demanded the sallary he had given him. Apollo was mightily
displeased with Cratippus his imprisonment; and turning to the Duke who was
there present, told him, that he should not blame Cratippus for his sons
unap^ss to Government, but his own bad choice; for that Vertuoso having taught
his P^pel the Science which he did publicly profess, had fully discharged his
duty: And that such a one as he, ought to know that Arsenals, Armories, and
State-Councels, were Schools for Princes children; and that the Scholarship
which they ought to learn, was the Philosophy, the Poetry which was several
times every week read in the wise Senate of Venice, that Captains, Counselors,
and Secretaries of State, were the best instructers of Princes children; and
the memory of their Ancesters, the glorious actions of such Princes, as both in
peace and war had done things worthy to be admired and imitated, the rods
wherewith they ought to be whipped.

Constantius Albicini was next brought before Apollo, whom his Majesty did
mightily abominate, as one who was publicly known to be a prime finder out of
vexatious inventions. His process said, That he being requested by an
avaritious Prince, to invent some new way for him, how to raise money from his
Subjects without offending or angring them, advised him to give out, that he
was likely to be unexpectedly assaulted by his enemies, who would possess
themselves of his State; that therefore it was necessary to fortify the
Metropolitan City; to effect the which so requisite work, he must proclaim a
new Tax, which would be easily granted by them who apprehended the danger of
their lives, goods, and honors; that then he should in all haste begin the
works which he must continue for one year, that the second year he should
proceed therein more slowly, and that the third year he should give it quite
over; for that the people being accustomed for those two years space to pay
such an Imposition, would willingly continue the payment of it. And because the
chief Magistrate of the City had a rich revennue worth forty thousand crowns a
year, which this covetous Prince did much thirst after, he told him, that to
make himself Master thereof, and to invite the Citizens to make a free gift
thereof unto him, he was only to provide two friends, the one of which should
stand up in a public Council, and should advise, that it were good and fit to
reward the Prince for his excellent Government, with freely parting with two
years revennue unto him; and that the other friend, whilst the Proposition was
discussing, should say openly, That to give their suffrages in secret, was an
action misbecoming a faithful people toward their Prince, where the ungrateful
and disloyal had opportunity to obscure the fidelity of Loyal Subjects. That
therefore men should speak their mind alowd, and the Votes be so decided; for
the rabble-rout, allured by the shortness of the time, would grant that for a
few years, which they should never regain. It was aver'd in the same process,
that this same Constanso had confessed that he had told the same Prince, that an
exeellent way to get money of his Subjects, was to inhibit somewhat which was
greatly desired, and much used in his State, as the extravagancy in aparrel,
costly Jewels, and too exorbitant portions; that if any one should afterward
desire a dispensation therein, it might be granted him; but upon a good
acknowledgment, and upon paying well for the Seals.

Apollo having heard this wicked man's so great iniquity, and wondering that so
much rascallity could be found in any one man, brake forth into these words;
Puniendos rerum atrocium Ministros. Tacit. lib. 13. Ann. and then gave
sentence, that this Devil incarnate should be thrown into the Boat where
Melossus, Melampus, Lisisca, and other Poets Dogs were kept, by which he was
presently torn in pieces and devoured.

This being over, the Commendador Hanibal Caro, was brought to the visitation,
and his Majesty was told, that the quarrels between the Commendador and
Castelvetro, were well known unto him; which could no otherwise be accommodated,
then by taking security that they should not offend one another. After which
Castelvetro passing one morning often before the Commendadors house; the Poet
did so call to mind the injury he had received by that rigorous sentence, as by
a railing Sonnet, which was a thing prohibited, he wounded Castelvetro's honor.
Apollo, contrary to all men's belief, commanded that the Commendador should be
presently set at liberty; and said that Castelvetro deserved to be severely
punished for his being so foolishly adventurous: For knowing that he had so
hainously offended a revengful man, he did foolishly to trust his life upon
money-security; and so much the rather for that Castelvetro knew that the
Marchigiani, who were otherwise very gallant men, but very bloody, have less
patience then discretion.

Caro's cause being ended, Aristides, that great Athenian Senator was brought
to the Visitation, who was imprisoned for having given out great quantity of
Corn to the people of Athens in a very hard year. Aristides imprisonment
appeared altogether unjust to most of the Visitors; but Apollo, who was of a
contrary opinion, told them in severe words, that in free Countries, where
people are more jealous of the public Liberty, then in any other sort of
Principality, in exercising charity, men should observe that pious Precept, of
not letting the right hand know what the left hand did: For in all
Commonwealths, too vainglorious alms, and done out of too much ostentation,
were very dangerous; that therefore he should hereafter forbear to use such
charity toward the poor, which smelt more of ambition, then of any true zeal
or piety; and which might make men suspect that they were rather done out of a
desire of purchasing Principalities on earth, then to gain the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Pietro Pomponatio, a Mantuan, appeared next all besmeared with sweat, and very
ill acoutred, who was found composing a Book, wherein by foolish and
sophistical arguments he endeavored to prove, that the soul of man was mortal.
Apollo, not able to look upon so wicked a wretch, commanded that his Library
should be presently burnt, and that he himself should be consumed in the same
flames; for that fool deserved not the advantage of books, who labored thereby
only to prove that men were beasts. Pomponatio cried out then with a loud
voice, protesting that he believed the mortality of the soul only as a
Philosopher. Then said Apollo to the Executioners, Let him be burnt only as a
Philosopher.

A Prisoner was afterward heard, who said that he being of Coos, had entered
bond for one, who was not sent thither as Governor by his Prince, and who
having committed many Larcenaries, fled from thence by night, wherefore he was
forced to pay the whole sum which was laid to the charge of that
thief-Officer. Apollo wondering at this man's imprisonment, turned to the Prince
of Coos, who was there President, and told him, that the sure way to have an
Officer rule well, lay not in his security to stand a Trial, but was only
grounded upon the Princes good choice: That therefore the prisoner who had
entered security upon firm belief that his Lord and Master would never have
employed such lewd men in places of such importance, should by all means be set
at liberty; and that the punishment belonging of right to him that had done the
fault, the Prince should pay his forfeiture, who had been so abusive in his
charge, of whom he might at his leisure repair himself. To which the Prince
answered, that his Officer was a stranger, another Princes subject; and
therefore he could have no right against him. Apollo replied, That he having
been so very a fool, as to make use of a forreiner, whilst he might be served
by his own subjects, he had no reason to complain of his loss: For that
Shepherd who was so foolish, as to lead other folks sheep to feed, ought to
blame none but himself, if when he brought them back at night to their folds,
he could neither shear nor milk them.

This was the end of that imprisoned security, which the Prince of Coos liked
not, though all the Visitors were well pleased with it. Tito Strozzi, the
famous Ferara Poet was the next that appeared, imprisoned upon the Suit of
Francisco Filelpho, who having given him some moneys to deliver to Cintio
Geraldi, a Creditor of his; Strozzo, as soon as he had it; lost it at play;
which Filelpho complained of in the Visitation. Apollo, who knew that Strozzi
wanted a leg, merrily asked Filelpho, whether if a man should have bought a
blind horse in his Market of Tolentino, the buyer might redemand his money
which was ill laid out? To which Filelpho answered, That whosoever bought a
beast that was palpably defective, could blame nothing but his own folly. If it
be so, says Apollo, you have judged aright Filelpho in your own cause.
Filelpho understood then whither his Majesty's question tended, and being much
afflicted, answered, that he was not ignorant of the common Proverb, That one
must be careful how he deals with those that Nature has marked; but that he
did not hold it to be always true: Know Filelpho, said Apollo, that Proverbs
are nothing else but experimented Sentences, approved sayings; and I tell you,
that Mother Nature in procuring men, may be fitly said to imitate a
conscientious Potter, who when he takes his Vessel out of the Furnace, if he
find any that have holes in them, that be not sufficiently baked, or that have
any other imperfection, to the end that unwary people may not take them for
good, he breaks off one of their ears, or gives them some other mark of being
amiss. And because all men cannot be born equally honest, as nor can all the
Potters pots come equally perfect out of the Furnace; as let a Garden be never
so well looked unto, and weeded, it is impossible but some nettles, or other
weeds will spring up; Dame Nature, who greatly hates cheaters, and crosbiters,
to the end that honest men be not deceived by hollow brains, crafty pates, and
half-baked wits, as soon as she sees any such born, she puts out one of their
eyes, breaks an arm or leg, by which evident signs, tying a bell about the horses
neck that is given to kicking, and fastening a board to the oxes horns which use
to thrust therewith, she admonishes all men to be aware of such.

Giovan Battista Amalteo's Cause was discust immediately after, who was
imprisoned for having called Nero's liberality which he used to Cornelius
Tacitus, when he rewarded him for the praises he had given him, with 25 Mules
loaded with Gold, foolish prodigality, that Ipsi non aderat infrae servos
ingenium. Tacit. lib. 13. Ann. The fault committed by Amalteo, appeared to
Apollo, and to all the Visitors to be so heinous; and the rather, for that all
the Schools in Parnassus hold it for an undeniable maxim, That whatsoever
excessive gift given by a magnanimous Prince to a Vertuoso, in reward for any
favor received from him, should not be termed prodigality: For a Prince that
thirsts after true glory, of which, Unum insatiabiliter parandum, prosperam sui
memoriam. Tacit. lib. 4. Ann. The merit of one pen full of that pure ink, which
smoothly laid on paper, makes men's names glorious and immortal, cannot be
sufficiently rewarded by mou^ of Diamonds and Rubies. Apollo was therefore so
highly incenst against Amalteo for this so great fault, as he adjudged him to
live two years amongst the ignorant.

Presently after appeared a Litterato in the Visitation, who did not only
believe that damned and execrable opinion, That the man was happier who had his
purse full of gold, then he who had his head full of knowledge; but did by all
the industry he had, endeavor to insinuate it into other men. Apollo being much
moved at the hainousness of this fault, sentenced the guilty person to be sewed
up in a sack, and to be thrown with his head downward into the deepest part of
Aganippa's well. It must not here be omitted, that this rascal was so obstinate
in his erroneous opinion, as that he would not only not gainsay himself at the
hour of death; but still affirmed more obstinately then ever, that he died in
the true opinion, that study was but Merchandise, and that Scholarship was only
learnt out of a design to get money; and that therefore it appeared that
Philosophy and Theology, were without all doubt the noblest; but Physic and
Law, were the most esteemed, and most embraced Sciences.

Baiardo, one of the Judges of Assize of this Court, read afterward the
process made against Manfredo, King of Naples, wherein it was proved, that by
night he had stolen Lisbia from Catullus, that so dearly loved her, whom he sent
home stripped, and robbed of all her Jewels, after he had enjoyed her many weeks:
Which injury Catullus did so lowdly complain of in the Visitation, as it grew
near the point of insolency; for highly incenst with anger, without respect
either to the place, or persons before whom he spoke, he called Manfredo a base
bastard. Apollo, to show his Judges that it was not possible to teach a too
highly exasperated mind to keep within bounds, though he seemed to be much
offended at the little respect Catullus had born him, gave him but a gentle
reprehension; and then commanded that Manfredo, Gratis ubique; should be set at
liberty, and said that bastards were most commonly vicious, and given to
ribaldry, only to increase the glory and prerogative of holy marriage; and that
wise Nature, to teach male. Asses to have only to do with she Asses, and Mares
to couple only with Stallions of their own kind, had so ordered it, that from
the coupling of he Asses and Mares, nothing should come but Mules, beasts so
damnably given to kicking, only to the end that men, to shun the getting of
spurious issue, might be the more ambitious to beget legitimate children, who
might in coming from the mothers womb, bring down Gods blessing with them. And
that therefore bastard-children not being bound to live virtuously, it was of
courtesy when they lived well. Catullus not being herewith satisfied, but
growing still more mad, Apollo, with some appearance of anger, bad him hold his
peace; for he who kept a piece of stinking flesh in his house, ought not
complain if it were troubled with flies.

Catullus being thus dismissed, the same Baiardo read a Process made against
Scipio Ammirato, a Politician, who was convinced of having committed many
heinous offenses; as for having taught a Prince who punished his people with new
and vexatious Taxes, to honest them by the names of Donatives, Subsedies, and
Aids, to the end that they might cause no innovation in his State; and who
stuck not to term a most hateful Imposition, the mountain of Piety. Moreover
for that he had taught an eminent Citizen of Phosides, who desired to be
attended by roaring Boys and Hectors, being backed by whom he might tyrannize,
and make himself be dreaded by all men; that he should keep in his house an
open Apertiment with Dice, Cards, Tables, and have a Bawdi house the next door
to him, for that these were the true Dequois, or call-Ducks, which ticed in the
scum of the City, and the lewdest sort of people: and that he should advise the
Prince of Epire, who was a bitter enemy to the Laconians, and who sorely
persecuted some Senators that were of a military genius, and being gallant men,
cared not to be assumed to the Principality of Laconia, lest the public
practice of persecution, might draw the hatred of the Senate upon them, which
was exasperated to see the virtue and merit of the most eminent Senators in
such sort persecuted, that I say, he should advise that Prince to color over
so great and apparent lewdness, with pretense that those Senators had deep
designs. Apollo marvailed much at this Politicians so great perfidiousness, and
after having freely declared, that now much to his dislike, he had found that
Politicians were Gypsies, Cheats, Coney-catchers, and Pick-pockets, he gave
order that this Monster of Nature should be thrown headlong down from the
Tarpeian Rock.

This was Ammirato's end, when the same Baiard^ gave in process against the
Judge of Guido, who was not only convinced by the testimony of diverse
witnesses, but by his own confession, that he had openly made sale of Justice,
to him that would give most for it. Apollo highly offended at the immensity of
such a fault, gave sentence that the guilty party should undergo the usual
punishment for sale of Justice: which was, That he should be flead alive. The
Sergeants did already drag the wretch to the place of execution, when he
fetching a deep sigh, cried out, O unfortunate man that I am, O my moneys, by
which I might have lived in all sorts of delitiousness, how through my want of
wit, are you now become the cause of my shameful and dreadful death. These
words which were heard by all the Visitors, wrought very much with his Majesty;
who sending to have the Judge brought back, asked him what it was he complained
of? and what relation his fault in the administration of Justice, which is
granted to men of worth and merit, had to the money which he said he had spent
so ill? Sir, said the Judge, The Office whereby I have deserved so ill at your
Majesty's hands, was not granted by the Prince of Guido to my Learning, nor to
my deserts, but to 70000 unlucky crowns, which I gave two years ago for the
place: So as I may very well complain of having purchased so great misery by my
ready-money. Apollo having heard this, gave order immediately that the prisoner
should be set at liberty; and said that he judged and declared him to be
innocent: That therefore he should presently return to his Charge, and to the
eternal infamy of the Prince of Guido, continue the ignominious Merchandise of
selling Justice; for it was impossible to keep a man from selling that which he
had bought.

The last that appeared in the Visitation, was the famous Bartolomeo d'Alviano,
whom the Attorney General accused, for that in a dispute which arose betwixt
him and Julius Caesar Scaliger, he had called him a scurvy Scholar. Apollo much
resented this excess in Alviano, and said unto him, If my Litterati, adorned
with so many virtues, full of Science, who have perfect knowledge of the course
of the heavens, of the virtue of herbs, who understand the propriety of
plants, the worth of Minerals, and all the Miracles of Nature, are not truly
Noble, who are they that deserve to be termed Noble? Perhaps those that are
ignorant? Perhaps those vicious people, who being sunk even to the chin in
idleness, sports, gluttony, and lust, have nothing praiseworthy in them; but
the virtues and long series of their predecessors glory? And if gold, for the
virtue it has of not being consumed by fire, eaten by rust, corroded by
Aquafortis, and for other rare qualities, was deservedly reputed the King of
Metals; if the Diamond and Ruby, for their incredible hardness, were the
Princes of all Jewels; Why should not my Litterati, who know and understand so
much more then all other men, deserve to be rather termed Demi Gods than Kings?
and said that there was a great difference between innobling the body by rich
vestments, and clothing the soul with precious Sciences. Then Apollo turned
toward Alviano, and said unto him, My always famous Sabellico, Bembo, Giovio,
Guicchardine, who have so by their pens illustrated thee, and the labors of my
Vertuosi, which have rendered thee immortal: When did they ever deserve to be by
thee rewarded by so inormous an injury, by such ingratitude? This so
exasperated discourse of Apollo was the more efficacious with the Visitors, in
that it was accompanied by the noise of all the Litterati that stood by, who
incredibly incenst against Alviano, cried out for Justice: After this, the
Court, by order from Apollo, voted for sentence, and propounded all sorts of
severe punishments for the prisoners penalty.

This was Alviano's case, when the State of Venice hearing of this so important
accident, and being very tender of Alviano's honor, came in all haste to the
Visitation, and prostrating her self before his Majesty's feet, with a generous
submission, said, That she would never rise from before them, till she had
obtained full and free pardon from his Majesty, for that her courageous
Captain: And that though she might plead a new Edict of his Majesty's, wherein
it was declared, That those who should have taken up arms against barbarous
Nations in defiance of Free Countries, should never lose his Majesty's favor
for any fault they should commit, though capital; yet she begged her dear
Alviano's pardon, who had lost so much blood for her, suffered so many
hardships, and run so many dangers, from his Majesty's mere grace, which all
the world knew belonged to him of justice. When the Litterati had heard th^se
affectionate entreaties, and had called to mind what gracious acceptions that
noble Queen had always given in her Court to all the Vertuosi that repaired
thither, their conceived anger was so appeased, as they cried out aloud, Orace,
Grace. Whereupon Apollo raising up that Noble Queen from the ground with his
hand, placed her first amongst the Illustrious Muses; and then told her, that
he could not deny any thing that she demanded, he willingly forgave Alviano for
point of punishment; but he would have him give fitting satisfaction to
Learning, and to his vertuosi whom he had so offended. The Alviano, before
almost half dead for fear (so much does the fear of shame more terrify a man
of honor, then certain danger of death) took courage, and said, That being so
low of stature as they all saw he was, he ought to be born withal, if his
cholar was soon stirred, which was that which had caused him to do amiss; but
that confessing his error, he declared to all the world, that he who was of
choice Learning, and good demeanor was as Noble as any one born of the house of
Austria, or of the bloud-Royal of France, although his Father were a Hangman.

The XCI. ADVERTISEMENT.
A Great Prince in discharge of a Vow that he had made, carries a rich Vessel
to the Temple; which the Priest receiving with show of great sadness; The
Prince desires the reason thereof, and receives satisfaction.

NOt many days since, a Prince of great quality, carried a very rich Vessel of
God to the Temple, in acknowledgment of a singular favor which he had received
from God. And because the Priest at the receiving of it, appeared to be much
afflicted, even to the shedding of tears, the Prince had the curiosity to know
the occasion of his sadness, and desired the Priest that he would tell it him.
To the which, that man who feared God, in downright weeping said, That he
could not choose but weep when he saw any gifts brought to the Temple, for that
it put him in mind of the ancient piety of men in former times, who endeavored
to enrich the Temples with what they had of most precious, and thought those
Vessels of Gold and precious Stones very necessary for Divine Worship, which
men now adays, unmindful of the true Religion, and more in love with their own
accommodation, then with the honor of God, appropriate to themselves even in
things of basest employments: And that the present condition of the true
Religion was in some States infinitely deplorable; for whereas formerly the
wealth of sacred things served to augment true piety, and to add to the
greatness and Majesty of Religion, they were now become T^umpets which
summoned Thieves to come from wicked caves, and rob the sacred Patrimony of God
and of his Saints. And that they were the more wicked thefts, in that their
authors were not ashamed to gild them over with the spacious name of Reformed
Religion. Nay the ignorance of some people is grown to such a height, as they
suffer themselves to be persuaded, that to deform the ancient Religion, so
constantly believed by their Fathers, Grandfathers, and great Grandfathers, by
gormandizing, thefts, and by all sort of libidinousness, is the next way to
reform it: As if to plunder a man, to rob and kill him, would be believed by
any man that is in his right wits, to be the next way to clothe him, to honor
him, and to raise him from death to life.

The XCII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo forbids the Shepherds of Arcadia to fatten Hogs any more; and being
earnestly entreated to revoke that his Decree, denies to do it.

BY Letters of the 18 of this present sent from Arcadia, certain news is come
of the Commandment given by Order from his Majesty, to Titerus, Co^idon, Mi^as,
Melibeus, and the rest of the Shepherds of that Country, that upon pain of
severe punishment, they must no longer dare to fatten Hogs. The people of those
parts were generally so troubled at this news, as this morning, Montanus and
Damon, two of the chiefest Shepherds of that Province came to Apollo in name of
all the Arcadian Shepherds; who humbly desired his Majesty not to deprive them
of their choicest cates, and of their hogs-flesh, wherewith they did so
plentifully feed their Families. To this Apollo answered, that he loved
Husbandmen and Shepherds better then Nobility, because men that bring in profit
and advantage, deserve to be better beloved by Princes, then such as are rather
prejudicial then of any use; but that having published his Edict for many
respects, and by mature delibration, he would by no means recall it; for that
Pagan avarice had learnt an execrable politic precept, from the useful custom
of Husbandmen, of fatning Hogs in the Autumn, that they might kill them at
Winter.

The XCIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
It being observed that Pero Trasea, in company of his son in Law Elvidius
Priseo, frequented the houses of the chiefest Poet esses of Parnassus; He is
severely reprehended for it by Apollo*

IT has been observed by such Vertuosi who delight to pry into other men's
actions, that Pero Trasea, accompanied by his son in Law, Elvidius Priseo, did
very much frequent the houses of the Lady Victoria Colonna, the Lady Veronica
Gambera, and other chief Lady-Poets of this Court: And although the
extraordinary good opinion which is generally held of Trasea's honesty, makes
it very hard to believed that so grave a Senator can commit a foul fact; yet
the great frequency of his visits, and the length of them, has occasioned such
scandal even amongst the best men, as the unseemliness thereof has come to
Apollo's knowledge: Who to quench the flames of murmur, sent for Tresea two
days ago to come to him, and charged him to acquaint him with the business
which he had with those Ladies? Trasea answered, That he went to those Ladies
only to exercise his charity in reading every day a Chapter in Boethius
Severinus, De Consolatione Philosophiae. Apollo seemed to be much offended with
this answer; wherefore he said, Trasea, if you will merit favor from God, and
love from men, by using your endeavors to consolate the afflicted, go comfort
those miserable wretches who lie perishing in Hospitals, and those unfortunate
people that are led to the Gallows: for to spend whole days like Sardenapalus,
amongst women, and hope to make men believe that you exercise there only your
spiritual parts, is a piece of hypocrisy able to move laughter in fools, and
to make those burst for anger, who know that men who go often to the Mill are
easily bemealed; and a man of your parts ought to know, that when a woman
conceives twins, if they be both male children, they are wrapped within one
Filme; and so likewise if they be both females: but if the one be male, and the
other female, wise Nature parts the female from the male, in a particular
Filme. So as Nature by not confiding in the cohabitation of a brother with a
sister, in so tender age, teaches all men, that people cannot be secure even
of such as you are: and he who relies upon his own strength, Trasea, in such
like occasions, is more rash then wise. And because these disorders ought to be
corrected, both for your reputation and mine; I straightly command you, That for
the future you forbear such dangerous doings; for the world is not so great a
blockhead (as I perceive you foolishly conceive) but that it very well knows
that visits made to handsome women by such as you are, after a second time grow
suspicious to those that know that all men are pleased with what is handsome,
stimulus carnis is a natural vice in all men; and that lust is no ways better
refrained, then by keeping far from fair creatures. Therefore let him that will
keep from committing error, avoid all occasion. And all your Philosophy cannot
make a man believe, but that every man made of flesh, is pleased with a savory
morsel: Wherefore I put you in mind, that one like you, who make such
profession of not staining your reputation with the spots of lasciviousness,
ought to shun all that allure thereunto: for it is not only a great piece of
folly; but an infinite rashness, worthy to be punished, to make gunpowder in a
Smiths shop, with hope to make people believe there is no danger in it.

The XCIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
A chief Senator of Poland, whilst he corrects another Senator, who is a friend
of his, is made aware that be himself is he who goes astray, and needs
amendment.

THere are at this time in the King of Polands Court, two Senators, who are
very great friends; the one of them professes openly to be ill satisfied with
his King, and therefore blames the manner of his Government, and even to the
point of malice, censures and cavils at all his actions. The other Senator was
much displeased with this his friends manner of proceeding, and went so
counter-bias to this his friend, as he did not only praise such actions of his
Kings as deserved blame, but to purchase his favor; stuck not to do unworthy
things himself. This man being much scandalized at his friends dangerous way of
proceeding, told him one day, that it was not only imprudency, but great
rashness, by thus carping at his Princes actions, to irritate his hatred from
whom he might expect all good; and that to serve in Court, merely to demerit
the Princes favor, was the greatest folly that could be committed. The other
Courtier answered him thus; Your so free reprehending me, clearly shows the
cordial affection you return for the great love I bear you; and I thank you for
it: But know that both we aim at the same end of acquiring the highest
preferments and dignities in Court, though we take contrary courses. You walk
the usual and beaten way, but I take a nearer cut, which is only known to the
most accomplished Courtiers; and I foretell you, that I am likely to compass my
ends sooner then you. In hereditary Monarchies, where the brother, children,
and others of the bloudroyal, do together with the State inherit usually the
friendships, enmities, and all the Interests of the deceased Prince, the way
you take, and which was first taught you by Tacitus (that the favor of them
that rule, must be forced from them even by indignities) is admirable good. But
in an elective State, as our Poland is, and particularly under an old King, who
may justly be thought not likely to live long; the way I take to seem
displeased at the Court proceedings, is the safer for such a one as I am. And
the advertisement given to men, to be either exceeding hot, or passing cold in
their actions; and that by all means they should shun lukewarmness, was worthy
of him that gave it. The first Court-preferments by which men proceed to the
highest dignities, you see they are already possessed by others: So as not able
to work my self into the Kings favor by fervency of zeal, I have betaken my
self to the other extremity of being all snow, by appearing mal-content. And
you, who for what I see, have not the fortune to burn in the favor of our
Prince, and do abhor to fly to the other extreme of freezing in discontent of
the present state, I prognosticate for certain that by being lukewarm, you will
part old and grayheaded from the Court, just in the same condition as you came
thither young and beardless: For in Elective Kingdoms the new comer in, being
usually an enemy, no less to the firiends, then to the actions of his
predecessor; those who were friends to the former Government, are abhorred, as
not confiding; those who are lukewarm, are shunned as foolish; and the
malcontents are diligently sought after, and allowed to come under the Cloth of
State, as deer friends, and secure instruments to perpetuate their greatness.

The XCV. ADVERTISEMENT.
A Controversy arising between the Governors of Pindo, and of Libetro, in
point of Jurisdiction: Apollo punishes them both.

SOme great fault being committed in the City of Libetro, the Governor of the
place pursues the Delinquents with his whole rout of Sergeants and Catchpools,
and overtakes them in the Territory of Pindo: He besieges them in a
Countreymans house, which he soon begirts with his men, and threatnes to burn
it, if they would not render themselves. This mean while the Governor of Pindo
hearing of this uprore, comes to that place to defend his Jurisdiction; and
brings along many armed men with him: And finds that the besieged had already
delivered themselves up into the Governor of Libetro's hands, who led them to
be imprisoned in his own Country. The Governor of Pindo complains bitterly of
the injury done to him in his Jurisdiction, and demands that the prisoners be
again assigned over unto him; which he promises to restore within a few days;
when by the former assignation, he might be somewhat repaired in his
reputation. But the Governor of Libetro did not only deny to do so, but made
the prisoners march the faster into his own Territories. He of Pindus, provoked
by so great a scorn, commanded his men to fall on, and by force to bring back
the prisoners, who being valiantly defended by those of Libetro, so foul and
bloody a scuffle insued, as many were wounded. The news hereof was soon brought
to Apollo, who being highly distasted with both those his Officers, commanded
the Provost-Marshal of Campagnia, Alvigi, Pulci, to bring them bound before
him, in a shameful manner which was soon done. His Majesty with great patience
first heard the reasons alleged by both those his Officers; and then judging
the Governor of Libetro to be in the wrong, for having rashly disturbed another
man's Jurisdiction, he deprived him of his Government, and declared him
incapable of ever having any employment within his Jurisdiction; and as for the
Governor of Pindo, whom he acknowledged to have reason on his side, he
condemned him to the Galleys for ten years; laying so heavy a sentence upon
him, thereby to teach him, and all other Officers, that those who serve under
the same Prince, must defend their right of Jurisdiction, only with their pen,
and reserve their arms till they should be disturbed by Forreiners. The
Governor of Pindo bewailed his misfortune bitterly, being sorry, that having so
fair an occasion to deserve well at his Masters hands, by showing his own
modesty upon this occasion, and the others impertinency, he had ignorantly
turned another rashness into his own fault. A sad thing certainly, and worthy
to be considered by all Princes Officers, as that which shows it is a great
error to refrain impertinences by insolences, and to amend a fault by a
trespass:

The XCVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo sentenceth Hanibal Caro to pay his forfeited security, for the wounds
which he gave Castelvetro.

AFter the disimprisonment of the Commendador Hanibal Caro, who, as you have
heard, was pardoned by Apollo, when he visited the prisons, Bossio, the
Atorny-general, pretending that his Maj. had only pardoned the punishment, for
having wounded Castelvetro, but not the moneys which he by breach of security
had forfeited, De non offendendo, cited the Fernesi, who were his sureties to
pay the 3000 crowns, which was the covenanted forfeiture. Caro, who conceived
he had received full and plenary pardon for the one fault, as well as for the
other, put his Maj. in mind thereof yesterday, and complained of the trouble
given him by the Atorny-general. Apollo answered, that he intended only to
pardon the excess committed in wounding, not the moneys covenanted for for
security; and gave order that without further reply, the forfeiture should be
paid to Castelvetro. The Atorney-general, when he heard his Maj. Order, hasted
to Apollo, and told him, that the forfeiture being made payable to the
Exchequer, it ought not to be paid to Castelvetro. This Custom appeared so new
to Apollo, as he said in anger to Bossio, Shall Castelvetro be prejudiced by
being wounded, and shall the advantage of the moneys redound to me? Is there
such a Custom as this introduced in Parnassus, the Laws whereof I intend should
serve for a rule of the best government to all other places? Bossio told
Apollo, that this was the custom, not only of all the Tribunals of Italy, but
of the most places of Europe. Apollo growing still more incenst against Bossio,
said, That the Prince who would maintain peace amongst his people, ought rather
to forbid faults upon pain of severe punishments, then foment them with easy
chastisements, and make base merchandise of man's blood. And that in carnal
pleasures, in pleasing the pallat, in delights of hunting, and for the
enjoyment of other worldly contents, since men were too naturally given to
evil, and were therein p^odigal beyond their power, who did not perceive that
men were invited to revenge offenses, by introducing so scandalous a custom,
revenge being to man's depraved genius, the greatest contentment and
satisfaction that can be taken: and therefore bad him go and see that Caro made
payment of the 3000 crowns which were forfeited, not into the Exchequer, but to
Castelvetro's self; for it was reason that he should receive the advantage of
the moneys, who had been prejudiced by wounds. What his Majesty had commanded,
was forthwith put in execution: And because Caro made resistance, not only
because he would not do the Office himself, but that he showed a great deal of
passion even whilst he told out the money, every one clearly perceived that his
Majesty had very discreetly foreseen, that the vexation to do a man's enemy
good, did much allay revenge, even in those that were most given to passion.

The XCVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Dante Aligieri being assaulted by night in his Country House, and ill used by
some disguised Vertuosi; is relieved by the great French Ronsard.

Whilst famous Dante Allegieri was the other day in a Country House of his,
which he had built in a very solitary place to exercise his Poetry in, some
Litterati got secretly into his house, where they did not only take him
prisoner, but holding a dagger at his throat, and harquebuses at his sides,
they threatened to kill him, unless he would tell them the true Title of his
Poem, whether he called it Comedy, Tragi-Comedy, or Heroic Poem: And Dante
answering them, that they used him not like one of his quality, and that if
they would ask him the question in Parnassus, he would satisfy them: The
Litterati, that they might have their desire immediately, beat and buffeted
him; and not being able by these insolences to compass their intents, they
grew so outrageous, as taking the rope which hung upon the bucket by the well
side, they fastened it to a beam of the house, and went about to hang Dante
therewith; who cried out, Help, help, murder, murder; and so great was the
noise he made, as it was heard by Ronsard the Prince of French Poets, who had a
Country House not far from that of Dante: This generous Frenchman took up his
sword immediately, and ran toward the noise; whereupon the Litterati fearing
lest some others might be with Ronsard, ran away; but not so soon but that the
Frenchman both saw and knew them. Dante was set at liberty, clothed, and
brought to Parnassus by Ronsard; where the news of so foul a riot being heard,
Apollo was very much grieved at it; and his honor pressing him to know the
Delinquents, he first examined Dante, who told him all that had past, and said
he knew not who they were that had dealt so inhumanly with him; but that it
might be that Ronsard, who had not only seen them, but had severely reprehended
them for that their insolency, might peradventure know them. Ronsard was
forthwith sent for, who denied not only that he knew any of them, but said he
had not seen them. The Judges, by reason of this contrariety between what Dante
had said, and Ronsards Deposition, feared that the Frenchman, thinking it a
base thing to accuse any man, would not discover the Delinquents. When Apollo
heard of this, he was very angry with Ronsard, and commanded to give him the
Rack: Wherefore Ronsard was quickly secured, who persisting in his denial, the
Judges gave order that he should be put to the rack, as one who was likely to
know somewhat. Ronsard being stripped, bound, and bidden to speak the truth, was
raised from the ground. The generous Frenchman, instead of complaining, as is
usual in such cases, desired the Judges that they would not let him down all
that day, affirming that he held it too inestimable a content, rather to suffer
so, then to offend any one. The Judges finding by this his constancy, that they
should do no good by the rope, caused Ronsard to be let down, and began to
think upon some other torment; and of as many as were propounded, the Judges
liked none better then that which Perillo's devilish wit found out; who said,
that a better way to torment a Frenchman, then either ropes or fire, was to set
him without either spur or switch, upon a slow dull horse: and so they did. It
was a miraculous thing to see, that Ronsard was no sooner set on horseback, but
belabouring him with his legs, wrying his body twenty several ways, and
shaking the bridle to make the horse go fast, he grew to such impatiency, and
was surprised with such an agony of mind, as being quite out of breath, he
cried to the Sergeants that were by his side, Take me down, friends, for I am
dead; take me down quickly, and I will tell all; and let them suffer the
punishment that have done the fault: Those you enquire after, were, Monsignor
Carrieri of Padua, Iacapo Mazzoni of Cesena, and another whom I know not; but
you may know from the other two that I have named.

The XCIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
All the Princes of the world beseech Apollo that he will insert into their
people the love of their Country.

THe Ambossador from all the Princes of the Universe, who came long since to
Parnassus, had on Thursday long audience from his Majesty, and the common
report is, That in the name of all his Princes, he made a sore complaint, that
their people committed every day such shameful excesses, so inormous actions,
as that they had made the art of Reigning much more difficult then it was: That
they were so far advanced in their disorders, as a Prince could not now give a
City, or any strong Hold in custody to a Soldier, without running evident
danger of being in a short time treacherously assassinated; and that they could
not be so circumspect nor wary in choosing a Captain General, or other Officer
of War, but that they were soon brought into the sad condition of being forced
to fear their servant friend, then their Prince enemy; and that the peoples
iniquity was no less, then the Commanders perfidiousness: For their people were
so shamefully given over to a vicious curiosity, as they began in a short time
to hate any Prince, how good soever; showing the same desire and liking to
change Princes, as they had to change meat at their tables: That hence it
arose, that Princes in their greatest needs were not only not assisted by their
people, and defended by them with that affection and charity as they were bound
to do; but it was every day seen how they were shamefully betrayed by them, and
for a little money sold to their enemies. And that the Princes had at last
learnt, that for certain all these evils were occasioned through the little
love which people bore unto their Countries; and that Rome, the Queen of the
World, and Mother of Empire, could succesfully extend the Confines of her
Dominion from the East to the West, only by means of the cordial love which her
Citizens bore her: That whereas amongst them, banishment was as terrible as
death, many modern Princes, that they may not be without Subjects, nor have
their Countries unpeopled, were forced to forbid men the forgoing of their
Country, upon pain of forfeiting their Estates. That therefore all the Princes
of the world did jointly signify unto his Maj. that all the remedies they
could use against this so grievous evil, had proved invalid, and that therefore
they humbly entreated him that he would be pleased to insert into the hearts of
subjects, that fervent charity, and that immence love unto their Countries, as
was seen to be in the Subjects of Commonwealths, and wherein doubtlesly the
chief greatness, and richest treasure lay, of whosoever reigned. Apollo
answered the Ambassador, That Princes might make their Subjects love their
Countries much better then he could by good Government, and equal Justice, and
by liberality, and procuring them perpetual abundance: For that all men, who by
natural instinct, bore an excessive love to whatsoever Country they were born
in, were easily induced not to love it, when it was made odious to them by
incommodious living: For men would rather be benumn'd with cold, then stand by
a fire, which filling the house with smoke, made their eyes water.

The XCVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo wakes a general hunting of Pismires and Tortoises, as being both of
them Beasts of evil example to mankind.

YEsterday morning Zenofon, Apollos Master-Hunt, gave order to Acteon, Adonis,
and to the other chiefest hunters of this State, that they should be ready with
their dogs the next day, for that his Majesty was resolved to make then a
general hunting; and every one thinking that Apollo, according to his custom,
would have gone to the Mountain Ida, or to the Hill of Helicon, w^ere were great
store of Gotes, Stags, Wild Bores, and other wild beasts; his Majesty, as he
came forth of the Gate, declared the intended Chase to be against Pismires and
Tortoises; which he said he intended to rout out of the earth, for the great
benifit of mankind.

Then many of the Vertuosi, desirous to know why his Majesty had conceived such
anger against those animals, told him, that they thought the Tortoise was not
only the emblem of mature delay, but the very type of those poor Vertuosi, who
carried the houses of their patrimony, and the whole substance of Learning
about with them; and that Pismires, which taught men to labor in the summer of
their youth, to lay up food for the winter of their age, ought rather be
assisted then pursued by his Majesty, as an admirable example of Providence. To
these Apollo answered, That what they had said, was true; but that all men
being more inclined to vice then to virtue, had learnt most scandalous examples
from those animals', and did not imitate them in their good things: for some
passionately given to avarice, and being shamefully inslayed to their own
Interests, had learnt the wicked custom of keeping continually with their head,
feet, hands, and with all their members, hid within the husk of their interest,
and to carry about them the houses of their own commodities, with so much
sordidness and obstinacy never to come out of them, as that they had made the
sole interest of peculiar utility their Idol, only from the Tortoise: Whence it
happened that such as these, when they were made use of to take upon them the
care of widows and orphans, they presently turned them to their own advantage;
and that the same men, if they were employed by Princes in public affairs, the
very first day of their Magistracy they began to draw the water to their own
Mill. And that as for the Pismires, many had learnt from them the unhappy
example of toyling and moyling both day and night, not ever taking so much as
one hour of lawful recreation, to the end that they may heap up by all, yea
though unlawful means, the grain of that wealth, which was afterward marred by
the rain of Gods anger, or stolen away by mice, by thieves, Sergeants, Judges,
Atorneys, who always lie in wait for the wealth of these avaritious wretches,
who like Pismires, not caring (though they abound in all things) to be lean and
ill-favored, suffering like dogs in their life and reputation, did so drown
themselves in their sordid scraping, as they cared not though they were
persecuted, ill treated, and troad upon by all conditions of men, even as
Pismires were. And that God having placed that virtuous providence which is
void of all defect, in the miraculous Bees, men should look upon those, and
imitate them, who with the love of all men, and without doing any the least
harm, build their houses full of honey taken from flowers; whereas with the
general hatred of all men, Pismires stole grain from others grainaries; and
that the Bees made both honey and wax, not only for their own accommodation,
but for the general good of mankind: A most precious instruction; that those
exercises, and those employments are holiest and most blessed by God, which have
the public benefit joined to their own advantage; whereas Pismires accumulated
riches stolen from others, only for their own use.

The C. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo refuses to receive a Censure presented him by a Litterato, which was
made upon the Poem of an Italian Vertuoso.

APollo had already ended the toilsom course of day, when descending in his
radient Chariot to the West, a Vertuoso, whose name Menante does wisely
conceal, for fear of drawing some mischief upon himself, came before Apollo,
and presented his Majesty with a very severe censure which he had made upon
the Poem of an Italian Vertuoso. Apollo did openly appear to be so little
satisfied with that present, as manifest signs of anger were seen in him: in
so much as turning to Petrach who was by him, he said that it was great folly
in men who not considering how they were addicted to whom they presented any
thing, would offer spectacles to those that are blind, a lute to him that is
deaf, or wine to an abstenious man. His Majesty then turned toward the
Litterato, who would have presented him with the Book, and told him, that the
good of Melloans was given to such as he was, and the outside to hogs; that
therefore he should carry such trash as those in a cart to the common-shore, or
throw them into the river, and that he should present him with what of good and
virtuous he had found in that Work; which he would not only very willingly
read, but be beholding to him for it. The unlucky fellow answered, That he had
only minded the errors of the Poem, not taking notice of such things in it as
deserved praise. Whereat Apollo was so incenst, as though at that time (as it
falls out continually in his setting) the beams of his face were very much
sweetened and allaid; yet through anger his countenance grew as fiery as if it
had been noonday, and answered that unlucky wretch thus; It grieves my very
heart to have met with one of those malicious fools, who labor by their pens
to purchase that shame, which wise men so much abhor: And though your shameful
demeanor deserves a much greater penance, I will at this time be content with
this which I now give you: Pick out with your hands, without the help of a sive
or fan, all the darnel and chaf which you shall find in a bushel of corn, which
I will presently cause to be given you by my Factor General Columella, and
bring it to us, we will tell you what you shall do with it. The bushel of corn
was forthwith delivered out unto him by Columella, which was so full of darnel
and chaf, as he spent much time in cleansing it, and presented it to his
Majesty in a great handbasket. Apollo bad him carry the darnel to the Market
and sell it, and he would freely give him all the money he could make of it.
The silly soul said he did not only despair to find any customer for that
despicable commodity, but that to appear in the Market with a basket full of
such vile stuff, would make him be laughed at. Apollo bad him then go give the
darnel to somebody, and thereby purchase a new friend; the wretch replied, he
durst not present so poor a thing to any man, which if he should do, he should
be but derided. Then Apollo's fury being very much over, he said, if the refuse
cul'd from such things as were good, were not fitting merchandise for wise men,
and that they were neither worth selling nor giving, he was convinced out of
his own mouth that he had been ill advised when he undertook the business of
leaving the roses which he found in the Poem by him censured, to make an
unuseful and shameful collection of the thorns or prickles: And that in the
reading of other men's labors, the wary Vertuosi imitated the Be, which knew
how to gather honey even from bitter flowers. And that there being no sublunary
thing which was not kneaded with some imperfections; some bran would be found
in the Works of Homer, Virgil, Livy, Tacitus, and Hyppocrates, who were the
wonders of writing, if a man would be curious in sifting them; but that he was
satisfied if the flower of his Vertuoso's Composures were current merchandise:
That the defects of good Authors were concealed by the juditious and friendly
readers, and published only by such as are malicious. And that to make
profession of taking out the worst things only out of other men's writings, was
the office of base beetles which spent their lives with much gusto amidst the
filth of excrements: a thing very far from the practice of those honored
Litterati who feed advantagiously upon good things. And that since his beloved
Poets thought Time the most precious Jewel which the East produced, he could
not well see how he could be so very a fool as to believe that they would cast
away their hours in perusing his malicious detractions, which they might
advantagiously spend in reading the Works of Pindarus, Sophocles, Ovid, and of
his beloved Heracli. This unfortunate Censurer was no sooner parted full of
confusion from Apollo, when he against whom the Censure was made came hastily
in, earnestly desiring permission that he might reply by way of Apology to his
malevolent friend. Apollo smiled, and told him, that he appeared as little
wise, who would by his Apology put a value upon other men's prating, as
Censurers appeared malicious: That it was the greatest part of gross ignorance,
to lend an ear to the backbiting babbling of those whisperers, who not having
sufficient parts to publish their own talents, foolishly believe they may win
credit by carping at others; and that the Travailer who being annoi'd with the
noise of Grasshoppers in the midst of scorching July, should alight from his
horse to kill them all, were a very fool; whereas he were wise, who though he
had a pair of good ears, would seem to be deaf, pass on his way, and let them
sing and burst.

The end of the first Century.
THE SECOND CENTURY.
The I. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Province of Phosides, does by her Ambassadors complain to Apollo, that his
Majesty's Officers do not any whit observe their privileges; and are not only
not listened to in what they do say, but receive a harsh answer.

THe well peopled Province of Phosides, who rebelled some years ago against
the ignorant, and voluntarily submitted themselves to be governed by Apollo;
from whom they obtained such ample privileges, as those of Phosides might be
said to live in a sort of liberty, has now sent her Ambassadors to this Court,
to complain of his Majesty's Officers, who do no vvays observe the privileges
granted them, desiring that they may be better observed. Apollo not being well
pleased with this business, referred it to the Council of State, from whom
two days ago the Ambassadors received their final answer, That the Lords of
the Council did very much vvonder, and were scandalized, that the people of
Phosides should understand the affairs of the World so little, as not to know
that Privileges, Exemptions and Immunities given to people newly purchased,
were like those cherries which were given to little children to quiet them
when they cry; which when they were quieted, were taken from them. The
Prime Ambassador stoutly replied, that if it were the custom of Pernassus so
foully to abuse simple people, Phosides would quickly cry again that she might
be pacified with cherries of new privileges. To him Francis Guichardin, Lord
President of the Council ansvvered, That they should do well first to consider
their present condition, for they should find that they had suffered themselves
to be brought to such a point of slavery by the Citadels and strong Holds,
which in time of peace they had permitted to be built amongst them; as if they
returned to complain and cry, they might be quieted by scourges, without any
danger to Apollo's affairs.

The II. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo makes use of the unfortunate Count St. Paul, to frighten the Nobility
in Kingdoms from rebelling against their natural Lords, at the pressure of
Foreign Princes.

APPOLLO much to his displeasure has learnt, how that some Princes that they
may vanquish their enemies, do not use open force (as was the custom of ancient
Hero's) with armed men in the field, but make use of fraud and cozenage;
whereat they are so good, as they have been thereby able happily to atchieve
very great enterprises: for the first arms that these draw against their
enemies, is shamefully to corrupt the Loyalty of other men's subjects, and to
incite the Nobles to rebel. Apollo to remedy so great disorders, gave command
to Iovanni Francisco Lottoni, Register of his Majesty's Moral Precepts, that
the miserable Count S. Paul, for a public example of very great misfortune,
should be carried in an open chair by beggars, and set before the Porch of the
Delphick Temple: This great Prince, with his hands without fingers, and so
shamefully torn, as they seem to be mangled by dogs, is showed by Lottoni to
the people, who in great numbers pass in and out through that Temple, to whom
he cries aloud, Faithful Vertuosi, lovers of learning, and holy moral records,
take example by the calamity of this so miserable Prince, who has lost the use
of his hands, which God preserve still free to you; and learn at the cost of
others, what it imports to be always pulling of Crabs out of their holes with
your own hands, for the advantage of other men.

The III. ADVERTISEMENT.
Great Euclid, for having distated some powerful men, is cruelly beaten by
their Bravoes.

THe freshest news from Libetro brought by the ordinarry post from Ephesus,
bears date the fourteenth of this present month; and they tell us, that on the
sixth of the same, about noon, Euclide, that Prince of the Mathematics, was
set upon by some under the Uranian Porch, who beat him so cruelly with sand
bags, as they left him for dead. Apollo was mightily disturbed at this novelty;
and the rather, for that though Euclide was better beloved, and more made of by
the greatest Princes of this State, then any other Litterato, yet this so great
excess appaared to be made by the command of some powerful personages; for
Euclide was first seized on by two of these Swash-backlers, and held fast,
whilst other two beat him, who were seen to be backed by many armed men. There
are many occasions alleged for this so great resentment; but the most
generally received opinion is, that some potent subjects of this State are very
much ill satisfied with Euclid, for the Mathematical Instrument which he some
few days before published in the Schools, wherein was conclusively showed, that
all the lines of the thoughts, and actions both of Princes and private men,
meet in this center, how to take money handsomely from another man's purse, and
put it into ones own.

The IV. ADVERTISEMENT.
In a Duel which happened between an Italian Poet, and a Vertuoso of Spain, the
Spaniard being wounded to death, did so gallant an action before he expired, as
Apollo gave order that he should be solomnly buried at the public charge.

A Great dispute arose some few days ago between a Spanish Vertuoso, and an
Italian Poet touching a certain Lady, who challenging each other, met in
Bellona's Forum, and the business being to be disputed without defensive
weapons, proved vrey cruel. For being armed only with two short and sharp
Terzetti, at the first encounter they grapled, and the Spaniard having received
two mortal wounds, fell to the ground, and said these words to a friend of his
who run in to help him, Hermano azeme plazer d'enterarme, sin che ninguna mi
desnude, Do me the courtesy friend, to bury me before I be stripped naked. Which
being said, his wounds bled so much as he dyed. The de sire which this Spaniard
made to his friend, that he might not be stripped, being noised abroad in
Parnassus, made all men (as it commonly falls out in things forbidden) the more
desirous to see him naked; especially since it was made by one of that wise
Nation, which does not only never speak by chance, but never suffers a word to
escape their mouths which carries not mystery and great sense with it. And
Apollo's self had the curiosity to know why that Litterato at the very point of
death, did so earnestly desire not to be stripped naked. So as commanding him to
be stripped, it was found that he who went so sprucely dressed, and had a ruff
about his neck so curiously wrought as it was more worth then all his other
clothes, had never a shirt on; which caused much laughter throughout all
Parnassus; only Apollo was much astonished at this novelty, and did mightily
exaggerate the gallantry of this Litterato, who in the very agony of death was
so sensible of his honor, as he closed his eyes with zeal to his reputation.
For which excessive worth, which was a clear evidence of an extraordinary
great mind; he commanded that he should be solemnly buried at the public
charge, con la pompa censoria: the which was done with so great a concourse of
the Litterati of all Nations, as more were never seen to be at any Roman
triumph. Afterward Flavius Quintillian; in a Funeral Oration which he made in
praise of this Vertuoso, did much exaggerate the happiness of the powerful
Monarchy of Spain, whose greatness lay not (as he said) in the gold and silver
shops of Peru, of Nova Spagna, Rio della plata, and in the Castiglia dell'oro;
nor yet in the numberless number of Kingdoms which she was master of; but only
in the honorable condition of her Nation. Since it being clearly seen that this
Spanish Vertuoso, in that his great calamity, endeavored first not to suffer
in his reputation, before he took order to have his wounds cured, it was an
evident proof, that it was peculiar to the honorable Spanish Nation to prefer
honor before life; and that the Spaniards were more careful not to commit any
unworthy act, then they were of life. And Quintillian concluded his Oration
with a cruel invective against Philosophers, who will not admit that two
contraries can be found in one and the same subject, when great appearance and
infinite substance, vain glory and sollidness, were visibly seen to reign, even
in their greatest extremes amongst Spaniards.

The V. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo having used great diligence to come by any of the Idols of Princes,
proceeds with severity against one, who fell into the Judges Power.

APOLLO, much to his displeasure, perceiving the great disorders, occasioned
not only in great Empires, but also in little States, by the blindness of
those Princes who assubject themselves to some one of their servants: Since
neither his Majesty's exhortations, nor the sad calamities which many Princes
have undergone by so great folly, has been able to make them avoid the hard
destiny of being violently hurried into Hell by these inconveniences: his
Majesty, not to abandon his protection of the Governors of the world, resolved
some months since, to proceed with severity against such servants; who by
their prodigious ambition, and devilish cunning, go about to command their
masters; insomuch, as some years ago, he laid great fines upon such, and
promised great rewards to any who would discover them to his Judges. And about
a fortnight since, the Magistracy was told of one of these. who being
afterward taken, had the rack given him; whereupon he confessed all the wicked
tricks which he had used, not only to enslave, but even to make his master
adore him. When Apollo saw the process made against this wicked one, he was
much troubled to find that those very Princes who are jealous of their own
children, either through their own blockishness, or by the fraud of others, can
bring themselves to the shameful infamy of becoming a slave to one of their
ignoble servants; and he thought it very strange, that a Son or Nephew of a
Prince, who that he might rule his Father, or domineer over his Uncle, had
shown himself to be infinitely ambitious, and to thirst after Government, and
who at last had compast his desires, could then so metamorphose himself, as to
relinquish that power which he by so many practices had gotten over a Superior,
to one who was so far beneath him, a great wonder certainly, and which man's
wit can give as little reason for, as for the hidden virtue of the Lodestone.
Apollo, to the end that Princes might learn to keep themselves from committing
such indignities, by seeing what punishment was inflicted upon this
Court-favorite, caused all the Princes that are resident in this Court, to meet
two days ago in the great Hall of Audience, in whose presence, and to their
greater confusion, he caused Atorney Bossio to read aloud the shameful process
made against this wicked one; wherein when he was asked what tricks he had
used to get the command over his Master? made answer, That from the very first
day that he came to Court, he used all possible diligence to observe his
Princes genius, and finding that he was mightily given to lasciviousness, he
used all his Rhetoric to praise a vice so misbecoming a King, making it appear
to be an egregious virtue, and then all his industry to be employed by him
therein; which when he had obtained, he studied diligently how to fit him
with those who mig ht satisfy his lust. That afterward under diverse
pretenses, as that they were either vicious, or enemies to the Prince, he had
by degrees removed all the Princes honest servants from the Court, who he
knevv might have reduced him to have lived virtuously, and that he had put
Confidents of his own in their places, who were likewise given to carnallity,
and to all other sorts of vice, by whose means he had endeavored that his
Master should quite lose some signal endowments which he had by nature, and
which he had received by his former good education. That then under pretense
that they were unfaithful, he had so wrought it, as all the old State-Ministers
were turned out, whose just sorrows for their Prince his loose life, he had
made the Prince believe were but seditious backbitings, and so had made their
places be conferred upon men void of counsel or wisdom, and who cared not for
their Princes interest; for he only desired confidence in them, and that they
would stick close to him: and that he had so surrounded his Master with such as
these, as it was impossible for him to hear truth from any one that was
faithful to the common good, which truth ought always to be joined to a Prince,
as is his shadow to his body. That then, to the end that he himself might alone
govern the State, he had brought his Prince to be so in love with idleness, as
taking delight in nothing but pleasant Gardens, Conntrey-houses, and hunting,
he hated to hear of business, or of any thing that concerned his State. That
moreover, he had brought him to believe, that his having made him fall out with
his own son, and the Princes of the blood, proceeded from his great zeal unto
his service, and his love to the public good of his people; and that he had
so besotted him by his cunning tricks, as the unfortunate Prince called that
the vigilance of a faithful servant, an ease to his labors, charity toward
the public affairs, which was known by the veriest fools of his State to be
Tyranie, and as such abhord: And had made him believe, that his idleness,
slothfulness and negligence was honorable repose. That besides all this, to
the end that the Prince might never awake out of so shameful a sleep, and
opening his eyes, might be aware of his own simplicity, and of other men's
wicked ambition, he had filled his house with flatterers, who by their infamous
persuasions, cried up his folly for great worth; the peoples universal hatred,
for immeasurable love; public fault finding, for exagerated praise;
confusion, for excellent Government; the tyrany of a wicked personage, for
excellent service; termed extortions, justice; prodigallity, liberallity; his
slothfulness and baseness in having quite given over the Government of his
State, honorable labor, and diligent rule. All the Princes who heard the
wickednesses confessed by this perfidious man, were so astonished at the hearing
thereof, as they said, it was charity to hang him; and that therefore Perilous
should be desired to invent some new torment whereby this monster of nature
might be by piecemeal torn in pieces, and made to dye a lingering death; to the
end that no man might ever commit such wickedness hereafter. And the Princes
were so moved with the foulness of this process, as they earnestly desired his
Majesty to use extraordinary rigor to such who should suffer themselves to be
so shamefully treated by their fraudilent servants. And because Apollo being so
touched at the very soul, with the virtuous desire made unto him by these
Princes, let fall some tears: the foolisher sort of people believed that it was
occasioned through his great joy to see the Princes so much detest that vice,
which he desired they might shun: but the wiser sort of Vertuosi who were there
present, knew very well, that Apollo bewailed the blindness of Princes, who are
so drunk, as hating their own errors in others, did earnestly desire that those
vices should be punished with extraordinary severity, in which the most of
them, without being aware of it, were dipped even up to the eyes. So pernicious
is it in Princes to idolatrize Minnions, as knowing it, and blaming it in their
companions, they are not aware of it in themselves, but do highly commend it;
and they who boast themselves to be the only Aristarchi of the world, are
those who fall into this shameful error.

The VI. ADVERTISEMENT.
All the Monarchies of the world affrighted at the overgreat power and
successful proceedings of the German Commonwealths, consult in a general Diet
how to keep themselves from being in time oppressed by them.

THe general Diet which all the Monarchies of the World intimated four month
ago, to be held at Pindo the 15 of the last month, and which by excluding all
the Commonwealths of Europe, occasioned great jealousies in them, lest a
general league might be concluded against all free Countries. Being at last
dissolved, on the 20 of the present month, and the Princes being already
returned to their own States, it is known for certain, that it was called for
no other end, but against the infinite number of Commonwealths which have of
late been instituted amongst the Switzers, Grisouns, Bearnois, and other people
of Germany; particularly against those which with so much scandal to Monarchy,
begin to rise between the Hollanders and Zealanders in the Low Countries. When
all the Monarchies of the World, according to their custom were set down in a
great Hall; it is said their Lord Chancellor spoke thus:

Most high and mighty Monarchs, and Rulers of mankind, it may clearly be seen,
by the sad and dangerous condition which you are in, that there is nothing
under the Sun which is perpetual, nor which does not threaten present ruin.
Since Monarchy her self, which by all understanding Polititions has always
been held for the sovereign Queen of all Policy, has got so great a rent and
cleft in her Fabric, as it is not only evidently seen that she is not of that
Eternal Foundation which those who understand State affairs, have continually
asserted her to be, but seems to be near ruin. Monarchies from the very
beginning of the World to this present day have governed so happily, and won
such reputation, as of all sorts of Governments, they have been chiefly
praised, and have always had the victory over Commonwealths, their enemies. And
though it was thought that the immence Roman Liberty, by having destroyed so
many famous Monarchies, would have put the whole World at Liberty, yet at last
(though after a long time) she her self turned into a Principality, which is
the certain end, and inevitable death of all Commonwealths. And though the
prime wits of the world have labored sufficiently to institute long lived
Commonwealths, against the eternity of Monarchy, yet could they never compass
their intent. Olegarchies being known to be the insufferable Tyrany of a few,
have been soon turned to Principalities; and the Institutors of Democracy could
never find out a good way how to curb the people, so as it might have the chief
Authority to command, but after bloody seditions has precipitated into cruel
slavery, and has nursed up a Serpent in her bosom; some ambit^ous Citizen, who
by the certain way of the universal affection of ignorant people has known how
to get the chief Lordship over the free Country. Moreover, we have often seen
popular Government prove so hateful to the Nobility, as first the Romans, after
the death of Caesar; and then the Florentines when Alexander Duke of Medecis
was slain, chose rather to live under new Princes, then return to the cruel
servitude of the Plebeians, who are always seditious. And the very
Aristocratical Governments, which of all others has cost so much sweat, have
at last ended in Monarchies; for the founders of such Republics, could never
perfectly compass those two important qualities, which make Aristocracy
eternal; of maintaining such an equality amongst the Nobility, but that there
would arise an odious disproportion of honors and riches amongst them, the
fruitful mothers of Tyrany; and of giving such satisfaction to signal subjects,
to the haughty minds of Citizens excluded from public Government, so as they
may be content to live servants in that Country, which has the name of being
Free. And those who have boasted to make mixed Commonwealths eternal, have been
likewise mightily deceived; for as in humane bodies, the four elements whereof
they are composed, after an agreement of long health, do at last alter, and
that which proves most predominant kills the man; so the mixture of Monarchy,
Aristocracy and Democracy in a Commonwealth, one of the three humors getting at
length the upper hand, she must needs in length of time alter; which alteration
changing the form of Government, at last bereaves Liberty of her life, as we
may have seen a thousand examples in former times; for all that learned men
have set down in writing, and proved by good grounds of reason, does not prove
true in practice; it being clearly seen, that Licurgus, Solon, and other
Legislators for living free, who have thought to tame the unvanquishable
spirits of men by the excellent provision of holy institutions, and to curb the
malice of the ambitious by severe punishments, have been more then much abused
in their opinions. But now (nor can I speak it without great terror and grief
of heart) we plainly see with our own eyes, that the Germans, being excellent
Artificers, no less of Commonwealths, then of Clocks and Watches, have at last
invented those eternal Liberties, which for so many ages the wisdom of ancient
Philosophers have in vain sought for, and from whence Monarchies have great
reason to apprehend their death and utter extirpation. Never was there a more
golden sentence said (most glorious Monarchs) then that, That every least
despised sparkle is apt to occasion great combustions. For who would ever have
believed that that little spark of of liberty which first arose amongst the
Switzers, would have been able to kindle a fire, which should afterward dilate
it self so far in Germany, as the World now sees and wonders at? And what man
how wise soever, could have foretold, that in so short a time it would have
caused the combustion of so many Cities and warlike Nations; which to the great
shame and infinite danger of Monarchy, have vindicated their liberty? Certainly
it is a thing almost miraculous to believe, that the little liberty which began
to have a being amongst the Switzers, a poor people, and husbandmen of a very
barren soil, and which was so much despised by you, should afterward be able
to infect the most warlike Nations of Germany with the same disease; and which
is yet the greatest miracle, who could ever have foreseen, that these
Commonwealths should in so short a time win such credit with all Potentates, as
well in civil affairs, as for matter of Arms, as that they should not only be
held the supreme Umpires of peace and war in Europe, but the very greatest
Terror of the chiefest Princes of the World. The Commonwealths of Germany (most
illustrious Princes) are Trumpets which should awaken you from the too supine
sleep wherein you have so long lain. Know your evils, look upon your dangers,
which cry aloud for speedy remedy. Since in the German Commonwealths you see
not only Aristocracy grounded, with so wise laws, as they promise long life,
but that which all men thought impossible, quiet and peaceful Democracy. The
Commonwealth of Rome, which with an unparalleled ambition proposed unto her self
as her ultimate end, the absolute Dominion of the World; that she might arive
at so immense an tent, was forced to be continually in arms, and to put weapons
into her Citizens hands, who by continual command of Armies, and by the long
Government of large Provinces, filled their private houses with treasures
befitting any King, but very disproportionable for Senators of well regulated
Republiques; and by the too great authority which was unwisely and fatally
given them by the Senate, of bestowing even whole Kingdoms on whom they best
liked, they swole so big with the wind of ambition, as that equality of
Authority, which is the soul of free Countries, was wholly disordered in the
Roman Nobility. By reason of these disorders it was, that first the Silli and
Marii arose in Rome, and then the fatal Pompeys and Caesar's, who after long and
bloody civil wars, slew that so famous Liberty. And for the last calamity of
Monarchy, it cannot be hoped that this wide gate should ever be opened in the
well-regulated German Commonwealths, where all ambition of commanding over
vanquished people, and neighbor nations, being utterly banished, the glorious
resolution and firm purpose reigns only in them, of not yielding obedience
unto any. A happy resolve, which maintains that necessary equality between the
Citizens of those Hans-Towns, and between the chief Senators; and works this
effect, that whilst they wage not war to impose that slavery upon others, which
they themselves seem so to shun, their neighbors do neither hate them, nor are
they jealous of them. So as it is no wonder if they promise unto themselves
long lives, and think themselves unvanquishable by the power of whatsoever
Potentate; for they are of opinion, that the best Politic precept which by
others is to be admired in the German Hanf-Towns, is to detest the acquisition
of neighboring Nations; for with like wisdom they enjoy that public peace
with Foreigners, and that private agreement amongst their Citizens, which makes
their freedom formidable abroad, and safe at home. This that I say, is clearly
seen by the miseries into which the Roman Liberty, after six hundred years,
did at last fall; which not to speak any thing of the infinite acquisitions
which she made in Italy and elsewhere) by the last conquest which she vvoud
make of France (a Kingdom which has always proved fatal to Foreigners who
endeavored to subjugate it) fell headlong into Caesar's Tyranny: And the
Florentines, by their obstinate ambition of making those of Pisa slaves, did so
disorder their own Commonwealth, as they may serve to teach the World, that
it is better and safer for Republiques to have their neighboring Cities and
Nations Confiderates and Friends, then subjects and enemies. This disorder is
not seen in the Hans-Tovvns of Germany, who resting content with their own
liberty, suffer those who join with them to live free under the Government of
their own Law; whence it is, that in Germany, and in universal concerns,
there appears but one only Commonwealth to be in Germany, but many in
particulars; and the Arms of the Freemen of that Warlike Nation, serve only
for instruments of peace, and to preserve their own, not to entrench upon the
liberties of other men. A thing which certainly forbodes much evil to Monarchy;
for what more pernicious or cruel enemy can a Prince have, then he who assaults
him with pretense of communicating liberty to a subjugated people: These are
the arms by which the German Hans-Towns have so dilated themselves: And
certainly not without good reason; for people cannot kill that enemy, who
instead of death, fire and plunder, brings them liberty, which by instinct of
nature, is so much desired by all men. Lo then, illustrious Monarchs, how the
German Hans-Towns are little in particular, each of them contenting themselves
with their own liberties; but immensly great in general, for that they do all
communicate in the interests of public liberty. So as a Prince cannot have to
do with one, but he must offend all; a disorder which is so much the greater,
for that like a contagious disease, or enraged cancer, it every day increases
by degrees, taking in new Cities, and new people, and assembling them all to
their own liberty the first day of their purchase, naturalize foreign Nations,
make enemies dear friends; wherefore it may well be doubted, that in a short
time the whole world will be infected with this contagious disease; and the
danger is the more dreadful in these unfortunate times, wherein the liberty of
Commonwealths is gotten into so high an esteem, as our own subjects fear not to
call it the only filicity of mankind. Whence it is, that (when men can think
to enjoy it quietly, and that as it is in the Hans-Towns of Germany, every one
may live in liberty under the Laws of their own Country) it is so infinitely
coveted, as it is purchased, though at the expense of much blood. And if such a
disease has been able to enlarge it self so far in so short a time amongst
dissolute people, people so given over to gluttony and drunkenness, what shall
we think it may do if it should fasten in Italy or Spain, or in the other sober
Nations of Europe, the most of which, as we all know, are so affected to
Monarchy. The business about which you are here met, is as you have heard, most
mighty Monarchs, of importance, and requires the more speedy remedy, for that
if the Hollanders and Zealanders shall once have laid a good foundation, and
shall have perpetuated themselves in that liberty which they have usurpt
against the powerful King of Spain, their natural Lord, you may well, from so
foul a scandal, fear your utter extirpation. And you as well the most
Christian, as the most powerful Kingdom of France, which in this so majestical
an Assembly do deservedly hold the first place, amongst the greatest Monarchs
of the world, you very well knew that in your last troubles, it was often talk
of; and perhaps agreed upon by your seditious enemies, how to kindle in your
bosom; and amongst your faithful French men, the fire of the German liberty; so
far are the evils advanced; which to those that understand so much, it may
suffice me to have touch upon.

This Discourse made by the Lord Chancellor did infinitely trouble those great
Monarchs. And many Princes, whose States lay nearest those Republics, finding
what danger they were in, were extraordily afflicted. Wherefore they fell
suddenly to think upon remedies; and as the most immediate, a strait League was
propounded to be made by all Monarchies, against Commonwealths, hoping that by
open force of so many Princes joined together, they might easily be mastered.
But in this opinion, which at first seemed very plausable to every one, great
difficulties were afterward discovered: for some Princes put the Diet in mind,
that it was not only indiscretion, but great rashness to affront with
mercenary Soldiers, whose interest in the war was but the poor pay of six
pence a day, a Nation which took up Arms for the defense of liberty; and which
was that important reason of men's proving so courageous; And to this purpose,
Charles Duke of Burgundies unfortunate case was instanced in; who though he was
held to be the thunder of War, the Orlando and Mars of his times, was
notwithstanding, together with the greatest part of his Army, cut in pieces by
the Switzers, only because each man that fights in defense of liberty, has
twenty hands, and as many hearts.

And it was considered; that it being impossible for the Princes to vanquish so
many Commonwealths in as short time (as the business required) the expense of
much time would likewise make it altogether infeasable; for that the Hollanders
and Zealanders had taught all Princes, that if people who defended their
liberties were long trained up in war, they became unconquerable; and this was
said to happen, because the charity of a free Country, does not only make the
hearts of the Citizens thereof undaunted, and their hands nimble, but makes
their souls faithful, and quickens their wits.

And it was further said; That that Prince took a bad business in hand, who
could not fight his enemy with Canons loaded or charged with gold, which was
that which routed all Armies, and won all Battles, and which had the wonderful
effect of destroying a man's Loyalty And concerning this particular, reflection
was had upon the modern actions of the Hollanders and Zealanders, who out of
the very great affection which they bore to the liberty of their Country, had
so gallantly resisted, not only the steel and iron, but even the gold of that
valiant and rich Spanish Nation, which knows so well how to make use both of
the one and the other, as it was held a thing almost miraculous; that at one
and the same time they could defend their new Commonwealth, no less against the
open force of the Spaniards; then against the concealed designs of the French
and English; and chiefly against the subtle cunning of that crafty Fox the
Prince of Orange: All which (though under various and specious pretenses of
liberty) had as great a mind to make themselves masters of those States, as the
King of Spain had to reduce them under his ancient Dominion.

To this, a second, and much more important difficulty was added; for
consultation was had, what the Colleague Monarchs should do with the German
Commonwealths, when by their forces they should have conquered them. For answer
to which, the common reason of Nations, and the ordinary use of leagues was
urged; which is, that the acquisition of enemies States made by Colleagues, if
any of them be of the number of the colleaguing Princes, that they should be
restored to their ancient Lords: by virtue of which law, the Roman Empire
desired, that when the victory should be gotten, those Cities and Hans-Towns
should be restored to her, which had withdrawn themselves from her authority.
And the house of Austrea pretended with good reason, to repossess her ancient
Dominion over the greatest part of the Switzers, and other people, who to make
themselves free, had shook off the yoke of her Government. Though all these
pretensions were by the Senate acknowledged to be just, yet did the Princes so
much stomach them, as after a long dispute, it was at last resolved, that no
more should be spoken thereof: And it was then said, that it being impossible
for the two aforesaid reasons, that the Monarchies should by open Force
subjugate the Commonwealths of Germany, they should for the future so wisely
strengthen and fortify themselves, as that the malady of the German
Hans-Towns, which till then had made such and so prejudicial progress, should
grow no greater. And it was resolved, that it being very palpable, that the
many large privileges which were granted by some too prodigal Princes to their
vassals, in a middle way of living free, and this not without great occasion,
had made them affect total liberty; that therefore such privileges, as being
scandalous, and very pernicious to Monarchy, should not only not be granted
hereafter, no not to any desert, how great soever; but that every Potentate
should cunningly by little and little, endeavor to take them from their people,
and bring them so wholly into servitude, as they should not have any the least
ken of those privileges which had heightened their minds to affect total
Freedom: And hereupon some former Emperors of Germany, and Dukes of Burgony,
were severely reprehended, who were not only fools in granting their people
prejudicial exemptions, but ignorantly avaritious in selling them for a small
sum of money, whereby they had put themselves and other Monarchies upon great
difficulties. And for their greater severity, these Princes decreed, that all
form, all footsteps of levelling, should from the very root be extirpated from
amongst their subjects; the wisest of the Diet affirming, that the great
inequality of the Gentry in a Kingdom, was that which secured them from ever
bringing in a form of free Government: and the Monarchy of Spain was so stiff
in this Opinion, as she freely said, she spoke it knowingly, that nothing had
more preserved the Dukedom of Millan from living in that freedom, after the
death of Philip Maria Viscount, which was then talked of being instituted
therein, then the great disproportion of wealth, which has always been
observed to be in that noble Dukedom, not only between the Nobility and people
of Millan, but even between the Nobility it self, which had also been the
reason why, in the rich Kingdom of Naples, no speech was ever heard to be made
by those Barons, of levelling or living free, no not when they had so fair an
occasion presented them of doing so by the failing of the blood Royal, and by
many other interregni which they had had in their troubles; for that the
Nobility of Kingdoms had this of natural instinct, rather to admit of any
subject how barbarous soever for their King, then to see not only Barons of
late edition, but even Doctors and Shopkeepers made equal (which liberty would
do) like to them. Moreover, it was hinted, as an excellent means whereby to
weaken the German Hans-Towns, that the Potentates of Europe would forego the so
pernicious custom of buying at a deer and dishonorable rate the schum of the
Switzers, Grisouns, and other German Nations, it being sure that if they should
be left in their own Countries, those unquiet, seditious and disorderly
spirits, which much to their profit, they send abroad, would cause such
fractions at home, as they would be seen to turn those weapons upon themselves,
which now they sell to unwise Princes at the weight of gold. But the many
jealousies which have always reigned, which reign now more then ever, and which
it is to be believed, will for ever reign amongst the greatest Kings of
Christendom, wrought so, as for fear, lest the one might leave all the refuse
to be made use of by the other, so salutiferous a memorandum was publicly
praised by all, and in private abhorred by every particular. But it is true,
that to make Monarchy as pleasing to the people as it was possible for Princes
to do, these underwritten Articles were with great solemnity penned,
established, and sworn unto in the Diet to be inviolably kept.

I. THat since to love and fear God with all ones heart, was the wisest piece
of Policy, and the most perfect State-Reason which could be learned and
practiced by Princes, they should not for the future make use of his most holy
name (as many had formerly done) as a means whereby to get money from their
people; and to hurry them or wheel them about with diverse Sects, and new
Religions, such as made most for their worldly interests; but to obtain that
favor from his Divine Majesty, which brings abundance of all that is good to
Princes who fear God, and to people who obey his holy Laws.

II. That for the future they should be content so to milk and shear the sheep
of their Flock, as that they should not only not flea them, but not so much as
touch a bit of their skin, being mindful that men were creatures which had
understanding, not beasts which knew nothing; that therefore there was a great
deal of difference between Shepherds who shore and milked sheep, and
Prince-shepherds, who shore and milked men; the latter being to use the shears
of discretion, instead of those of mere interest, which are only made use of
(and that always unfortunately) by greedy Shepherds; it having been often seen,
that public hatred has been able to metamorphize the simple sheep of
subjects, into skittish Mules, who have driven their indiscrete shepherd out of
the fold with kicking.

III. That they should keep their people within the bounds of fear, not with
such a caprichious beastiality as makes the Government of one man alone
dreadful, and then totally pernicious, when he will judge men's lives by his
sole arbitrary power; but by being inexorable in those faults only which not
deserving pardon, had need to be punished with all the severity that the Law
allows.

IV. That they should be spairing of public moneys to unworthy personages,
prodigal to such as did deserve well; for that they being so hardly drawn from
the subjects, every Prince who would deserve the name of a good shepherd, was
bound to give them so much satisfaction, as to see that their moneys were not
prodigally wasted in hunting, tilting, feasting, in enriching Bawds, Buffoons
and Flatterers; but that they were judiciously laid out for the advantage of
public peace.

V. That they should for the future confer Dignities and Magistracy to such as
were most worthy, having respect only to the merit of the desirer, not to any
affection of the recommender; for that he did truly deserve to be accounted a
fool, who to honor or advantage another, shamed himself, and disparaged his own
gifts.

VI. That they should bury their own odd conceits, and for ever banish their
private passions: And to the end that they might put on that excellent
resolution which makes Princes so happy, and Kingdoms so flourishing, of
absolutely submitting themselves to the good and public interest of their
people, they should totally abandon their own wilful opinion.

VII. That they should appear to be absolute Monarchs of their States, in
executing the results of their most important affairs, but in consulting
thereupon, only the heads of a well ordered Aristocracy; being sure that four
fools who did advise together, made better resolves, then any the best greatest
wit could do alone.

VIII. That making God their example whose Lieutenants Princes were on earth,
they should pardon Homecide only out of compassion, born to minority in yerrs,
to the greatness of the offense received more in honor then in life, to certain
sudden furies; which makes a man not master of himself bereaving him of all
judgment and reason; but not for greediness of money; for that Princes could
not introduce a more wicked Traffic in their Tribunals, then to make
merchandise of men's blood. That therefore fraudulent Homicides committed out of
premiditated malice should by no means be forgiven, not only for not drawing
down Gods anger upon them, but for the administration of that right justice
which they were bound to give unto their subjects; for that Princes by
pardoning heinous offenses, purchased only the praise of being avaritiously
and wickedly merciful.

IX. That they should firmly believe themselves to be absolute Lords and
Masters of their subjects; not as shepherds are of their sheep, who may sell
them to the shambles; but only utendo, not abutendo, by using, not by abusing
them; for people imbittered by bad usuage, could not live long with that ill
satisfaction, which is the fruitful mother of bad resolutions.

X. That they should think the true heaping up of riches consisted in giving
content unto their people, and in making them of subjects, brothers and
children; and that the excellent art of taking Sturgions with Pilchards, was
nothing else, then to purchase the rich treasure of men's hearts by a wise
liberality, and to cheapen love by clemency: for to fill their coffers with
gold, raised out of the taxes and exactions (as some Princes do) was not only
to swell that spleen which did so impare the health of a sound body, but did
often times serve as sharp spurs, and loud sounding Trumpets, to make Foreigners
arm themselves that they may make themselves masters of so great wealth.

XI. That in their insolences and extravagancies, they should by no means rely
upon their subjects love, which was as soon lost by using an impertinancy, or
by a distaste given, as it was won by a courteous or liberal action. Neither
should they build upon their peoples former patience; for that the minds and
humors of men did change and vary with Times, Places' and Persons. That
therefore they should not wax proud of their peoples being grossly ignorant or
that they were altogether unarmed, nor should they presume too much upon them;
for there was never any Kingdom yet, which was not very full of such unquiet,
ambitious and malcontent Nobility, as would serve for sure guides to blind
people; and for learned Schoolmasters, who would teach ignorant people the
important precept, and the seditious doctrine, that to come out of the
laborinth of the slavery of Monarchy, which was governed only by insolency, and
the irregular fancy of a hair-brained Prince, like These's, they must follow
the clew of arms; which was more dangerous to a Prince, for that despair caused
in people by such proceedings, though they were weak, unarmed and ignorant,
would make them find arms, courage and judgment in every corner.

XII. That they should wear the powerful Militia of boundless Empire (which the
Laws will have Princes to have even over the lives of men, for terror of the
wicked) by their side, for the security of such as good; but that they should
never make use of it, and that they should freely deliver up such as were
guilty, to the power of sacred Justice, for the ranker of hatred and revenge
was never a whit lessened by inflicting cruel torments upon the guilty. That
therefore to the end that Delinquents might appease their so incensed souls,
even at the bitter point of death, they should let all favor in criminal
causes proceed from themselves; and that the sword of justice should be only
exercised by their Magistrates.

XIII. That in laying on of Taxes, as great caution as could be should be had
to such things as tended to the feeding and clothing of the poor, who live out
of the sweat of their brows; and that they should lay the heavier impositions
upon such things as belonged to the delights, luxuries and superfluities of the
wealthy, who living idly upon their rents, minded nothing but great gaming, and
inventing new vices.

XIV. That above all things, they should be very careful, that all public
provisions should be modestly exacted, and by discret parsonages; for it happened
often times, that people were more troubled with the condition of him that
gathered the taxes, and the violent manner of gathering it, then with the tax
it self.

XV. That they should use all possible industry in feeding the common people
with bred, the Nobility with degrees of honor; and that to arrive at so happy
ends, they should suffer free commerce amongst their subjects of selling and
buying the fruits and incomes of their lands, and the gain of their Traffic:
but that they should be very careful to fill their State-Magazines with corn,
and all things necessary for the life of man, bought and brought in from
foreign parts; which was a rich and happy Traffic, which paid Princes the use
of a hundred for one, when by the great plenty occasioned thereby, they had
lost their principal.

XVI. That for the better content of their Nobility, who always thirst after
glory and honor, they should confer places of Magistracy, and other chief
dignities only upon the Noble subjects of their States. And that they should
keep, as from fire, from giving them that mortal wound, which had caused woeful
subversions in the greatest Kingdoms of Europe, of admitting foreigners into
places of employment, thereby to enrich and aggrandize them, and of exalting
mean and ignorant persons to a higher degree then the jealousy of the State
will bear, merely out of their capretious affections; and that in a particular
of so great concernment, they should imitate the wisdom which wise nature had
taught dogs, who cannot endure that a strange dog should come within the doors
where they live, only out of fear that they should steal their masters favor
from them, which they are very jealous of, and that bread which is deservedly
their due for having by their continual watchfulness, kept the house in safety.

XVII. That in the Edicts which they should publish, they should imitate well
governed Commonwealths, the end of whose Laws is always seen to be the common
good, not private interest, as it is often found to be in Principalities.

XVIII. That they should for ever banish from out their houses, those
Flatterers, Buffouns and Minions, who do so stain the reputation of any great
Prince; and that they should not only be inamored of the virtue, worth and
merit of their Magistrates, and deliver themselves wholly up unto their power,
but that they should even worship them.

XIX. And because to be cast in suits, did redound as little to the reputation
of private men, as for Princes to go to law with their vassals, and carry the
cause against them, be it right or wrong, all such disputes should be first
made known to men learned in the Law, and commence no suit, wherein their right
did not evidently appear to all men. And that to free themselves from the stain
of rapine and tyrany, they should appear more content when they had not only
lost the cause, but were condemned in damages, then over-joyed when the
sentence went on their side.

XX. That answerable to the custom of good Commonwealths, the ultimate end of
their thoughts should hereafter be the peace and quiet of their States, which
makes the people that enjoy it so happy; and that they should vent their over
much ambition in acquiring the singular glory of well governing their people,
which God has given them, and not to affect other men's Dominions by fire,
rapine, and the effusion of mane blood. That they should make poormens faults
pecuniarly punishable; but that they should punish proud wealthy men in their
lives, making them pay composition of blood, that they might make the whole
world see, that they punishmens faults out of zeal to justice, not for
greediness of money; he being a great enemy to public peace, whom riches made
proud, and spurred him up to commit faults.

XXI. That they should endeavor to effect the good and virtuous living of
their subjects, more by their own examples, then by rigor of law, it being
impossible to keep people from committing those faults which their Princes are
addicted unto.

XXII. That in the Government of their States, they should not use that
carelessness which is proper to Princes who possess great Kingdoms, or that too
exact diligence which does so disquiet the people, and which is usually seen in
Princes, who having great wit, command over a little, State, but that they
should sail with the safe north wind of Nequid Nimis.

XXIII. That they should punish only great ^aults with the rigor of the law*
and seem not to see, or take notice of little ones, or (as becomes Princes who
govern men, not Angels) freely pard on them; that for faults of a middle sort,
they should use such punishments as were suitable to the misdemenors; and that
they should shun, showing themselves too severe in punishing at the present, to
deter future excesses; that they should chi^fly study that the Princes clemency
might clearly be seen in the punishment of any guil^y person, either in
mitigating the pain, changing the punishment, or by pardoning confiscated goods.

XXIV. That private injuries, as well as public offenses should always be
vindicated by the cha^table arm of justice; and that when any of their subjects
should offend them, they should not hate the whole family, but only the party
offending, with whose punishment their anger should cease, and should shun the
custom of preserving rancor, and of transmitting those eternal fewds and
immortal defiances to their heirs, which making men despair, were not only
very dangerous to Princes, but made Monarchies be hated.

XXV. That all of them should as soon as may be, endeavor to free their people
from the disease, which so much molests their minds, afflicts their bodies, and
consumes their estates of the eternity of law suits; and that of all things
they should keep themselves from that foul fault of reaping profit out of
yearly revenues, that so they might shun the public hatred which they would
incur, when people should see that these so great disorders served only for
Leeches, to suck money out of the very bowels of their afflicted people, who
finding no greater hell in this life, then the torment of pleading, and of
being in the hands of ravenous Judges, Advocates, Notaries and Sergeants, it
was the duty of every good Prince, rather by his own expense to free his people
from being so pilled and pooled, then to make use of them for a rich, though
very wicked commodity.

XXVI. That they should preserve such grain, oil and wine, and other things
which appertain to the food of man, as grew in their dominions, yea even in
years of greatest abundance; and when their was much superfluity of them, and
should by no means make sale thereof to foreign Nations; for since no man can
secure himself of the next years plentiful harvest, Princes could commit no
greater folly then to be blamed for that scarcity which even God himself sends.

XXVII. That the greatest advantage which Commonwealths have over Monarchies,
lying in their being free from the impediment of women. All Princes should keep
their wives, and all other women of their blood, from having any thing to do in
Government, or in public affairs; as those who by their indiscrete and
avaritious proceedings, had caused sad Tragidies in many Principallities. And
that they should firmly believe, that the great Politician Tacitus, had never
said a greater truth then Non imbecillem tantum, and imparem laboribus sexum:
sed si licentia adsit, saevum, ambitiosum, potestatis avidum. Tacit. 3. Annal.
That it is not only a weak sex, and unfit for business; but if permitted,
cruel, ambitious and greedy of power.

These Articles being agreed upon, and sworn unto, the same Lord Chancellor
heartily desired the Monarchs of the Diet, that (to the end that the world
might not see the scandalous example of the States of Holland and Zealand) they
would quite lay aside all other whatsoever kind of private interest; and that
if (as they were obliged to do, both out of wisdom and State Policy) they would
give no assistance to the Spaniards, so as they might the better witness to the
world, that it was impossible for rebellious people to purchase liberty by
seditious arms; that they would not at least assist the Hollanders and
Zealanders, it being great folly, and very bad counsel, to precipitate or
overthrow their own affairs, by so shameful an example, to the end that they
might discompose the affairs of other men. All these Monarchs, with a wonderful
consent, answered the Lord Chancellor (so possitively can Princes, who are
born, brought up, and have continually lived in the Tiberian art of Simulation,
promise that with their mouths, which their heart never dictates to them) that
that should by all means be done, which they in private knew they would never
execute.

The VII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The People of Phocides treating how they might rise in Rebellion, by reason of
the relation which their Ambassadors made unto them, who were formerly sent to
Apollo, to pray that their Privileges might be observed: The remedy fittest to
be applied to such a disorder, is discust in his Majesty's Royal Council.

IT is not to be believed, how much the Inhabitants of Phocides were incensed,
when they heard the relation which their Ambassadors made, who were sent by
them to Parnassus, by reason of the breach of their Privileges; for they could
not endure that to boot with the prejudice of loss of privileges, they should
be scornfully treated, like boys. Wherefore horn-mad with anger, they stormed,
and freely professed that they would by arms defend the privileges of their
Country, and that even with the loss of their last drop of blood, they would
therewith endeavor to recover their lost liberty; and that if any thing of ill
should befall them, they should deerly pay for it, who were about to enslave
them. The nevvs of this sedition was soon brought to Apollo; and the business
was argued many mornings in his Majesty's Council; and though some of the chief
thereof said, it was requisite to dispatch away immediately a Legion of Poets
to Phocides, who might keep that incensed people in obedience; yet the opinion
of Isabel Queen of Spain prevailed, who for the excellency of her wit, has
deservedly the prime place in that Council. She said, that to provide soon for
the prevention of insurrections in States, which were wholly in slavery to
their Princes, was excellent Council; but that in such States, as by reason of
many large privileges, lived in a medium between slavery and liberty, rather
then to prevent them with dangerous remedies, it might be wisely done, to tarry
till the disorders were begun, whereby wise Princes might much advantage
themselves; for then they might justly take from them all those privileges,
which are sharp thorns in the eyes of those that govern.

The VIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
A great controversy arising in point of Precedence, between the Prince of
Bisagnano, and Dr. Juliano Corbelli of St. Marino. Apollo refers the
consideration thereof to the Congregation of Ceremonies, by which it is decided.

A Difference arose a while ago in point of Precedence, between the Prince of
Bisagnano, and Iuliano Corbelli, Doctor of Law at S. Marino, a little Castle in
Romania, but very famous for the great Pre-eminency of liberty which it enjoys,
for it is governed like a Commonwealth: and though the Doctors pretensions
were so despised by the Neapolitan Barons, as it was thought presumptuous, yet
was not Corbelli any whit discouraged; but appealing to Apollo, his Majesty
referred the business to the Congregation of Ceremonies in Parnassus; before
whom the Prince scorned to appear, complaining, that in a cause which was so
clear on his side, he should be made to appear in judgment against a man born
in so base a Country, as produced nothing but Swine-herds, he himself being an
illustrious Neapolitan Baron. Yet lest sentence might be given against him for
his contumacy, he was forced to acquaint the Congregation with what he had to
allege for himself; who having very diligently perused the evidences produced
by both parties, gave judgment six days since on the Doctors side, who being
born in a Free-Countrey; was (as they said) to walk hand in hand with Kings;
much more to be preferred before a Neapolitan Baron. Then, as for the Fee or
Tribute which the Prince possessed in Bisagnano; they said, that it was declared
by a decree made long before by his Majesty, that he did truly deserve the
name of Prince, who obeyed no King; not he who in another Lordship, commanded
over poor vassals, by whom he might be daily accused, abused and persecuted in
Court Leet, and other Tribunals; in which case the titles of Prince, Duke or
Marquis was no real thing, but a kind of false Alchimy, which was very like
those glass eyes which squint eyed people wear to honest the ill-favouredness
of their faces, not to make them see; then, as for his noble blood, upon which
the Prince, being descended from the noble family of Sanceverini, did ground
his best pretension, they said, that the Congregation did not at all consider
it, the clear Testimony of the Anatomists being produced by the contrary party;
wherein it being clearly proved, that the bones, nerves, flesh and bowels of
men were all made after the same manner, it denoted evidently that true
Nobility was placed in the brains, not in veins.

The IX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo publ sh^th a very severe Edict against some Litterati, who under a
cloak of feigned piety, cover downright avarice.

APollo finding for certain that a new race of wicked men are sprung up in
Parnassus, and in his other States, who though they have made Gold their Idol,
yet to cover their unquenchable thirst after riches, do so confidently make use
of the cloak of feigned goodness, as they have dared to exercise the devilish
art of hypocrisy bare faced; his Majesty to provide for the indemnity of
those silly ones, who think all to be gold that glisters, and of those
blockheads who cannot discern an Eel from an Adner, by an Edict of his
published on Tuesday last, does in the first place affectionately exhort all
souls living, to walk by the so beaten way of honored Antiquity, of been
vivere, and Laetari; which proceeds from Gods great grace to good men; assuring
every one that men may win favor from God, and good will from men, even
amongst great riches, if they be honorably gotten, and well distributed:
Wherefore he exhorted all men, that forgoing fiction, and all manner of double*
dealing, as things which gave an ill savor even to good things, and which made
men's devotion appear hypocrisy, they should live with that purity of soul, and
that candidness of manners, which made even stones look lovely, much more men;
and that if there were any one, who would by a holy life make that profession
of piety, which is so suspected in men who have avarice joined to their great
riches, that their devotion should by all means begin from the contempt of
money, distributing it out unto the poor, and laying it out in pious works;
which if they should not do, they should be held from those crafty companions
who make use of piety more to deceive men, then to please God.

The X. ADVERTISEMENT.
The City Praetor, or Chief Justice of Parnassus, complai^ bitterly before
Apollo of the Triumviri; a Magistracy newly instituted by his Majesty, That in
an Edict of theirs published against Mignus and other Ministers of Princes
obsenities, they have violated his Jurisdiction.

APollo having learnt by many sad examples which have happened, that Printing,
which it is to be believed, was at first by Divine Council suggested into the
Cavalier John of Mentz, only to facilitate the learning of the most illustrious
Sciences, to such as are desirous of knowledge, is made use of by wicked men,
not only as an excellent instrument to stain men's minds, with impiety,
obsceneness and evil speaking; but that ambitious men serve themselves thereof
for damned weapons to make people rebel against their natural Princes: Apollo,
I say, by wholesome and Divine Council (as the event has shown) did many years
ago institute the remarkable Magistracy of the Triumviry, whose Office it is to
send such books as are infected with impiety, sedition, and such obscenities as
corrupt good manners, to the Pesthouse. This Magistracy some three days ago,
under pain of grievous punishment, sent express command to all favorits, bawds,
flatterers, and others whom their Princes do Idolize, who live desolutely, that
they should not dare any more to stir out of doors, to the end that these
monsters of nature might not (to the great scandal of good men) be seen to go
so vain-gloriously trampling the street upon their pacing horses, and in their
rich Coaches, as if they triumphed over the world, who by their lewd manner of
living, having extorted those rewards from vicious Princes, which are only due
to deserving men, are not worthy to eat bread. The City Praetor made a great
complaint to Apollo of this novelty, accusing the Triumviry of having exceeded
the bounds of their Authority, and very much intrencht upon his Jurisdiction.
The Triumviry were immediately sent for by his Majesty, who defending their
cause exceedingly well, said that they had by length of time clearly learnt,
that certain obscene living books which walked up and down the streets, caused
greater scandal in well composed minds, and free from all pollution, then did
Machiavil, Bodin, Aratin, and other writers of wickedness, and obsceneness,
which were found hid in many Libraries; a disorder which ought the rather to be
corrected, for that the wicked manners of living men, made a much greater
impression in men's minds; then the filth that was read in dead Authors, whose
damned writings many forbore to read, out of mere abhorition of such things,
many for fear of offending God, and of being punished by men, many for that they
had not many of those forbidden books, or for want of curiosity, or love of
idleness; but that men of holy lives, much against their wills, and not without
offense, were forced to read, study, contemplate, and honor these Bawds,
Flatterets, and other Ministers of vicious Princes, who neither cared for Gods
honor, nor their own reputation, who were scandalous two legged books, which
were daily seen to walk the streets; and that he must be armed with more then
humane virtue, who would not be contaminated and scandalized to see the sole
aspects of these hateful men.

The XI. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Inhabitants of Phocides fall into open Rebellion, by reason that the
Privileges of their Country are not observed by Apollo's Officers; they are
pacified by a Senator, and send new Ambassadors to his Majesty.

THe Politicians precept is very true; That people who have lived long in a
half Liberty, with large privileges, are very hardly reduced to tolerate
whole slavery. This is said, because the uproars of Phocides occasioned by the
not observancy of their privileges (as you heard at large by the last Post)
have still increased more and more, in so much as on the ninth of this present
month, more incenst then over, since such satisfaction as was desired, was
denied them by Apollo's Officers, the Phocidians took up arms, and running
through the City, cried out, Liberty, Liberty. When the chief Magistrate of
Phocides, much troubled at such a novelty, desired a Parley of the people that
were in arms, who when they were all assembled in the chief Piazza; it is said,
that the uprightest and most experienced Senator of Phocides spoke thus;

The most dangerous enterprise (my most beloved Phocidians) which Subjects can
undertake, is to grow stubborn, and rebel against their Prince: For Princes are
not so merciful as to pardon injuries of so high a nature; which though they
sometimes forgive, they never forget; Whence it is, that such excesses never
pass without their condign punishment: For as it falls out in all offenses
which are either through wisdom winkt at, or pardoned per force, they are in
their due time and place, the more severely revenged, by having their
vindication retarded to a more opportune time. And God deliver us, and all
other people that suffer such calamities as we do, from those cruel revenges,
which Princes who are offended in State Affairs, use after long meditation to
take, against their disloyal people; and rebellion is so far from being
forgotten (even by most merciful Princes) as an amendment of many hundred years
loyalty cannot so cancel it cut of exasperated minds, but that the memory of
such signal injuries are transmitted over to the twentieth generation; since by
their importance they infuse such diffidence into him that reigns, and such
suspicions as occasion perpetual odium between the Vassal and the Sovereign
Lord; from whence afterward the great disorder arises, as that natural
subjects, which are no other then the Princes beloved children, and therefore
ought to be treated with terms of fatherly love, and governed by Laws of
Charity, are reputed cruel enemies, conquered people, subjugated by force of
arms; and therefore according to the politic Precept, treated like slaves:
Which things at last produce that great inconvenience, that even lawful
Princes, grievously moved by such heinous offenses against their rebellious
subjects, become cruel Tyrants. I (fellow Citizens) speak not now as an Officer
of the Prince, in aggravating the condition of our slavery, but as one who
would produce peace in this our Country; and if you shall not think my council
good, I will willingly be one of the first who will join with you in your
resolution, being better contented to err with many, then to be wise with a
few. But before you proceed further in a business of such importance, I
earnestly entreat you, and heartily beg of you, even by these tears which fall
so abundantly from mine eyes, that you will maturely consider, that for the
most part, popular insurrections meet with unfortunate ends: Which happens not
only because resolutions in so weighty affairs are taken in hot blood, when men
are most incenst, and when men's minds are most incombred with the foolish
passion of fury, whereas they ought to be put on in cold blood, and when the
mind is most maturely settled; but because upon such like occasions, rash and
precipitous councels are more willingly embraced and listened unto, then such as
are mature and quiet. For with people that are up in commotion, he is always
thought wisest, who is most adventurous, and he most zealous of his Countries
Liberty, who advises to things most headlong. Here (beloved Citizens) is a
business in which consists the total of our safety, the good of our children,
the happiness of our Country, which ought to be so dear unto us, being all of
them things of great importance, wherein surely we ought to proceed with much
circumspection, since repentance will not serve the turn, ^nce the punishment
of such a sin is never pardoned, but the infamy thereof indures for ever, and
the danger of punishment grows then greatest when the Prince has taken a
thousand oaths to pardon it: For Princes think it no shame, nor breach of word,
to revenge rebellion in their subjects, though it be pardoned, but great
honor, and an obligation which they owe unto their honors. We know for
certain that Apollo will take from us those privileges, which we are bound to
defend with the effusion of our bloods, and loss of lives* great is the injury
that is done us, and such as ought by no means to be suffered by us, who upon
other occasions have proved our selves to all the Vertuosi of Parnassus, to be
resolute; the injury his Majesty does us, is notorious, and peradventure fit to
be rescented; but in revenging offenses given, and in preventing such as are
feared, we must be sure to proceed so, as not to fall upon such resolves, as
may be more prejuditial to us then the loss of our privileges, which now we go
about to defend by force. For very foolish and unfortunate is that rescentment
which brings with it more loss and shame then the injuries which are desired to
be vindicated. A most true rule, which admonishes us not to enter upon so
dangerous a game, without assured hope of overcoming; for unpardonable injuries
ought either never to be done to any whosoever, more especially not to powerful
men, or upon certainty that they can never be revenged. I urge this, for that
whosoever puts on the fatal resolution of taking up arms against his Prince,
must be sure to have sufficient forces of himself to resist his Princes power,
or so ready and lustly foreign aids as may secure him from being suppressed. We
(my fellow Phocedians) know very well our forces are but weak; and that no
Prince will assist us; it therefore appears to me to be a horselike piece of
beastiality, when we find our selves fast bound to the Charret, to kick against
the wheels, and so spoil our legs. It is rash folly to do that which brings
with it certain and severe punishment: We may truly say we have been assaulted
in the streets by those rascally Officers who thirst after the goods of their
fellow subjects, who would take from us the rich Jewels of our Privileges;
they are armed by the Princes power, we unarmed passengers; will it not then be
unwisely done of us to exasperate them by resistance? It Is great wisdom
willingly to part with our Jewel so to save our lives. The minds of Princes who
are born and brought up in the ambition of reigning, are always in motion, are
continually working, nor are they ever quiet till they get total domination
over their subjects; and it is an experienced proposition, that all things are
loosned with the same cords wherewith they were bound; and it is very
observable upon this our occasion; for if it be true, that we must all confess,
that Princes grant privileges to their people more out of necessity, and when
forced so to do, then out of free will; who is he that knows not that it is the
same necessity which keeps them from breaking them? And does not every one know
that the effect cannot keep on foot, when the cause fails? Apollos desire of
depriving us of our privileges, arises not (as we complain) from
discourtesie, not from ingratitude, not from falcifying his word, but from the
alteration of this our afflicted Country. Phocides (as you all know) confined
formerly upon the ignorant, who are capital enemies to Apollo and his Vertuosi,
and therefore were we honored with the gift of Privileges which we now
endeavor to defend; the which he gave us (as it is usual with Princes to do)
because we had lately, of our own accord, put our selves under the Dominion of
Parnassus; we are now by process of time become natural subjects; and (which
has more impaired our condition then any thing else) we are, by the
Litterati's dilating their Dominions, become no longer confiners, but inland
inhabiters; all which things gives us to understand, that Princes observe other
men's privileges inviolably, as long as the cause why they were granted
remains.

By these things which I have told you (my beloved) you may know that your
taking up arms of rebellion, will, as they usually do, aggrivate their evils,
who have boldly, but unwisely taken them up. But before we proceed further in
these our tumults, I earnestly desire every one of you, not to mind so much the
just reason which we have to re^sent the apparent injury which is done us, as
the unfortunate end which this our insurrection will have: For men cannot more
maturely shun committing errors, then by meditating long upon the evils which
they may produce. And above all things, I straightly conjure you all to remember,
that non tantum est Decora Victoribus Libertas; quantum intollerantior servitus
iterum victis. Tacit. lib. 3. Annal.

This Senators persuasions prevailed so much with these enraged people, as
after a short consultation, four Ambassadors were sent to this Court from the
Senate and people of Phocides, who presenting themselves this morning before
Apollo, told him, that the people of Phocides, who were his Majesty's most
devout servants, having learnt at last, that nothing can be more foolishly nor
more rashly done, then for a servant to capitulate with his Master, found that
the privileges, exemptions, and immunities which people owe unto their Princes
goodness, were nothing but occasions of scandal, and seminaries of discord
between the Prince and his Vassals; that therefore the Phocidians being very
unwilling that any thing should fall out between his Majesty's love, and their
loyalty, which might hinder their delight in their Sovereign Prince, did
voluntarily renounce all privileges, immunities, and exemptions formerly
granted them, and that with all the humility that became most devoted Vassals,
they did only presume to put his Majesty in mind, that Princes who did command
their subjects lovingly, were always faithfully served by them.

The XII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Whilst some Poets paralleld the greatness of Rome with that of Naples, a
dangerous dispute arose between them; Apollo, to the end that his Vertuosi
might know what to say and believe in a business of such importance, commits
the Cause to the Rota of Parnassus, who decide it.

WE hear from Pindus by Letters of the tenth of this present month, that some
Poets speaking before the Perepatetick Portal, of the greatness of the City of
Rome, in comparison of that of Naples, Luigi Tansillo let these words fall from
his mouth, That the Suburbs of Naples was bigger then all Rome; which petulant
falsehood being gainsaid by Caro, he gave Tansillo the Poetical lie; That the
Nobility of Parthenope being thereat much incenst, would have used violence to
Caro; who being succored by the Marcheggian Poets, his Countrymen, both
parties fell to prohibited Rhimes, and even to Sonnets with stings in their
tails, with which they were likely to have made a bloody bickering, when the
City Recorder, who was soon advertised of the uprore, sent Mutio
Iustinopolitano speedily thither, who did not only quickly appease the tumult,
but made both parties pass their words not to offend each other. And because
the Litterati have formerly taken up arms upon the same occasion, and therewith
caused bloody business, Apollo, to the end that for the future men might know
how to speak and believe touching these two great Cities, committed the cause
to be considered on by the Rota di Parnasso, whom he commanded suddenly to fall
upon the business, and to decide it. Wherefore upon several days hearing of
both parties, the Rota three days since publishes this decission.

Coram reverendo patre Domino Cino, die 10 Maii, 1612. Domini unanimes
tenuerunt. That the City of Naples should always yield for Majesty to the City
of Rome, and Rome to Naples, for pleasantness of situation. That Rome should
confess there were more people in Naples, and that Naples should firmly believe
there were more men in Rome. That the Wits and Wines of Naples had need to be
sent by Sea to Rome, to receive perfection in that Court, and to be made more
pleasing to the pallat of gallant men; whereas the Roman only was perfectest at
home; as one which without ever going out of the City, might be said to have
travailed all the world over. That Naples should be held the Metropolitan
amongst all Cities of the Universe for breaking of Colts, and Rome for managing
of men: That there were more Cavaliers in Naples, in Rome more Commendums. That
in Rome they only deserved the title of Cavalier, who bore the badg upon their
Cloak; whereas all the Gentlemen of Naples, without having any badg upon the
Cloak, were deservedly called Cavaliers, the Cross which they bore upon their
naked skin, making them sufficiently worthy of so honorable a prerogative.

The XIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Theodoricus, that famous King of Italy, having ofttimes pressed very much to be
admitted into Parnassus, is always denied by Apollo for a very important
reason.

THe powerful King of Italy, Theodoricus, from the very first day that he came
upon these Confines, has by several Ambassies continually pressed Apollo that he
might be admitted into Parnassus, but still in vain; for as often as the proposal
was made, he received a favorable denial: Which put him at last into such a
rage, as he had the boldness to burst forth into these blasphemous words, That
Apollo was partial in admitting such great Princ^es into Parnassus, who by
their virtuous actions had merited eternal fame, since many Princes were seen
to have glorious places in his Court, only because they had governed petty
Principalities in Italy; and he who for many years had had the whole and sole
Government thereof, was shamefully kept out.

When Apollo had heard the complaints of so great a Prince, he gave him to
understand by the Delfick Chancellor, that he should do well to be quiet; for
to be plain, he did not think him worthy admittance into Parn^ssus; since the
world ought to thank none but him for the horrible Atheism which was of late
introduced in many Provinces of Europe; for whereas the doubts about Religion
risen up amongst Divines, were after some dispute cleared, and their errors
taken away by the Councels, which were made capable of declaring what was
truth, and were all extirpated out of the world, by making bonefires of such as
were obstinate. When he, as the head thereof, took upon him the protection of
the wicked Sect of the Arrians, he did not only turn Heresies, which require
whole Armies to root them out, into Interest of State, but with unheard of
affrontedness, he made the whole world see, that he made use of heresy, to
work division amongst people, to weaken Princes who were his enemies, to have
adhearers in his neighbors States, to make himself head of new Sects; and to
steal away the hearts of other men's subjects; and that in his heart he had no
other esteem of holy Religion, but as of a powerful means, and excellent way to
obtain Government.

The XIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo, according to his usual custom of the first day of every month, hears
the Petitions of such as desire to be admitted into Parnassus.

APollo thinks nothing more unworthy of himself, then to retard, though for
never so little a space, the deserved reward of glory from those Vertuosi, who
by their learned writings have deserved eternal fame. Whence it is that his
Majesty does not only give such continual audience as is requisite, to such
Litterati who have occasion to desire admittance into Parnassus, but has
deputed many ages ago the first day of every month, for the examination of
their writings and persons, wherein all other affairs being laid aside, he only
attends that business. It Is true, that not to profane those virtuous places of
Parnassus, by bringing thereinto such as have not been yet adjudged worthy of
so honorable an abode, the solemnity of so famous an action is not cellebrated
in his Majesty's usual Residence or Palace Royal, but without the walls of
Parnassus, in the famous Phoebean field, where yesterday morning, being the
first day of September, great store of Pavillions being erected for his
Majesty, for the Illustrious Muses, Prince Poets, and learned Lords of this
Court, Apollo attended by a glorious Train, came very early to the appointed
place, where without any delay, Commencement was given to the business. It is
not to be believed how great a concourse of Litterati of all professions,
desirous to purchase so honorable an habitation; appeared there that day: In so
much as his Majesty's Guard, who are strictly charged to carry themselves
civilly to all men, had very much to do to keep back the infinite number of
those who pressed to be admitted into the Audience. And though the number of
pretenders be infinite, yet such are the indowments which are required at their
hands who are to be admitted into such an habitation, as there are but few that
attain their desired ends: For in this affair, where neither the favor of
friends nor yet riches avail any thing, his merit who is to be admitted into
the fruition of so great a happiness is weighed very censoriously in a just
scale. Here, before he pass further in the narration which he is to make,
Menante must acquaint all those who will read these his Advertisements, with
Apollo's usual and laudable custom, never to begin any action of importance,
without first using some of those Acts of Grace to his Litterati, which makes
Princes be so beloved by their people. You must all know then, that before any
Writer, or Illustrious personage, who in his lifetime has done any action
worthy of eternal fame, be admitted to make his request known, the Heads of all
Sciences appear before Apollo, who draw forth each of them a Ball from forth a
well closed Urne, where amidst as many other Silver Balls as there are
Sciences, three only Golden Balls are placed, with this order, That they who
have the luck to draw forth the Golden Ball, shall enjoy the Noble Privilege of
nominating what Vertuoso of their profession they best please; to whom (yea
though he be yet alive on earth) Apollo does by particular favor give that
immortallity, and eternity of fame, which is usually only granted to such who
have put a period to their humanity: A custom certainly as noble as profitable,
and altogether worthy of his deep judgment, who brought it into this State, as
that which serves for sharp spurs to those thirsty souls after glory, who by
their honorable writings, or signal actions, have purchased that fame which is
the first rise, and utmost bounds of every virtuous soul. So as since Apollo
does liberally reward the pains and merits of his Vertuosi before their due
time, it is no wonder if they so greedily affect the precious coin of eternal
fame, as they think it great consolation, to consume themselves in continual
managing their pen, and even killing themselves with perpetual study, esteeming
it great and honorable usury to pass by some few years of their present life,
to purchase that eternity which will make them live gloriously in all future
ages, in the memory of men.

The first who had the good fortune to draw the Golden Ball out of the
aforementioned Urne, was Francisco Berni, the head of those Italian Poets who have
wittily written facetious things in Triplets. The second was Petrarch, the
Prince of Italian Lyrick Poets: The third Cornelius Tacitus, the chief of
Politic Historians.

Francisco Berni being gotten up upon a very high seat which is set of purpose
in that place, for such like affairs, said with a loud and audible voice, That
the prime man in these present times for pleasant Triplets, was Girolomo
Magagnati, the flowery wit of Venice, whose savory rhimes he read in public,
and were much admired, not only by all the Litterati of Parnassus, but by the
Illustrious Muses, and by Apollo's self: and diverse of the Litterati taxed
Berni of imprudency, for that having propounded a personage of such eminency to
Apollo, he was not aware that he might peradventure nurse up a Serpent in his
bosom. But both Apollo and the Muses, and greatest part of Poets did commend
Berni's ingenuity even to the skies, who like a loyal and honest Florentine,
could prefer another man's merits, though with hazard of his own reputation.

After this, when they came to voting, all the Litterati were favorable in
their voices; wherefore the Delfick Chancellor proclaimed aloud, Eternal fame,
and endless glory to Girolomo Magagnati; at which words the whole College of
Vertuosi did with general applause answer Placet. The writings of so fortunate
a Poet being consecrated to eternity, they were delivered out in a Basin of
Gold to all the public Libraries from whence they were afterward with the
accustomed ceremony, to the Delfick Library. But because the Illustrious
Ferdinand, Cardinal and Duke of Mantua had taken La Boscareccia Clomira, the
last and best of Magnati's Poems into his protection, Apollo, in favor to so
learned a Prince, who was a public lover of Learning, and a liberal Mecenas to
the Vertuosi, would have so lovely a Pastoral appear in his presence; wherefore
Berni, the solicitous promoter of all this business, came presently to the door
of the Pavillion, and took that fair maid by the hand, who being waited upon to
the Court, not only by the rest of the Noble Princes, and learned Mantuan
Barons, but even by great Virgil's self, was likewise attended by Dametas,
Corridon, Titerus, Niso, Mirtillo, and other famous Shepherds of Arcadia,
together with their fair Nymphs; a spectacle so acceptable to his Majesty, and
so pleasing to the Muses, and to the whole College of the Vertuosi, as they did
not remember that they had ever received any greater consolation. When the fair
Clomira was presented to Apollo, she fell down at his feet, and adored his
Royal presence; and then rising up to the Muses Throne, she humbly kissed the hem
of their garments; then returning to her place, she undauntedly related all the
misfortunes of her love, which she had suffered to attain the marriage of her
beloved Igeta. Then Apollo, having greatly praised the constancy of so lovely a
Shepherdess, fell to expatiate himself upon the commendations which she
deserved, for having preserved her chastity untoucht, in her so long
peregrination, though clothed in man's aparrel, in this so corrupt age. Whilst
Apollo spoke these words, a voice was heard, which amongst the infinite number
of Vertuosi who were flockt together to see this delightful sight, said these
identical words; If she should come into our Country, she might bid her
virginity goodnight. The most excellent Pietro Vittorio, one of the public
Censors, rose up then, and asking who it was had been so rash as to utter such
misbecoming words in that sacred place, commanded that he should be found out.
Apollo, with his a^customed gravity, admonished the Censor, that it became good
men, even by wresting the words, always to interpret another man's sayings in
the best sense, it being the sign of an ill affected mind, to understand those
things sinisterly, which might admit of a good construction; and that he who
had spoke so, deserved rather to be thanked by the Judges, for the severe
correction which he gave to the wicked men of his Country, then to be
reprehended: That therefore he who had received public admonition, should
amend his manners. And this being said, gave order that an honorable place
should be allotted to the faithful Clomira and her beloved Igeta, amongst the
other famous Shepherds of Arcadia. Then Berni drew from forth his bosom,
Magagnati's special Writ of Proxy, and giving it to the Delfick Chancellor,
first kneeled, and then in Magnaties name took the Oath of Allegiance which is
wont to be given to all the Litterati who are judged to deserve place in
Parnassus. Wherefore Berni, in the behalf of Magagnaty, swore, That as he
formerly had done, so for the future he would make it appear by his actions,
that he did believe with his heart, and profess by his mouth, that man's true
wealth lay in possessing the rich treasure of knowledge; that he would in all
places, and at all times, show himself to be an implacable enemy to the
Ignorant, a ready friend to the Vertuosi. And this being said, his Majesty's
Lord Treasurer came to Berni, accompanied by the chief Exchequer Officers of
this State, who by the agreement made by the Lord Chancellor, obliged his
Majesty's Royal Delfick Treasury, that when the pleasant Tersets, Clomira, the
life of St. Longinus, La Vernata, La Meditation Poetica, a Noble Panegyric
upon Cosmo the second, great Duke of ^uscany, and the other elegant Works of
the Vertuoso Giorolimo Magagnati should be lost either by fire, deluges, or any
other imaginable way, Apollo should out of his own Royal Patrimony, always
keep the name and fame of so famous a Poet alive and glorious amongst men.

The solemnity of this Covenant being ended, the famous Petrarch mounted the
same Chair; and turning toward Apollo, said, Sir! The most polished, neat,
polite Writer which we in these times have of Italian Lyrick Poetry, is that
reverend Father Don Angelo Grillo, a Noble Vertuoso of Genua, whom I so much
glory to have amongst the number of my followers, as I find a particular
ambition in me, that I may now name him in this place, and in this age, wherein
the Guidiccioni, the Bembi, and my beloved Iovan di Casa failing, and all the
rest of the most observed former Italian Poets, nothing is usually seen in the
modern ones, but a certain natural abounding vein, without the solidity of
those Poetical precepts which put a difference, in the opinion of the
Litterati, betwixt the Verses of one that is born a Poet, which are sung on the
sudden, from those which such Vertuosi who having study and art joined to the
natural Talent of Poetry, are continually filing, and by candlelight severely
censuring their Composures. This being said, every one might perceive by a
certain humming that was heard amongst the Litterati of so honorable a Senate,
how much every one was pleased at the nomination of a personage of such
splendour: Wherefore Apollo, in whose face great joy might be discerned, said to
Petrarch, Well beloved! you have named a Vertuoso who is indeed worthy of your
choice, and who^ly conformable to our desire: And though we love Don Angelo
dearly, and consequently wish such length of days unto him, as he himself
desires; yet great is our curiosity of quickly enriching this our Senate by the
purchase of so cried up a personage; to the end that my Vertuosi may see and
know how they are qualified, who deserve to be beloved by stones, much more by
men.

Then the Rhyme Morale, Pietosi affetti, Pompee Funebri, and other sacred Poems,
together with the Prose of so flourishing a Wit, being read in public by
Petrarch, they for their delicacy deserved so the public praise, as (though it
were unusual) the Senate not being able to tolerate that where there was so much
worth, Votes should be given in private, Viva voce, vivisque suffragiis,
Immortality was with extraordinary applause granted to the name and writings of
the reverend Father Don Angello Grillo, with all the solemnity of
Proclamations, Oaths and Allegiance, and the Lord Treasurers obligations before
mentioned.

Petrarch being retired to his own place, Cornelius Tacitus mounted the
aforesaid Chair, but with great trouble of soul to his Majesty, the Muses, and
the whole College of Litterati; for, remembering that after the entrance made by
so miraculous a writer into Parnassus, so many ages ago, he having enjoyed the
prerogative of taking out the Golden Ball 46 times, he had never had the
fortune to name any Latin Historian who might be truly styled a Politician,
they were very much troubled that modern Histories, which write the naked bare
narration of things, should want that Politic salt, which makes the Reading of
History very delightful, and him very wise and Learned, who delights in such
like studies.

But wary Tacitus being much pleased with the trouble which he perceived to be
in them all, said to Apollo, At last most serene Monarch of the Stars (though
to my great affliction, it has been long first) that happy day so much by me
desired, is come, that my detractors, who have imputed the failing or want of
Politian Historians of my Classis; to my harsh, short, and therefore obscure
style, to my defect of always joining the reason of things, to the things
written; a way of writing which they said was shunned as vicious and rash,
rather then not imitated for its difficulty, shall have reason to know their
great error, and to be quiet, when at this present time, in that famous Court
of Rome, which having always been that true Trojan horse, has sent forth
continually Heroes of singular virtue, and more then humane valor, there lives
an Elegant Politic Historian at last, a well relishing Latin Writer of the
Annals of his times, one who for the shortness of his style, for his frequent
Sentences, for the pith of Policy, his handsome way of Narration and document,
and for knowing how in the very Narratives, to show in two words, the occasion
thereof, has known how to imitate me so, as for the grace of this Senate, and
for the glory of the Liberal Sciences (far be all boasting from these my
expressions) I will not call him by his own proper name of Paulus Emillius
Santorius, a famous Prelat in the Court of Rome, but I will boldly term him
another Tacitus. It is not to be believed how overjoyed Apollo and all the
Litterati were, when Tacitus named one who was as acceptable to them, as the
imitaters of Tacitus are rare to be found. So as Tacitus having with a loud
audable voice read the Annals of so delightsom an Author, they gave such
satisfaction to ever one, as with public and gracious suffrages, the name of
Paulus Emillius Santorius, was judged by the College of the Litterati, to
deserve the same Immortality of Fame, and the same glory, with which Maximus
Cornelius Tacitus had formerly been honored. When Tacitus had given the
accustomed Oath of Allegiance, and the Lord Treasurer had performed his part
for the greater security of the Immortality of so famous a Writer, an end was
put to t he nomination of such Writers as were yet alive. Whereupon they fell
immediately to the admission of such Litterati as had arived at Parnassus,
after their deaths, for the writings, and actions which they had done whilst
they were living.

The first then who presented himself before Apollo, was Marius Equicola, who
spoke thus unto his Majesty, I (most gloricus Prince of Planets) very well know
my own affrontedness in pretending for the rich reward, and precious Patrimony
of that eternal fame which they enjoy, who you think worthy of the glorious
patrimony of Parnassus, by my weak endeavors in those my writings, wherein I was
made to show the nature of Love; but the great benignity which your Majesty
uses toward the lovers of Learning, does so largely supply the smallness of
men's merits, as I do thereby dare to crave the exorbitant usury of receiving
much, for the little that I give.

When Apollo had heard the request of this Vertuoso, If you have brought
nothing else with you (friend Mario) said he, then that little volume which you
have there of the nature of love, I am sorry that I must tell you, you have
taken pains to no purpose; having labored to show the world the nature of that
love, which is so well kno^n to all men, as that there is not any one that
knows not in some sort how to conceal it; you might have deserved a chief place
in this my State, I tell you, if you had bestowed your labor in writing the
nature of hatred, which every ignorant common person knows so well how to
palliate with the name of good will, and cover with the false cloak of love, as
the world is full of the complaints and appeals of those unfortunate people,
who for having trusted too much, exclaim of being assassinated by their friends.

Marius Equicola departed much afflicted from the Court, by reason of this his
Majesty's resolute answer, next to whom came Sforza Oddo, a famous Perugian
Doctor of Law, who laid at his Majesty's feet, his complete Treatises, Della
Compendiosa sostitutione, and Della restitutione in Integro, and the Volumes of
his learned Conciglis; which in a short, but pithy Oration, he desired might be
consecrated to Immortality. This Litterato was very acceptably and graciously
received by his Majesty, and by the College of the Vertuosi; but, but little
honor was done to those his Works; not for that they were not completely
learned, but for that Treatise of Law being of very little esteem in this
State, Sforza was only admired for the sweetness of his disposition, and for
his being very much verst in all the most commendable Sciences. Immortality was
therefore, but coldly, and with weak applause decreed to Sforza, and to his
writings; and when he had taken the accustomed Oath of Allegiance between the
Chancellors hands, he was told by the Master of the Pegasean Ceremonies, that
his business being ended, he might be gone. Sforza replied, that he could not,
nor ought not to be gone before his Majesty's Exchequer was bound to keep his
name and fame always alive in men's memories, as he had seen done to Magagnati,
and others. Apollo hearing this dispute, he spoke thus to Sforza; Know most
honored Litterato, that I willingly bind my Royal Exchequer, for security of
perpetual fame to those my Vertuosi who are admitted into Parnassus; but this
belongs not to Doctors of the Law, with whose writings I out of good reason
proceed otherwise; for knowing that the infinite volumes of modern Lawyers,
have put those Laws into so great confusion, in the clearness and perspicuity
whereof man's greatest felicity lies, as to end suits which are made
everlasting; the capricio s of private men are more embraced and followed, then
the Decrees of Princes, and in the multitude of the variety of common opinions,
the opinions of writers are rather embraced then weighed: I foresee that within
a short time Princes will be forced to free mankind, afflicted by so great
disorder, with extirpating out of the world the writings of those Iurisconsulti
who by their infinite cavilings, have turned the administration of sacred
Justice into an execrable Merchandise. Wherefore I should too much injure my
Exchequer, if I should oblige it to keep the fame of those infinite volumes
written by the Doctors of Law, perpetually alive, which I foresee for certain
will shortly all be burnt, as being public prejudicial enemies to mankind.

Sforza, by reason of this unexpected answer of Apollo, looked very pale, and
being much afflicted, reassumed his Writings consecrated to immortality; and
putting them under his left arm, took from out his bosom, three excellent
Comedies made by him, De Morti vivi, and Della Erofilamacchia, and della
Prigione d'Amore: Andshewing them to his Majheld up in his right hand, said;
Most Illustrious Prince of the Zodiac, I rather desire to obtain certain
Immortality amongst the Italian Comic Poets, then that of the Doctors of Law,
which, as your Majesty has said, is so manifestly exposed to the danger of
fire. I am so delighted with the sight of this so glorious abode in Parnassus,
as I will not leave any thing unindeavoured, that I may never depart from
thence. I therefore humbly beseech your Majesty not to think me unworthy
thereof. Apollo then commanded the Vertuosissimo Alexandro Picolommeni, called
Lo Stordito Intronato, the Prince of Italian Comic Poets that he should
acquaint the College of the Litterati with his opinion of those commodities,
which Picolommini having done, and therein highly exaggerated sforza's wit,
Immortality was again decreed unto him, by all the Litterati of Parnassus; and
all the aforesaid solemnities being performed, Sforza departed very much joy'd
from the Royal Audience.

Giovanni Desp^uterio, a Dutch Schol-master, presented Apollo next with his
Grammar, and earnestly desired to be admitted into Parn ssus. To whom Apollo
answered, That being cloyed with so nausty a generation, by reason of the
musty, moldy disputations and questions which daily arose in Parnassus,
between the Pedanticks, he was resolved rather to lessen their number, which
was grown too great, then ever to add any one more to them, that therefore he
might depart when he pleased. Though Apollo had so clearly excluded
Despauterius, yet was not he a whit discouraged; but with a Pedantick
petulancy, answered, Sir, if your Majesty shall please to give such
satisfaction to my demands, as I desire, I am so far from intending to
displease your Majesty, or any of your Litterati in Parnassus, as I promise
and oblige my self to teach my easy Grammar to all such children as shall come
to my School Gratis. Appollo replied, That he was not the first, who under
pretense of so charitable a work, had intruded themselves into Parnassus; that
Donato first, then Guarin, Scopa and M^rcinello next, and many other
Grammarians, who by their excessive number had so defiled Parnassus, had made
use of the same fair pretense, who being afterward grown wealthy by the
profuse liberallity of their Scholars Parents, whereas their large Donatives,
ought to have encouraged them in so good a work, they contrary to all men's
expectation, had wrought the contrary effect; for being already become rich, as
soon as they saw they could live plentifully upon their own incomes, they
abandoned their profession of teaching, and impiously spurned at that charity
which seemed first to be so deeply graven in their hearts; so as such being
become unuseful in Parnassus, were a visible encumbrance to him, and to his
Litterati. Apollo further added, that notwithstanding all that had been said,
that he would willingly allow Despauterius an abode in Parnassus; but upon
condition, that whenever he should shut up his school, he should restore all
the moneys to the Parents, which he had taken for instructing their children.
When Despauterius had heard this proposal made by Apollo, he, without further
replying, made all the haste he could out of the Court; and answered John
Baptist Guarina, who reprehended him for his shamedenying to accept of his
Majesty's offer, That it being usual with all men to be soon glutted with any
one, and to love new things, the usual custom of Curtizans, to put forth part
of their moneys which they had got in their youth, to keep themselves thereby
from being necessitated to turn Bawds when they grow old, was more then
Platonic wisdom, and therefore worthy to be admired and imitated by every one.
And that it became a wary man, so to consider his own interest, together with
his charity used to his neighbor, as that that love failing, wherewith all men
were at last cloyed, a man might live commodiously of himself, without running
the hazard of being forced to beg his bread when he should be old and decrepit.

Dispauterius was no sooner gone from the Audience, but Olao Magno the curious
Writer of the Gothish affairs, and of the other Northern Nations, and the
Historian of so many famous Kingdoms of China, came jointly thither; who when
they had presented their writings unto his Majesty, made the usual request
That they might be consecrated to immortallity. Then Titu, Livius the Soverain
Prince of Latin Historians, who was appointed by Apollo to give his opinion of
them, did mainly oppose them, accusing them for fabulous, and rather written to
show their own curious capacious inventions, then the solid truth which he was
obliged to do, who would deserve the name of a perfect Historian. All the
Litterati to whom Apollo also referred it, joined in this opinion with Li^y;
for they thought it a very scandalous action to admit of the slack compositions
of those vainly curious wits, who had filled their writings with incredible
things, and therefore merely fabulous, amongst the strict Historical writings.
Only the Politician Tacitus differed from the opinion of Livy, and of the
other Historians, who said, That these men who had described, and recounted the
actions of the most remote Northern Nations, and of the furthest Eastern
people, ought not to be proceeded with, with such rigor, as was exactly
observed with those who wrote the Histories of known Nations, and neighboring
people, for that with every one, Omne Ignotam pro Magifico est, Tacit. vita
Agric. and that it was very true, Majoracredi de ab^ntibus, Tacit. lib. 2.
Hist. This opinion of Tacitus, though it were singular, was approved of by his
Majesty, whereupon the Northern Histories, and those of China, together with
the names of their Authors, were with the wonted solemnities consecrated to
eternity. It Is true, that Apollo told Olao, that by all means he must moderate
the greatness of those Northern Eagles, which preyed upon Elephants, and
carried them up into the air; which appeared so disproportionable to him, and
his College of Litterato's, as it would not be born withal, no not in Plinies
mouth. And he said to the Author of the China History, that he should reduce
the immence Metrapolitan City of so many Kingdoms, inhabited by many millions
of men to some credible measure; and particularly, that he should bring the
Palace of that King, which he had affirmed to be many miles long, to such a
form, as Vitruvius should not laugh at him for it, saying, that if that
building were so great as he had described it to be, the Halls must needs be
half a mile long, and the Chambers little less; which if it were true, the
whole Academy of Architects had reason to say, that to bring the meat hot to
the table, the servants of so great a King must ride post.

These two men's business being ended, Thomaso Bozio entered the Court, a noble
Aggobine Vertuoso, no less famous in the Court of Rome for his sanctity of
life, then for his learning, wherewith he was abundantly endowed; and was
therefore received, and looked upon by Apollo, and by the whole College of
Vertuosi, with extraordinary demonstrations of love. This so famous personage
presented Apollo with his learned writings, De signis Ecclesiae Dei, and his
other noble pieces, which were all of them exceedingly praised and celebrated
by the Censors. They only said, That in his book Deruinis Gentium adversus
Machiavellum, there were many things observed, which deserved to be censured
and corrected, in that wicked writers desperate policy; but that
notwithstanding, since they saw not that there was any the least mention made
in all that book, of the ruins of any Nation or people, they were of opinion
that those words De ruinis Gentium should be cancelled as superfluous, and
placed in the Frontispiece of the book, only to make the title more stately
and glorious. This Caveat of the Censors was so readily pursued by Apollo, and
the College of Vertuosi, as Apollo complained very much of the great abuse of
many writers, who to make their works seem more learned and curious to others,
do fraudulently give them glorious and stately Titles, not minding that they
were very far differing from what was contained in their Works: A cheat which
being only committed for the advantage of the Booksellers, to make the Books
more vendible, was much like the falsehood of those Merchants, who selling their
Corn in sacks, lay the worst and rotten stuff in the bottom, and cover it over
with very good grain which they put at the top: And the Writers who were truly
Vertuosi, ought to think, that noble matter, learnedly handled in the bodies of
their Books, did render their Titles (though not so curious) as famous as a
Title unlike the matter treated on, did infinitely shame whatsoever elegant
Composition. Apollo having said these things, Immortality (according to the
custom of this Court) was graciously granted to the Name and Writings of this
renowned Litterato.

Bozio's admittance into Parnassus being had, as has been said, an Italian
Poet appeared before the Pavillion where Audience was given, on horseback, with
a guide before him, who that he might come time enough to the days solemnation
of admittance of the Litterati into Parnassus, had taken Post at Corinth; this
man, as soon as he got off horseback, presented himself before Apollo with his
boots and spurs on; to whom he delivered a Book of Songs made by himself; and
then desired that the glory of eternal fame might be decreed to his Name and
Stanza's. It is not easily to be believed with what joy this Litterato was
received by the whole Senate: Wherefore Apollo having received his Songbook with
show of extraordinary affection, as soon as he had read certain Madrigals, and
Sonnets full of lascivious and obscene conceits, he, as if he had had a
Serpent, or some other perilous beast, threw the Song-book into the midst of
the room; and afterward growing very red in the face, through anger, Go (said
he) and publish these your lascivious Ribaldries in the Stews and Bawdi-houses;
for in my State, which is the habitation of all chaste Virtue, such Ruffion
pieces as this are not admitted. I myself (and I glory to speak it in this
place have been a lover, and consequently I love amorous Poetry; but this must
be when love is handled with such terms of civility by modest Poets, which I so
much admire in my most modest Petrarch,: Nor can I sufficiently wonder how some
modern Poets can be so shameless as to make use of Learning, which was wholly
brought into the world to sow virtue amongst men, therewith to teach others the
use of wicked lust; and the practice of every most detestable vice: Nor can I
imagine how it can be possible that any man should be so sullied with the
sluttery of uncleanness, as that he dare publish those obscenities with his
pen, in clear daylight, and in the sight of the whole world, which are
committed by libidinous men, not without blushing, and remorse of conscience,
in the dark, secretly within sheets in close Chambers; and that they do not
only not acknowledge such slips to be actions which bring with them eternal
infamy, but that they are grown so blind, as that they hope to win same unto
themselves, and purchase eternal glory by those things which deserve perpetual
punishment. Apollo had not made an end of speaking, when the unfortunate Poet
went out of the Hall, and he and his guide getting upon the same horses whereon
they came, left Parnassus as fast as they came thither: And to his greater
scorn, his book, which no man durst touch with their hands, as if it had been
infectious, was by the public Aparators kicked out of the Court.

In this interim a base Mountebank forced the Guard at the door of the
Pavillion, and with a Box which he had under his arm, and a Dog which he led in
his hand, entered the Court; the dore-keepers ran immediately to keep so
unworthy a fellow from coming before his Majesty, and taking him by both the
arms, pluck him out of the Pavillion: The Mountebank being very strong,
strugled hard to keep in, and cried out aloud that he would be heard: Apollo
was sorry to see the poor wretch so handled, and commanded the Soldiers to
forbear further troubling him; the Mountebank then spread his Cloak upon the
ground, and opening his Box, drew forth a great sheet of Vellum, at which a
large seal was hanged; and showing it to his Majesty, to the Muses, and to the
College of Litterati, said, Sir, To prove that the Soap which I for the general
good deliver out to every one, to take away whatsoever stain of shame or
dishonor (unless it be the disgrace of having married a whore) out of the
vestments of peoples reputation, is miraculous, and the only thing in the
world; let all men behold this my privilege, granted me by the invincible and
always glorious Prince, Charles the first, King of France; who thought this my
secret worthy so singular a favor, only because I took away that great spot
of Oil from off his Royal Robe, with this my soap, not any ways injuring the
stuff, which Ariadeno Barbarosso threw upon it. Wherefore I earnestly beseech
your Majesty, and all those who are in this consecrated place, that my
commodity may be fully tried; and if every one find it not to be the rare thing
which I have said, I desire it may immediately be burnt. Apollo seemed to be
much taken with the vivacity of this bold man's wit, whom he asked what his dog
was good for? The Charletan answered, That the modern world being become
sensual, he gathered company together to hear him, with this his dog which
could show tricks. If it be so (said Apollo) this your occupation seems to me
to be much like to the catching of birds; for you with your prating play the
fowlers part who whistle; your soap is the bait which is put upon the
bird-lime, your dog the owl, those that hear you and believe you, the guls,
who leaving some feathers of small money in the bird-lime of your Merchandise,
makes your Quarry good. But since you are unfortunately fallen upon this place,
where such as you are, are but little credited, and your commodities not like
to go off, for that my Litterati have no stains at all in their aparrel, do me
and my Vertuosi the pleasure to see your dog play: The Charletan obeyed, and
made his dog, which was singularly well taught, show many tricks, which it did
so handsomely, and with such understanding, obeying whatsoever his Master bad
him do, as he seemed to have human sense. The graver sort of the Senate wondered
very much to see Apollo waste the time appointed for businesses of such weight,
in looking upon such trivial pleasure, especially since his Majesty seemed to
be much delighted with the dogs tricks, which continued a good while: But their
wonder turned soon into admiration, when Apollo, whose property it is to
extract excellent documents, and useful precepts, even out of the vilest things
that he looks upon, cried out, Oh the glory of Knowledge! Oh the great felicity
of my Illustrious Virtues! the only rich patrimony of mankind: O my dearly
beloved Litterati, rejoice with me, cheer up your hearts, since now you see
with your eyes, the great power of Knowledge, the worth of Science, when a
little knowledge which a man has been able to teach a dog, is sufficient not
only to make both him and his Master live plentifully, but to cause him to
enjoy the greatest content which can befall a large soul, of seeing the world,
and getting good gain thereby, and yet there be some who value them not, who
despise them, and persecute them as being prejuditial.

The Mountebank being liberally rewarded, and dismissed by order from Apollo, a
Vertuoso appeared before his Majesty, who whilst he lived in the world, by
reason of his pleasant pregnant wit, and his graceful comportment, having been
the delight of the Roman Court, was by all men known to be that Baldo Cataneo,
who was so admired by the Vertuosi of that Court, for his pleasant witty
conceits, and his gravity in more serious affairs, both in Prose and in Verse,
as he deserved the munificent Allessandro Peretti Cardinal Montalto for his
liberal Mecenas. This Poet presented Apollo with the first Canto's of his
Argonautica, a Poem composed by him in eight lined Stanzas; and bitterly
bewailing his misfortune in dying in the flower of his age, said, his death was
for no other cause displeasing to him, save only that he must now lay before
his Majesty's feet, that immature fruit of his brain, which if he had lived
longer, he hoped would by increase of years have been so perfected, as it would
have been more then meanly pleasing to the Litterati: Which calamity was the
reason why for his small desert, and by reason of the misfortune of this Poem,
he now desired that Immortality unto his name, of mere grace and favor, which
he had hoped to have been able to have challenged of right and justice. Apollo
with great humanity, but in words and gesture, answered Cataneo, That both
himself, and all the Vertuosi of Parnassus were very sensible of his immature
death, both bad him comfort himself in the benign Laws of Parnassus, since
thereby for the better encouragement of his Litterati, the good mind, and
virtuous intention of his beloved Poets being had in more regard, then the
quality of the Compositions which they brought to Parnassus, they gave with the
same liberality the reward of entire Immortality, to Poems which were but begun
by the pregnant brains of the Litterati, and which were interrupted, not by
lasiness, but by death, as if they had been brought to their full perfection.

Thus was Immortality favorably decreed to the Name and Writings of Baldo
Cataneo, who being with wonted solemnity, placed by the Masters of the Pegasean
Ceremonies, amongst the demi. Gods who enjoy the signal Prerogative of
Immortality to their Names and Fames; a Litterato appeared in the Royal
Audience, who by his Gown, after the Grecian fashion, and by the evident sign
of his beard, was known by the greatest part of the Senate, for that famous
Timotheo Greco, who having gaged his beard about the dispute of a syllable,
with Francisco Filelfo, that famous Poet of Marcha, it was by the severe Victor
cut off; whereupon all the spectators began again to laugh, and greatly to
wonder how Timotheo, who had never been very wise, had so much to his
prejudice, dared to present himself in that place, to demand a Residence in
Parnassus, which is only granted to the Litterati of highest esteem. Yet
Timotheo, spoke boldly thus to Apollo: I may truly say I have been rather a
lover of Learning, then that by my perpetual study I may have deserved the name
of a perfect Litterato, though I come emptyhanded before your Majesty, and I
dare demand a place in Parnassus amongst your Litterati; yet I hope I shall not
part from your Royal presence, without receiving some favor from that your
immense benignity, which does largely reward the bare intense desire which men
have of knowledge. Timotheo was upon his knees (as the custom is) whilst he made
this his Petition to Apollo, when (a thing that was never at any time before
observed to be done to any personage how eminent soever) his Majesty beckned to
him to stand up, and bad him be covered: And then commanded, that according to
the custom, the Senate should give their suffrages touching Timotheus
admittance: The Litterati, who had but an ill opinion of Timotheo, and
therefore were sorry to see him enter the Court, firmly believed, that by the
extraordinary favor done to one whom Filelfo had so affronted, his Majesty
would try the stedfastness of his Senators opinions in giving their Votes; and
whether they would be diverted by his extraordinary usage toward any
whosoever: Wherefore they did not only all of them jointly give him the
repulse, but many of them showing themselves more zealous of the glory of
Parnassus then they needed, said freely, that the great affront put by Filelfo
upon Timotheo, did not only mark him out to every one for an ignorant person,
but for a great babbler, a thing which his Majesty and the whole Senate did much
detest. You my faithful Litterati (answered Apollo) have given a very ill
Judgment of this my Vertuoso, one, than whom (and let not this be offensive to
any one) mine eyes never beheld a more glorious personage, and to whom the
glory of eternal Fame, with all the most privileged prerogatives, ought rather
to be given. O how signal, how immense, how praiseworthy was the glory which
thou (my dear Timotheo) did get in the loss of the wager which thou did lay
with Filelfo, how much ought it to be commended, admired, and rewarded by me,
and by these my Litteratio more then all the actions ever done by any whoever
thirsted after glory. Thou art he alone, who to this day have known how, by
keeping constant to thy Oath made, and by making good thy word, to purchase
that Crown of glory of maintaining promise both to God and man, which most
commonly is so abusefully measured by the compass of Interest, both by Princes
and private men, as there can no so strict form of Oath be found, no faith
whereby to bind men, from which they cannot tell how to acquit themselves, not
only by a thousand evasions, but even by affronted impiety. Thine then
Timotheo, be the chief and most honorable place of this my Senate; and let all
men learn by the glory which (...) this day adjudge thee worthy of, that men
win so much honor by constantly keeping their word when it is once given, yea
though it be prejudicial to their own affairs; as glory is by all men esteemed
beyond comparison, greater then the love of any thing that is earthly.

This was the end of fortunate Timotheus his business, when Ferdinando of
Aragon, the Catholic King of Spain, appeared with great gravity in the Court,
and attended by a great many Lords, who complained grievously, that it being a
hundred years since he had earnestly pressed to be admitted into Parnassus, he
could never obtain his desire; and that it was not only he alone, but even all
those that knew him, that thought it a great injury done him, to be denied that
abode, which was easily granted to many that were inferior to him, both in
merit and State. Apollo answered King Ferdinando, That it was the ancient
custom of Parnassus, that Princes who desired to be admitted into his State,
should be chosen by the Votes of the Litterati of their own Nation, as those
who knew best their Kings deserts, and that he would by no means break those
orders which by so long a concourse of time had still proved good; and then his
Majesty having commanded that they should again go to their votes, he in a
grave manner minded the Nation of Arragon, how straightly she was bound, both to
God and man, to weigh the merits of her Kings, with the balance of a soul free
from all passion: The Votes being given, they were all found to be negative;
for which reiterated injury, Ferdinando being highly incensed, Sir, said he;
Can then such a King as I be so ill dealt withal, and scorned by his
ungrateful Nation, without being able to receive remedy for such injustice, for
so manifest injury from Apollo's self? What other Nation, either in ancient or
modern times, is there in all the world, which ought to acknowledge it self more
obliged unto its Prince, then is Arragon to me its King, and so great
Benefactor? who from that obscurity of fame which every one knows she was in,
have made her to be held in high esteem by all the Nations of the earth, by the
glorious union which I made between the powerful Kingdom of Castiel and her, by
Queen Isabels Marriage. Whilst King Ferdinando with strange alterations of
mind, said these things, it was observed that some of the chief Arragon
Senators shook their heads, which he, taking to be done to his yet greater
disgrace, grew so incenst, as Apollo observing it, to avoid some foul
inconvenience which might ensue thereupon, made him aware of his great error,
which blinded with passion, he committed in that his Cause; telling him, That
Princes did then make their Nations great and powerful when they united them to
an inferior Nation (as the Kings of France had done by the important
acquisition of Britany) and not to a more numerous and potent Kingdom. For in
the first case, by aggrandizing her Empire, men made their Nation Mistress;
whereas in the other, by lesning her Dominion, they made her a slave.

Whilst King Ferdinando departed the Audience, no ways appeased by this his
Majesty's wise answer; to the great admiration of the whole College, a
Sparrow-Hawk came flying into the Court, and lighting upon the public Chair,
infused wonder into all the spectators, who took it for some prodigious thing,
which signified some great matter. And the Soldiers of the Guard running to
drive her out of the Pavillion, his Majesty commanded them to let her alone.
Then the Roman Augures or Southsayers rose up and desired Apollo that they
might interpret that Augury* Apollo laughed at the request of those vain men,
and told them, that futurities were so hidden by immortal God, from men, as he
was a mere fool who pretended he could foretell them by the flying of birds, or
any such like thing which happened by chance; and that if they would make use of
their Art of Augury, by their ordinary interessed ends of making ignorant men
more obedient and ready in the execution of such things as they desired,
showing them that the will of God concurred with man's command, they should know
that Parnassus was no abode for such fools as could be whirld about by the holy
and sacred pretenses of malicious interessed men. Apollo having said these
things, and great silence ensuing thereupon, the Hawk spoke thus: That Virtue
which is thought to be only peculiar to man, is not only known by other
Animals, but loved by them, and greedily embraced, is clearly proved by the
aptness which is seen in birds, to learn several tunes which they hear sung by
others, and by their learning to speak like man; by the corveting and dancing
of four-footed beasts, and by other things which they see, or are taught, the
which they do as gracefully imitate, as they do easily learn. This truth (most
glorious Prince of the Planets) is sufficient to make the wonder cease in all
those that hear me, why I, a savage bird, who live by rapine, and am therefore
thought to have a cruel heart, and to be fiercely minded, should desire the so
happy and blessed abode of Parnassus. To adorn the soul with virtue, the desire
of good conversation is not only infused by God into men, who are endued with
an understanding able to know all things, but into all sorts and conditions of
Creatures: And since I very well know that those are only admitted into
Parnassus, who by their words and acts, either have taught, or are able to
teach holy precepts, good doctrine, and virtuous things, I certainly may with
much reason pretend to be thought very worthy to live in these fortunate
habitations. I know that all these glorious Litterati will grant me, that man's
subsistence, that the good beginnings, better progress, and best end of all
virtuous life depends upon the education which parents give their children;
this as necessary, as badly known Science of breeding up children well, is
notwithstanding very ill practiced by men, and very well known by the instinct
of nature to bruit animals: I, if it may stand with your Majesty's approbation,
am come to instruct in Parnassus; listen therefore Gentlemen, and admire;
Amongst us birds there is no more immense love then that which children bear to
their fathers: but I find man's ignorance to be so gross, that amongst them the
greatest enemies which children have, are their fathers: For the unbowel'd love
which they bear unto them, is more prejudicial to them, then is their enemies
implacable hatred. Love even to ones own children, has its bounds and limits,
which those who exceed, occasion ruin to their children; and that you may
judge of other animals, by the example which I shall show you of us birds; we
do so affectionately love our young ones, as to feed them upon urgent necessity
with flesh torn out of our own breasts, is not our utmost charity to them; but
we do notwithstanding (as men unfortunately do) love them when they are old;
but by the wise instinct of nature, only so long as they must of necessity be
fed by us; for when we find their claws begin to grow sharp, and their wings
strong, the first fit for prey, the other for flying, we use the last and most
perfect bounds of charity in not loving them any longer; not for that that
paternal affection which lives in fathers even after their childrens death,
cease to be amongst birds, but because that infinite affection of parents to
do what is best and most convenient for their children, requires it should be
so; the love of fathers to their children is not only useful, but necessary;
but only so long as they are not able of themselves to get their living, and
harmful, and directly pernicious, if they assist them when they are able by
their own labors and industry to live plentifully of themselves: For certainly
men's children would be very industrious, if their parents would only love them
till that time which God has prefixed unto us, and that they would do like me,
who when I see my young ones can fly currantly, I show them hedges full of
Sparrows, that they may live plentifully: So men, when their children are
become men like themselves, should show them Princes Courts, and chief
Metropolitan Cities, wherein much business is transacted; to the end that they
might maintain themselves not like idle and unusefull lumps of flesh buried in
sloathfulness, and total ignorance, but by their own virtuous industry. Apollo
having heard so necessary a lesson for men, after having highly praised the
Sparrow-hawk, and deputed it a safe and honorable place in Parnassus, he said,
Now at last, my beloved Vertuosi, we find clearly, that the immortal God having
infused full and perfect wisdom into bruit-beasts, for what concerns their
preservation and propagation; the true Philosophy which makes men wise, and to
which by continual study and speculation they ought to attend, is to observe
their natural instincts, and diligently to practice them in what concerns
themselves; for so they might lead their lives happily, not by the
capriciousness of several sects of Philosophers, so far differing in opinion
amongst themselves, but by living according to holy and prudent natural
precepts; and as it would be a foul disorder if birds, and other bruit animals
should feed their children till they grow old in their nests and dens; so it
must be confessed that parents do very ill, who taking more care how to
accumulate wealth and riches for their children, then to leave them the
precious and always permanent patrimony of Learning, which fire cannot
consume, deluges devour, nor Tyrants take away, instead of breeding up men that
may be useful for their own Families, and serviceable to their Countries, and
to the world, do most unfortunately breed up unuseful and vicious lumps of
flesh, who not knowing wherein else to spend their lives, girting their swords
about them, that to the end that they may appear true Gentlemen, imitate those
unfortunate pismires, who are then sure to fall into rain, when they put on
wings. For it is evident that those great patrimonies which are got by
Learning, are ruined by the use of Arms.

Thus said Apollo, when the famous Philip Commines, Lord of Argenton, appeared
before his Majesty, and showed his Memorials to the Senate of Litterati; and
then desired, that together with their Author, they might be consecrated to
Immortality. When Argentonne had made his demand, Apollo commanded Titus
Livius, Prince of the College of History, to give his opinion upon Argentons
Memorials; who said, he saw no reason why that French Lord should desire that
his Writings should be placed amongst the Learned Labors of Historians which
were preserved in the Delfick Library; since there was in them no gravity of
style, no strength of eloquence, no good contexture of times, no frequent
Sentences, no Orations, nor any other thing worthy an indifferent Historian:
But that he having woven these his Memorials according to the vain fantastic
way of Romance, in sundry Chapters, wherein are handled the weighty matters of
fact, between the two glorious and potent Princes, Lewis the twelfth, King of
France, and Charles, Duke of Burgony, the first known by all men to be wise, the
other valiant, he thought him fitter to be placed amongst the Writers of
Romances, then in the Historical Classis. Apollo was so little satisfied with
this Relation of Livy, as not without some commotion of mind, he answered,
Livy, those requisites which as I perceive by your relation, you think ought
first to be had in consideration in a perfect Historian, are those which I
think ought to be considered last in my Vertuosi. History is meat not only well
seasoned to please the curious pallat, but substantially and magnificently
served in to please the soul; and therefore more respect is to be had therein
to profit, then to pleasure: And you are very much deceived if you believe,
that to the study of History it be requisite to have a neat polite phrase,
either in Latin, Greek, French, or Italian; the sole end of so honorable a
study, is to come by that wisdom, which is only drunk in by the reading of past
affairs. And though I highly commend your stately style, and Cesars so polished
speaking, yet I would have you know, that those things which you hold the
first; are the last in a perfect Historian. Truth is the soul of History, which
makes it long lived, and well esteemed of amongst men, as also the knowledge how
to explain the deep Councels, most secret thoughts of Princes, all the cunning
Intriegoes used in times of peace and war, in the Government of their States;
which though they be written in poor Law-Latin, affords such content to
virtuous minds, as does eternize his Writings, who has wit enough to weave
such Histories. And amongst these I esteem judicious Commines the chief, and
do not only think him very worthy a place in Parnassus, but command that the
first place amongst French Historians be assigned to him.

It grew now very late, and Apollo having taken great pains in listening to the
reading of so many writings, and hearing so many requests, was very weary; when
Berni, Mauro, Molza, and other pleasant and jovial Poets, to make his Majesty
merry, brought a Poet into the Court, so sordidly aparrelled, with his clothes
all tattered, and smelling of smoke, as he was not unlike a Chimney-sweeper:
This man having moved great laughture in the Senate, came before Apollo, to whom
with a rude discomposed reverence, he presented a very greasy Poem. His
Majesty asked him who he was? who answered, That he was the Author of the
famous Poem di Bovo d' Antona. Apollo seemed then to have heard of him, and
told him that he was the Ariosto of Ballad-makers; Apollo listened then so
attentively to one whole Canto of that Poem, scowling sometimes, as he made all
men wonder that his Majesty could so much as cast an eye upon so foolish a
thing. Apollo, who observed his Litterati's amazement, said, that he much
admired that Writer, whom they so much scorned and laughed at, since knowing so
little, he had the courage to write so much. A thing which might make many of
them blush, who knowing much, had writ little: And that the excuse made by many
was very naught, and altogether unbecoming a Vertuoso; That there was no more
need of writing Verses, since Princely Virgil had writ, that matters of Physic
being treated on by Hippocrates and Galen, ought not be touched upon by any
others; and that he spent his time in vain, in writing about the Mathematics,
who had well considered Euclids writings; for there was no book which had not
somewhat of good in it; and that conceits and doctrines were found in many
Latin Poets, in more writers of Physic, and in some Authors of the
Mathematics, which did not only equal, but exceed any in Virgil, Hippocrates,
or Euclid; and that he hated some wits, who having noble Talents in several
Sciences, able to eternize their names, did cloak their sloathfulness, and
hatred of writing with the name of modesty.

But when Apollo gave order to Platina to take that greasy Poet into his
Pastery to make him clean, to the wonder of all men, all the bells of Parnassus
were heard to sound an alarm, and presently after Mutio Iustinopolitano came
out of breath into the Court, and brought the dreadful news, that the
Monarchies and Commonwealths of all the world being fallen at ods, a bloody
battle was likely to ensue, unless some speedy remedy were found out. Apollo,
though at the very instant hearing of this so sudden chance, he was able of
himself to put on a resolution worthy of his own wisdom; yet in a business of
such danger, he would hear the opinion of his Council of State, though
tumultuary given. And though most were for quenching the sparkles of so
dangerous a fire, with the usual guards of the Palace, with two legions of
Satirical Poets, and with the Pretorian Lyrick Soldiers, and that his
Majesty's Royal Person should be reserved for a more urgent remedy, when all
other hopes failed, yet Tacitus his sole opinion prevailed with Apollo, who
resolutely said, Ire ipsum, and opponere Majestatem Imperatoriam debuisse,
cessuris ubi Principem longa experientia, eundemque severitatis, and
munificentiae summum vidissent. Tacit. lib. 2. Ann.

Wherefore Apollo marched speedily toward Parnassus, where the ordinary Guards
of Provincial Poets, and the Company of Curasiers of Italian Litterati, who
were in all haste sent before, found not only the chief streets chained up, and
the Foro Massimo secured with good Corpse de Guard, but the habitations of all
the Monarchies and Commonwealths well fortified, and furnished with armed men;
and the Monarchs, as well as the Consuls, Dukes, Standard-bearers,
Burgamasters, and other Chieftains of Commonwealths, were even then with their
Pikes couched ready to fall on: when the Princes and Commonwealths hearing of
his Majesty's approach, bore such reverence to his Royal presence, as throwing
their weapons on the ground, greatly fearing to be seen and known, fell flat
down: Which made every one see how much the presence of a Prince who is well
beloved and feared by his people, prevails with his subjects in such and other
like cases of urgent danger. The Tumults being thus quieted, as soon as Apollo
came to his own Palace, he sent for all the Monarchies and Commonwealths that
were resident in Parnassus; and all of them readily appearing, he bad the
Consul Marcus Marcellus acquaint him with the true reason of those Tumults. The
Consul said, that at a certain meeting, wherein were many Monarchs, Roman
Consuls, Dukes of Venice, Florentine Confalonieri, and Dutch Burgamasters, it
fell into discourse whether Monarchies or Republics were the better
Government; that Philippo Maria Vissinte, Duke of Millan, had the boldness to
say, that all republics, especially Aristocracies, were insufferable
Governments of many Tyrants; that the Illustrious Dukes of Venice, as those
that enjoy the perfectest Aristocracie that ever was, having given him the lie,
all Monarchies and Commonwealths, being concerned in common by this difference,
were, as his Majesty might see, fallen together by the ears. Apollo was the more
displeased hereat, for that by an Edict of his published long ago, he had
commanded upon pain of grievous punishment, that this so ancient question, and
which had been so often discust by the Litterati, should be no more disputed;
but that every one should rest content with his present condition. Then turning
to Duke Philip, who was the sole Author of this disturbance, he said, That
having spoken too inconsiderately of Aristocracies, he ought to know, that well
governed States were discerned from such as were Tyrannical, by their peaceable
and long life; for Tyrannical Governments being always full of conspiracies of
the Nobles, and of the Commonalties rebellions, lasted but awhile, and that it
might easily be seen what satisfaction the people of Venice enjoyed by the long
time that that flourishing Commonwealth had lived, and by the continual peace
that she had enjoyed at home: And that to make this truth appear the more plain
to all the Monarchies that were there present, he would put them in mind of a
business which had lately fallen out in Venice, whereby every one might see with
what, and with how much modest liberty people did live in that well governed
Commonwealth: For Vettore Calergi, a Noble Venetian, having left behind him one
only daughter with the rich portion of half a million of crowns; yet the
marriage of this so rich maid was so modestly endeavored by the Venetian
Nobility, as her mother might quietly marry her to whom she liked best; who
wisely chose Vicenso Gremani, a Noble Venetian, and next akin to her daughter,
for her daughters husband. Now tell me ingeniously; Philip, what would have
become of this young maid, if such a thing had happened in one of your
Monarchies? To answer your Majesty (said the Duke) with that ingenuity of soul,
and liberty of Language as becomes this place, doubtlesly if such a thing had
happened in any Monarchy, such designs would have been had upon so rich a Dowry,
well befitting any Queen, as with much violence (covered over notwithstanding
with the cloak of charity toward the young maid) they would have imprisoned
the mother, shut the young maid up into some Monastery, or other place, only to
enrich some of their favorites with this great Dowry, for more then three or
four such things as this, has been done in the like case, both in Italy, and
elsewhere in my time, and formerly, well worthy to be joined to the Letters of
Phalaris of Agrigentum.

The XV. ADVERTISEMENT.
At a public meeting, Force (contrary to the custom of the Plebean Court)
pretending to take place of Reputation: That Beautiful Lady, with excellent
resolution, finds a remedy for her reputation, which was in great hazard.

IT is very well known in Parnassus, that in all public meetings, Reputation
has always had the precedence of Force, and taken the right hand. But it
happened the last morning when Apollo made his solemn entry into Leo, Force had
the insolency (wherewith he is always accompanied) to contend for place with
Reputation; who, had she not been able by her excellent dexterity to overcome
so dangerous a rub, had certainly received some notable affront; yet was she
very much distasted at that her enemies petulancy used toward her. Wherefore
the Vertuosi, who were wholly devoted to that most excellent Princess,
encouraged her, and exhorted her, by no means to endure the insolency of that
rash fellow; and bad her moreover remember, that she was the right hand of all
Potentates, and the only instrument wherewith Princes did rule and sway the
world: That therefore she should take heart, and resolve to buckle with that
hairbraind companion, whom she would so bear down, with the Majesty of her
countenance, at the very first encounter; that (as it had happened a thousand
times) she would easily throw him down at her feet. The Lady-Reputation
answered those her beloved Vertuosi, who so encouraged her, with much meekness
and civility, that she greatly cherished their good will; but that she could
neither praise, nor follow their advice: Wishing them to remember, that her
whole power, authority, and greatness, being grounded only upon men's opinions,
which was so uncertain and various, and not upon the strength of armed men, nor
upon the security of inexpugnable Citadels, she must in this her adversity,
proceed with great circumspections, and admirable dexterity: And that there was
a great disparity between her and Force, who though once discomfeited, might
easily recover, and the second battle be made with greater strength, which
would be the more dangerous for her, for that her enemy would to his former
violence, add disdain and shame for the first discomfeiture; but that if it
should so fall out that she should not with the sole Majesty of her Person, and
Authority of Aspect, bear her enemy to the ground, or worst her enemy at the
very first encounter; like an Elephant which falling to the ground, cannot get
up again, she should be wholly robbed of all her greatness, which purchased her
the reputation which she had amongst men: Which considerations were the more
necessary for her, for that she had found nothing to be more dangerous to her,
then to go about to maintain that Authority and reputation in strength and
vigor, by force of Arms, which was only grounded upon Opinion: But that she
would provide for the indemnity of her Authority; by her usual remedies, and
would encounter force with her usual Arms, and would be sure to overcome him.
Then she added, that Force used those extraordinary terms of insolency against
her, not because his own power was increased, but for that by reason of some
private disorders of her own, he found her not to have that Grace and Majesty
which she had wont, nor to be had in such veneration by men, as formerly.

Having said this, the Lady-Reputation departed, and withdrew her self to her
Chamber, from whence she was not seen to stir forth for the space of some
months; but with great severity studied her amendment, banishing all private
interests for ever, clearly finding that her credit was much lesned, for having
given her self too much over unto them. In the next place she wholly busied her
self in sweeping with the besom of severe Reformation, all sordid baseness out
of her house, from whence she also extirpated avarice, overmuch ambition, and
all other private, dishonest, and scandalous passions. This Princess having thus
corrected her private disorders, upon a certain morning when she was to be
present at some public action, she adorned her self with purity of soul,
sincerity of heart, liberality, and with other her choicest virtues; and taking
upon her the Noble Mantle of immence love to deserving persons, and of public
Charity, she appeared with such Majesty at the place where she was expected by
the other Illustrious Virtues, and purchased such veneration and respect from
the lookers on, as even Force himself (so great was the devotion which that
sight wrought in him) was seen to tremble, and upon that occasion did not only
give her the precedence of the right hand; but begged it as a high prerogative,
that he might at that solemnity carry up her Train.

The XVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Giovan Francisco Pico, Count of Mirandola, that he might the more quietly
attend his studies, entreats Monsignor Dino da Mugello, Auditor of the
Exchequer in Parnassus, that the Reformers, by reason of the too great noise
which they always make in their profession, may be removed further from his
neighborhood; and is not heard in his desire.

THe Contentions, which now are greater then ever, and more obstinate between
the two chief Lights of Philosophy, Aristotle and Plato, having produced the
two mighty Sects of Platonicks and Peripateticks in Parnassus, which fill the
College of Litterati with troublesome disputes, and dangerous controversies;
Apollo, who joies in nothing more then in the peace and quiet of his Vertuosi,
employed Giovan Francisco Pico, Count of Mirandola, and Lord of Concord, many
months ago, in according so important controversies, who he hears has
labored so much therein, as that the business is already brought to some good
accommodation. But such a business requiring very much quiet, Pico is much
molested by the House of the Reformers, which is next to his Apartiment; for by
the continual great noise which they make, in beating water with Mortar, they
do much annoy him; wherefore Pico came yesterday before Dino da Mugello,
Auditor of the Exchequer in Parnassus, and desired that he might enjoy the
privilege of Scholars, in having all noisome occupations removed from his
neighborhood. The Reformers answered Dino, that there being no proportion to
be held between their reforming the ignorant, who were drowned in the dirt of
so many corruptions, and the agreeing the frivolous controversies of
Philosophers, they ought not to be any ways incommodated; and that it was
known to all men, that Princes wrought strange effects in their States, only by
keeping the House of Reformation open. Mirandola replied, That he did not only
much marvel, but was scandalized at the Reformers foolish pretention, the
vainness of whose employment was easily known, in that their long endeavors
had produced just nothing but infinite noise. Dino said then again with much
freedom, that there was nothing more necessary, nor of greater consequence in
any whatsoever State, then that the House of Reformation should still be kept
open, and should make a noise, for very great was the good that redounded
thereby; but that all men had not judgment enough to discern it: For
Reformation was not introduced by wise Princes in their States to do the world
good, and to make men virtuous, but that it might serve for a curb and rampire
against abuses, and to keep them from growing so powerful, as that in a few
years they might overrun the whole world: Moreover it wrought the excellent
effect of keeping a Prince continually in reputation with his subjects, by
showing them that he had a careful eye to the general good; for men were as
well contented with their Princes good will, as with the good effects which
they see proceeds from thence: A thing so true, as the greatest error which
could be committed by any that rule, was to let men see by their leaving the
Reyns loose to all corruption and abuses, they cared not how the world went.

The XVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Tacitus being excluded from out the most famous Commonwealths of Europe, makes
a grievous complaint to Apollo; and is by them with much honor received again,
and much made of.

THough the most excellent Caius Cornelius Tacitus be esteemed the Oracle for
Policy in this Court of Parnassus, and therefore is highly reputed by the
greatest Monarchs of Europe, yet Envy being always a capital enemy to Virtue,
some malicious people by their continual ill Offices, have rendered this so
illustrious personage, so hateful to most of the chastest Commonwealths that
reside in this State, as some few days ago they jointly forbad him their
houses. In so much as the very Venetian Liberty, which professes exact
chastity before all others, and is farthest from suspicion, shut her door upon
him the other day; for these chaste Princesses think it stands not with their
honor to converse with him who is held by men to be the only Architect of
Tyranny. Tacitus soon resented this so signal affront, both in words and
writing, not only with all the Republics that are resident in this State, but
even with Apollo's self, to whom with great commotion of mind, he grievously
complained, that he had been most wickedly assassinated by his ancient
ill-willers, and that in very deed, the ancient and modern Republics were not
more obliged to Plato, Aristotle, Licurgus, or to any other Legislater, or
Instituter of living free, then to him, if his Annals and Histories were
examined and well considered by learned men, not overbyassed with passion.

These complaints took deep rooting in the minds of these famous Literato's,
who not too much to distate so excellent a Writer, and that they might be sure
not to prejudice their own peculiar Interests, resolved to meet together in the
Temple of Concord, to the end that they might jointly resolve, whether it stood
with their reputation to hold Domestic conversation with Tacitus. And after
long dispute, they all agreed, That the familiar acquaintance of so politic,
and so wise a Writer, was more requisite for Commonwealths, then for
Monarchies; for they had clearly found, that Tacitus his end in writing
Tiberius his life, was not (as many who understood little of State Affairs had
given out) to form the Type of a Tyrannical Government; but that that excellent
Writer, by his so particular Narration of the enormous cruelties, not only of
inhuman Tiberius, but of Caligula, Claudius, Nero, and of the other most cruel
Tyrants which were Emperors since, used against the Roman Nobility, had no
other intention, then to let the Senators of Commonwealths see, into what
deplorable calamities they run, when preferring the hatred of their private
passions, and their own self-interests before the public good, they suffered
the precious Jewel of their Countries Liberty, which they ought so diligently
to keep and preserve, to be stolen away from them by cruel Tyrants. For it being
a precept exactly practiced by Tyrants, wholly to extirpate the Nobility which
formerly bore any sway, that so they themselves might reign securely, the
inhumanity of Tiberius, and others such as he, who succeeded him in the Roman
Empire, was not used by them out of any thirst they had after human blood, but
out of mere politic necessity, and Tyrannical prudence.

The XVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The blind man of Forli, that famous Italian Mountebank being, to the wonder of
all the Senate of Vertuosi, admitted by Apollo into Parnassus, is by his Majesty
put upon an employment of importance.

CHristofano de Sordi, called the blind man of Forli, a famous Italian
Mountebank, him to whom it is said, That the Illustrious Euterpe gave the
fluent vein of singing Verses ex tempore, in guiderdon, for a receipt which he
gave her where with to make her hair yellow, has these many years been
standing at Parnassus Gate, where he has still been troublesome to Apollo,
sometimes by submiss prayers, sometimes by fervent pressures, and many times
with importunate complaints, was so bold the last week (which caused much
laughture in the Litterati) to post up certain papers in the chiefest places of
Parnassus, wherein he divulged, that if there were any sprightly wit amongst
the learned Poets, who durst contend with him in singing Verses ex tempore to
his Harp, he challenged him to meet him in Euterpe's open field, where he would
make it evidently appear, that there was never a Poet in Parnassus of so
flowing a vein as could hold up against the fluency of his Verses sung ex
tempore, or that was worthy to carry his Harp after him. Apollo, who had ever
formerly laughed at the fond pretensions of this unworthy fellow, did on
Thursday last, of his own mere motion, in public Senate decree Immortality to
his name; and commanded, that with the usual pomp of solemn attendance, he
should be admitted into Parnassus, and brought into his presence. The next
morning the Triumphant Gate of Parnassus was thrown open to the blind man of
Forli, by which such Vertuosi enter, who by his Majesty are judged worthy the
glorious abode in Parnassus; whereat the learned Barons, the Prince-Poets, and
all the Potentates of this Court did so rage, as just when he set his foot upon
the threshold of the door, a great Monarch was heard to say, That Parnassus
began now to be an abode for trivial companions, since Mountebanks and
Quacksalvers were admitted thereinto. These words being spoken somewhat aloud,
were heard by the blind man; who presently asked his guide who that was that
had spoken so ill of him? Be quiet, said the guide, take off your hat, and, as
it becomes you, make a low leg to him that has injured you, for it was the
powerful King of England, Henry the eight. Then said the blind man boldly,
Master Henry, If you will play Orlando's part, and choke me with your
bravadoes, get you back to England, for we are all equal in Parnassus; and if
Mountebanks be not worthy of Parnassus, I wonder how you came thither, who very
well know with what Ballads you cheated the English. King Harry grew highly
incensed at so sharp an answer, and would have taken the blind man by the
beard, which was very long, and would have pulled it off, but he withheld
himself when he considered better, how unwise men of honor are, when they
contend with such as have no honor to lose. As soon then as the blind man was
come before Apollo, he bad his guide give him his Harp, and then desired his
Majesty that he would favor him with a Theme; whereupon (to the teeth of all
hidebound Poets, who are half a year in squeesing out a woeful Sonnet) he
offered himself to sing a hundred octavoes ex tempore: Apollo laughed at the
blind man, who did pretend to give satisfaction, with his silly ex tempore
verses, in that place, where the best Poets, with their well filed, and long
studied verses, could scarcely do it; and said unto him, I did not admit you
into this place, for any pleasure I take in your Verses sung ex tempore, but
only that you may teach my Litterati, in a public School, which shall be
assigned you, the Important Art of Walking Well and Safely. Giorolomo Morone,
Secretary to Sforzo, Duke of Millan, when he heard that blind men were to teach
such as could see, how to walk; broke forth into loud laughter; to whom Apollo,
without any manner of alteration, said, moreover, I bear with this your wonder,
which by the astonishment which I see in the faces of these my Litterati, is
common to many: But know that the ways of this present Age, being so stony,
and full of bad passages, as you all find them to be, blind men who walk
leasurely, leaning upon a guide, and with a staff in their hand, who raise
their feet high, and grope their way as they go, are excellent good to teach
those hasty wits, those lively, inconsiderate, rash, and impatient spirits, how
to walk safely, who being impatient of all circumspection, do abhor considerate
mature delay; and I am well pleased that you are not only an example of this
truth unto your self, but unto all others. Then turning to the blind man, he
bad him take Morone by the hand, and that he should walk two hundred paces with
him; which was done: And it fell out, that whilst the blind man and Morone were
walking thus, the blind man found by his staff wherewith he tried the way
before him, that he was come to a bad passage; wherefore he held back Morone,
and bad him (who was heedlesly walking over it) Stay: For, said he, Morone, we
are come to a place where we may break our necks; lift your foot high, and let
us be careful how we pass over this dangerous place: Try every place of it with
your staff, as I do, and diligently measure the length, breadth, and depth of
this hole, unless you will have us fall into it. Open the eyes of your
judgment, which is the true Lanthorn, which in darkest times, and places of
greatest danger, serves for the Sun. Morone punctually obeyed the blind man;
and though with some trouble and expense of time, they at last overcame all
hindrances, and past over the dangerous passage. Apollo then bad Morone turn
back, and to consider well the dangerous hole, which, guided by a blind man, he
had happily escaped; which when he had done, he run full of amazement and
apprehension, and threw himself down before his Majesty's feet, and humbly
craving pardon for his having laughed, confessed that by the guidance of a silly
blind man, he had prosperously past over that deadly Ford of the fraudulent
Marquess of Piscara, wherein himself, who was judged to be one of the best
guides of all the Italian Princes, broke his neck.

The XIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Luigi Alemanni having in an Elegant Oration set forth the Praises of the
French Nation, repented that his action afterward, and desired leave of Apollo,
to make his Recantation, but was not permitted so to do.

LUigi Alemanni, a Noble Florentine Poet, gave himself to hate the Spanish
Nation deadly, ever since his Country was overcome by the Forces of the Emperor
Charles the fifth; an action which would have purchased him much love amongst the
Italians, had he not obscured this his glory, with the common ignorance of many
modern Italians, of not knowing how to hate the Spaniards, without declaring
partiality to the French, of whom Alemanni grew so inamoured, as much to his
Majesty's admiration, he asked leave to make a public Oration in Praise of
them; a resolution which did not only redound to his own particular shame, but
to the shame of all Italy; every one being scandalized that so famous a
Florentine Poet should extol the praise of that Nation, from whose sole
ambition Italy may justly acknowledge all her present slavery to proceed.

Alemanni made this his Oration, and did therein very much exaggerate the glory
of the French Nation, terming it the overthrow of the famous Roman Liberty,
only because it gave the Arms of Tyranny into Cesars hands, wherewith that
ambitious man did afterward slay the Liberty of his Country: He said that the
French had in their Wars perpetual victory, in Africa, Asia, and Europe, and
ruled with infinite glory. He styled the French Monarchy, the Triumphant
Princess over the whole world, her enemies scourge, and the only means and
instrument of the yet remaining Liberty of Italy: He attested for truth, That
France was the most numerous Nation that was under the Sun; he said it was
rich, fruitful, well armed, united, strong, well peopled with such as were most
devoted to their King; all which he said were things requisite in a Kingdom,
which will be held to be formidable and lasting. This Oration made Alemanni be
followed by an infinite number of French; so as being made strangely much of,
by many of the Barons of that Nation he was easily persuaded to go into France,
where he found that true, which his best friends had taught him, that if he
desired to love the French men, he should by all means shun going to France;
for he had not been twenty days in the French Court, when he was so used by
those people, and so distasted at them, as he was forced to fly from France, as
full of ill affection to it, as he went thither with ravishment; insomuch as he
presented himself the other day with a much imbittered mind before Apollo, and
told him, that having in that his Oration very falsely exaggerated the praise of
the French Nation, to the end that truth might prevail, he desired leave to
make his Recantation; for by the unfortunate experience which he had made of
the French, he had found them to be so indiscreet, so furious, impertinent, and
so phantastically humerous, and ungrateful beyond all human creatures, as that
they were no less capital enemies to the Italians, though they knew they had
many there that sided with them, then they were to the English, Spaniards,
Germans, Dutch, and all other foreign Nations.

To this Apollo readily answered him, That he did not only deny him the leave
he had asked, but straightly charged to repeat the same Oration again in praise
of the French; and that amongst the other singular virtues of that Warlike
Nation, he should mention the infinite glory which they had won by appearing to
be mortal enemies to all foreign Nations. Which singular virtue he said the
Italians were so far from, as they were not ashamed to become the apes of all
the most barbarous parts of the world in their discourse, aparrel, feeding, and
in all other their actions: In so much, as if the Jews did rule in any part of
the earth, it was to be believed, that to curry favor with that base
generation, many of them would not be ashamed to wear yellow hats.

The XX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Corbulone having with much honor ended his prefixed time of Government in
Pindo, a Patent to continue the same Jurisdiction for one year longer, is
graciously sent him by Apollo; which he refuses to accept of.

DOmitio Corbulone having happily ended the first year of his Government of
Pindo, Apollo, who was very well satisfied with him, sent him his Letters
Patents to continue in the same Government the next year; though Corbulone knew
very well that all the people of his Government did very much desire his
continuance in Pindo, yet he had importuned Apollo to send one with all speed
to succeed him in that place: And though he foresaw that Apollo would interpret
his refusal sinisterly, yet he again desired to be changed; and had his request
granted. Being returned to Parnassus, his friends desired to know why he had
refused to continue still in that employment, which many other great personages
were ambitious of? Corbulone answered them, That he who would preserve his body
in health, and keep up his reputation, must be so much master of himself, as to
be able to rise from the Table with an appetite, and to quit Governments when
people seemed to be best satisfied with him: For Officers (though they were
foolish and untoward, were always adored by the people the first six months,
well enough believed the second six months; but that though they were good,
they were hated the third six months; and at the end of two years, the people
grew sick of those that were best; not for any misdemerits of the Governor, but
through the peoples too great curiosity, who as easily grow weary of good
things, as they do of bad. That therefore that Servant or Officer of a Prince
deserved to be esteemed wise, who havng done some special good service to his
Prince, could resolve to leave the Court, and leave his Master in love with
him, and not to tarry till that unfortunate time, which will at last happen in
all Courts, of being shamefully driven out of doors; either for some small
fault, which is able to cancel any former merit, how great soever, or else for
that not only private men, but Princes are subject to be glutted with the same
conversation still, and do daily love new things, and take delight in growing
worse.

The XXI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Sebastian Veneri, Duke of Venice, after his admittance into Parnassus, desires
Apollo that he may have the precedence given him before Hereditary Kings and
Monarchs; and obtains a favorable Decree from his Majesty.

THough the Illustrious Prince, Sebastian Venieri, Duke of Venice, had a place
allotted unto him in Parnassus by Apollo's extraordinary favor, worthy the
magnanimity of so great a Prince, before he made this his desire unto him; yet
would he not appear in public, before the controversy was decided which was
on foot, before his Majesty's own Tribunal, to which of the three Colleagues
the glory of the Naval Victory which he obtained at the Scogli Corzolari did of
due belong: The which being afterward decided by Apollo, in manner as shall be
hereafter said, Prince Venieri made his public solemn entrance on horseback,
which was in this regard very remarkable, because none were suffered to honor,
accompany, or serve this Illustrious Duke at his entrance, save freemen, who
were looked upon in Parnassus with envy, tenderly beloved, and honored with
such observance, as that they are deservedly called by all the Vertuosi,
Princes of private persons. The whole College of the Vertuosi were
extraordinarily joy'd to see to what sublime degree Venieri's merit had brought
a private man, and infinitely honored the immortal Venetian Commonwealth, which
by having so largely rewarded the desert of one of her Senators, had thrown the
Gate of Merit and gallant actions wide open; which many Monarchs either keep
close shut, or else out of a capricio, open it rather to unworthy, then to
deserving men. It was afterward observed for a very rare thing, that at the
Princes entrance, the Grecians, who since the fall of their Empire, have lived
in a perpetual melancholy, never taking joy in any thing, being now overjoyed,
were seen to dance and rejoice upon this occasion, as if Prince Veniero had
been one of their Nation; and that all the jollity of that show had belonged to
them. Some said that this was, because the Grecians being reduced into great
calamity, could not hope to be freed from their slavery by any other Potentate
then by the State of Venice, at whose victory obtained by this Prince against
the Tyrannical Ottaman Empire, they did rejoice as if it had been an act of
their own: To boot, they were mightily gladded to see the Duke of Venice wear
the ancient stately Grecian Habit; as if it were a happy and secure Augury,
that the greatness of the ancient Grecian Empire would be renewed in the
Immortal Commonwealth of Venice, when God should be appeased in his just anger
against the Schism of that Nation. Not long after this solemnity, when all the
Princes, together with the Senate of Poets, went in good order to visit the
chief Temple of that State, to beg of God to stir up the hearts of Princes to
be liberal toward the Vertuosi: Prince Venieri, who was placed by the Master
of the Pegasean Ceremonies (according to the ancient custom) amongst the rest
of the Dukes of Venice, boldly said, That he ought of right to have precedence
before the greatest hereditary Kings and Monarchs of the world. The Masters of
the Ceremonies did then humbly beseech Venieri, that he would be content with
his accustomed place, and shun both giving and receiving great distastes in
Parnassus by this hateful novelty. Venieri answered resolutely, that common men
observed customs, such as he would have what was just, who very well knowing
what was their due, did not live according to past errors, but did correct
them. Some great Princes laughed openly at this novelty endeavored by Venieri;
but others who were of a more refined judgment, began through apprehension, to
look pale, and were heard to say, that it belonged to fools to laugh at great
men's pretentions, who being excellently well nosed spannels, never wag their
tails till they be very near the Partridg: For wise men thought, that were the
business never so hard, it might be effected when it was taken in hand by such
a one as Prince Venieri; and that it was to be considered, that so great a
personage as he, would not set his rest of reputation upon a game, unless he
were sure of five and fifty in his hand. When the Masters of the Ceremonies
found Venieri to be so resolute, that they might prevent the scandal which they
feared such a novelty might occasion, hasted to Apollo, and acquainted him with
what had happened. His Majesty did not only not abhor Prince Venieri's pretention
(as many thought he would have done) but contrary to the opinion of most of the
Vertuosi that were about him, did mightily admire it; and wondered very much
that that singular man should find out an inconveniency, which was not observed
by as many Elective Princes as were in Parnassus. And because manifest danger
of great scandal appeared to be in delay of resolution, and that the business
required expedition, without citing the parties to appear, using the
Plenipotentiary power which he has over his Litterati; he at the very instant
decreed, That Prince Venieir should be placed according to his desire, above
all Hereditary Monarchs; and said, generari, and nasci Principibus fortuitum,
nec ultra aestimator. Tacit. lib. 1. Hist. That to be begotten or born of
Princes, was chance, nor was it otherwise to be esteemed of; that it appeared
not only to be high injustice, but infinite ignorance; that hereditary
Monarchies, which without any precedent merit, fell to Princes only by blind
fortune, or by the relation of blood, should in his State, where virtue was
only had in consideration, be preferred before personages of worth, who by
their rare virtue, and singular merit, knew how to get a Principality in a well
regulated election of worthy Electors.

The XXII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo being greatly moved to compassion, by seeing a poor Soldier, who had
lost both his hands in the Wars, go a begging, does sharply reprehend Princes
for their ingratitude to Military men.

THis morning, as Apollo went out of doors, a soldier who had lost both his
hands in the Wars, came before him and begged an alms: Apollo asked him how he
came to be so maimed; the soldier answered, That whilst he was handling his
Pike in a battle, in the service of a great Prince, both his hands were shot
off by a Canon. Apollo commanded a liberal alms to be given to the poor man,
and bad some Princes who were by him, remove away that unfortunate witness of
their ingratitude, from the eyes of the world, that sad example of the
miserable condition of soldiers in these modern days: For it was a spectacle
which did too much afflict the soul of the Vertuosi, to see that miserable
soldier beg his bread, who had deserved from the Prince whom he had served, a
rich patrimony, whereby to give that alms to others, which he was now forced to
beg for himself.

The XXIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo greatly compassionating the lamentable shipwreck which his Vertuosi
make in great Princes Courts, to secure their Navigation, Commands some of the
chief Litterati of his State to make a Card whereby men may sail by Land.

APollo being every day more grieved then other, at the sad shipwracks which
many of his Litterati do often make in the Courts of great Princes; who having
loaded their Vessels (their minds) with the sweat of Sciences, thereby to merit
their Princes favor, are unfortunatly lost upon the sands of some hired
lodging, drowned in the Whirlpool of a shameful Hospital, and sometimes split
upon the rocks of beggary and despair, the wealth of infinite virtues not being
able to free them from so lamentable calamities, would by all means find out a
remedy for so great evils, that his Vertuosi might make safe Navigation in all
Courts, but particularly in that of Rome, which is placed in so dangerous a
climat; and all this for the advantage of Learning, which loses much
reputation, when men see how little they get thereby, who spend their whole
life in obtaining it. Meditating therefore maturely with himself, that since
Portugal Pilats, and those of Biscay, England, Holland, and Zealand, by only
observing the Sun, Moon, and Stars, with a little stone in their hand, knew how
to bridle the dreadful Ocean, which they so freely cut through into all parts,
and at all seasons, as they had made road-waies all over it; why his Vertuosi
by their powerful aids of Astronomy, Cosmography, Mathematics, Meteors, and
chiefly by their dexterous wits, sharpened by perpetual reading, could not
invent as safe a Navigation by land, as the Pilats of the aforesaid Nations had
found out by sea.

To secure therefore Land Navigation (for as much as might be done by Learning)
Apollo some months ago instituted a Committee of choice men in all Sciences,
necessary for such a business, and made Ptolomy, that Prince of Cosmographers,
the Chairman; to whom he gave Aristotle for his Companion in the Meteors,
Euclid in the Mathematics, Guido Bonati in the Astronomy, and to these he
added Count Baltazar of Castiel, one very much verst in the deep Court Oceans;
and for the better carrying on of whatsoever was requisite to so weighty a
business, his Majesty gave order that the famous Carthaginian Hannae,
Palinurus, Columbus, il Cortese, Terrante Magaglianes, Americo Vespuci, Vasco
di Gama, all of them being the chiefest Pilats that ever sailed on the Seas,
should be admitted into this Committee.

In the first place then (as was very fitting) an exquisite Card whereby to
sail by land, was made by Ptolomy, which with singular skill, was struck
through with lines on all parts; and not only diverse learned Astralobes, but a
new artificial Quadrant was invented, to learn the true elevation of Courtiers
deserts, and the latitude and longitude of rewards with which their service
ought to be acknowledged: It Is true that Guido Bonati took very much pains to
find out the true height of the Court of Rome's Pole; yet nor he, nor any other
of the Committee, could ever by any Astralobe adjust the course of the sun of
any humerous Princes fantastical wit; but the genius of a Prince being the
true and safe North Star, which Court-Marriners ought to observe in their
land-Navigation; these gallant men did all of them much wonder, how a Star
which was so certain for Navigation by Sea, was not only not firm and stable in
Land-Navigation, but was continually carried about by the two contrary motions,
of Interest, and Passion, whence such dangerous Court-difficulties and troubles
do arise, as do often occasion foul shipwracks.

They discovered greater difficulties in the motions of the wandering Stars
(Princes Officers) for they were so far from being carried about, as they ought
to be, by the primum mobile (their Princes service) as they were often seen to
go retrograde thereunto, nay the Committee were past all expression amazed,
when they by their observation found for certain, that the inferior heavens
(the Officers) did by the course of their private passions and interests, often
hurry about the aforesaid primum mobile; so as by reason of these accidents,
the business grew so confused, as the Committee could never come at the perfect
knowledge of the motions of so many spears, as was necessary for those to do,
who were to publish the certain and assured rules thereof. Their obstacles grew
greater, when they came to score out the compass of winds, whose number they
found not to be certain and bounded, as is seen in Navigation by Sea; but that
they were little less then infinite: For besides the four Master-Winds, the
Princes Will, his childrens desires, the Authority of his Brethren, and other
Princes of the blood, and the opinion of the Council, an infinite number of
half-winds were discovered, Court-Officers, Princes favorits, make-mirths,
flatterers, and even Pandors, all of them so irregular, and upon some occasious
so boisterous as they begot great difficulty in contriving the Compass: So as
these Pilats thought the condition of Court-Navigators to be very miserable,
who were to fit their Sails (their Wits) to such a multitude of winds. Yet for
all these difficulties, these famous men were never disheartnep, but buckled
themselves closer to the business by how many the more flats, sholes, and
quicksands, Silla's and Caribde's, vast Whirlpools of rivals, enviers,
malcontents, persecuters, and heteroclite spirits they found in the vast Ocean
of the Court.

The Astralobes and Quadrants being made, and the Compass being brought to the
greatest perfection that might be, the Committee thought to make trial:
Wherefore eight spruce Courtiers were listed, all of them well provided of
Patience (a necessary Biskat) for such as have courage enough to plough the
tempestuous Ocean of the Court. And whilst these were ready to hoist sail, and
only staid for a favorable wind, there happened a thing altogether incredible;
for a favorable North wind blowing, to which all the eight Courtiers suddenly
spread abroad their Sails (their Hopes) the Sails of only one of them were seen
to swel, and make a prosperous Voyage, whilst the rest of the Courtiers stirred
not one whit from their place.

The Gentlemen of the Committee were strangely confused, when they found that
in Land-Navigation, prosperous winds (the Princes favor) did not blow alike in
all the sails of equally deserving Cou^tiers: Much greater was the wonder, when
the same prosperous wind returning to blow again; to the which some other
Courtiers who were ready for their journey, displaid their sails, there was
one, who being without either mast or sail (without any merit) who stood idle
in the haven, to learn before he put himself upon so dangerous a Navigation as
Courtservice; this man I say was by a blast of that prosperous wind, hurried
from the haven of his quiet, carried into the high sea of employments, much
above his capacity, and yet did make a happy voyage, got great riches and
honors. A novelty which appeared so strange to these Pilats, as Magaglianes
being astonished at so great a wonder, said, Gentletlemen, I should never have
imagined there had been so great a diff^rence between Sea-Navigation, and that
of Land; and these extravagant passages which I see, makes me greatly doubt the
good success of this our enterprise; but patience overcomes all difficulties;
therefore let us proceed.

Then a Courtier that was a great Vertuoso displaid his sails (his faithful
service) to a prosperous West wind (his Princes favor) and by his swollen sails
(fair words from his Master) thinking that he had made a long voyage, when he
had calculated what way he had made, found himself to be just in the same place
as he was before he hoisted sail, having been still fed in all his long journey
(his assiduous service) with false hopes and expectation, not meeting with any
real substance. But a stranger thing then all this, was, when they saw both the
South and the North wind blow at one and the same time so furiously from the
fantastic brain of an extravagant Prince, as that the unfortunate Courtiers
being molested by two contrary winds, knew not which way to turn their
Tacklings; so as between these two winds, many Vertuosi were miserably drowned.
At this so strange a novelty Columbus cried out, I now find for certain
Gentlemen, that Navigation by Sea, wherein these extravagancies are not met
with, is so safe a business, as it may be compared to travailing by land in a
Litter. Columbus had no sooner said these things, when the whole Committee were
aware that certain Courtiers that were Vertuosi, lying in the Haven, were in
great danger of being drowned in the Court-Sea, which was swollen much more then
usual, raised a great storm, the greatest Anchor-Cable-Ropes of the most
exquisite Court-patience, broke short in two, every thing threatened shipwreck;
and yet the air of the Prince his countenance was very calm, the pleasant West
wind of his content was only seen to blow; the danger appeared plainly, no wind
of the Princes anger was discerned, and yet the Court-Navigators ran hazard of
perishing in the Haven: Notwithstanding all this, in this so enraged Tempest,
one bold Courtier had courage enough to put out of the Haven, and was not only
not drowned, as every one believed he would have been, but that horrible cross
wind which would have endangered any other man, though never so well
experienced, proved so prosperous a wind to him, as in a short time it brought
him to the Haven of great Dignities: A thing certainly very strange, and which
did much astonish the Gentlemen of the Committee, who wondered that those
tempestuous storms should in Land-Navigation prove prosperous winds to some
few, which even in the safest Harbors did shipwreck many. But it seemed yet
more strange, when the sky being clear, no claps of thunder heard, no
lightning seen, some thunderbolts did notwithstanding fall, which burnt two
unfortunate Courtiers; this unusual accident made the Members of the Committee
muse, why thunderbolts shot from an incensed Prince, should not be preceded by
such thunder and lightning, whereby to admonish Courtiers to escape them, as
those are which are shot by the all powerful hand of God against mankind, when
he is angry with them.

Soon after a Courtier was seen to be assaulted by a terrible Tempest
(Persecutions) who after having long defended himself from the fury of the high
going Sea (his Princes anger) and from the boisterous winds of cruel
calamities, that he might keep himself from being swallowed up, was forced to
throw all his Merchandise overboard, and after having spent the main mast of
his hope, and that his deserts leaked water of despair, split himself upon the
Rocks (the ingratitude of an not acknowledging Prince.) Then (which appeared
very strange) the Vessel of this Courtiers service being after so hard an
encounter, broken and sunk, the tempest of Court-persecutions ceased, the sea
of the Princes anger was appeased, the rock which had been the cause of his
shipwreck, turned to a safe haven, the Courtiers sunk ship rose again from
underneath the water, fairer, stronger, and better tackle then befored, and was
again loaded with the Merchandise of his Merits, the which he afterward
bartered at dear rates, for great dignities, and rich revennues. This appeared
very strange to these Pilats, and to the whole Committee, neither could they
sufficiently wonder, how in land-Navigation, shipwracks could prove fortunate
to Navigators.

But continuing to make new experiences, they commanded a very wary Courtier,
that he should display the sails of his talent to a wind which blew from the
South, and he steering his course fortunately full North, after many days
sail, the Court-Pilat, to find where he was, took the altitude of the Pole of
his desert, with his Astralobe, and not without much wonder, found, that though
he had still kept the fore-castle (his good service) directly toward the North
(his Princes Interests) he had sailed Southward. The Courtier at first alloted
the cause of this disorder, to his not having kept the rudder of his soul
faithful (as he ought to have done) toward the North of his Masters service;
bu^ when he found both by the Card, and by the Compass which he held in his
hand, that he had always steered the ship of his actions aright, he clearly
found that the error of his unfortunate voyage was occasioned, because the
North-star of his Princes mind was turned by malignant men, which are always
about him, toward the South.

Then Vespucci, Gama, and the other Pilats, desired the Committee that they
would give over the business, as being a desperate cure; and said, that nothing
made the Navigation by Sea so certain, as the immutability of the North-star:
And that having clearly found, by the last unfortunate experience, that Princes
minds (which was the certain North-star of land-Navigation) were carried about
and diverted by malicious Courtiers, to sail on the tempestuous Court-seas,
was not a resolution to be put on by wise men, but by such as were desperate.

At this instant the Committee saw a spruce neat Courtier, who had sailed so
prosperously in the Court of Rome, and in other Courts for seventy years space
together, as that he had not only overcome tempestuous storms, and boisterous
winds of persecution, but had even broken the hard rocks which his ship had
given against; this man pursuing on his voyage prosperously with a most
favorable wind, was drowned for having only unfortunately fallen upon a company
of sedges (a Catchpoles impertinences) an accident which did so astonish the
Gentlemen of the Committee, as they resolved to make trial only of one other
Courtier who was outward bound, and then to be quiet: They commanded him
therefore to put to sea; and it happened that whilst he was sailing in a road
which was held by all men to be very safe, his ship at unawares gave against a
rock, and split in pieces; the Committee very much blamed the Courtiers
ignorance, who knew not how to shun that rock; but he clearly showed them that
it was not specified in the Card, Wherefore all the Pilats fixed their eyes upon
the Chairman Ptolomy, as if they did tacitly accuse him of ignorance, having
left out that rock in his Card, which had occasioned so great evil. But Ptolomy
having well viewed and considered the place, and all the coast about, showed
them clearly, that no man living that had ever made that passage before, had
ever seen any rock in that place, therefore he could not specify it in the
Card which he had made, and that it arose up at that very instant that the
unfortunate Courtier fell upon it.

The Committee finding then that in Land Navigation, rocks arose every moment
in the midst of Medows, and other places, which were held to be so safe, as
that they might be passed over with great security in the obscurest nights;
they broke up the Committee, accounting the undertaking to be desperate and
unfeasable, and commanded that none should presume to sail by land, except it
were at full noon, carrying the Lanthorn of discretion every one of them in the
fore-castle of their proceedings, morning and evening, with their bare knees on
the ground, and their hands lift up to heaven, beseeching God to grant them a
good voyage, for to bring the ship of hope in safety into a Court Haven,
depended more upon the immediate help from heaven, then upon any humane wisdom.

The XXIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Ariadeno Barbarossa being driven by a sudden storm, splits upon the Scogli
Cursolari, and Maturino Romagasso, Captain of the Guard of the Gulf of Lepanto,
endeavors his escape, when he might have taken him prisoner.

ARiadeno Barbarossa, a great Pyrat, being overtaken some days ago with a
cruel storm, fell upon the Scogli Corsolari, wh^re he lost many ships, and an
infinite many of men: yet he suddenly bet^ok himself with those that were
escaped, to repair those his Galleys, whi^ were yet unsplit; when the news of
such a wrack being brought to (...) (...) forthwith gave order to Maturino
Romagasso, who had the custo^ (...) the Lepanto Gulf, to go and seize upon that
public Thief. It is known that vigilant Romagasso did at that very instant
charge a trusty Mariner to go with all possible diligence and secrecy to those
rocks, and to wish Ariadeno to remove from those rocks, and save himself as
well as he could. The Mariner wondered very much at Romagasso's resolution; whom
he asked why he would save the life of that his deadly enemy, whom he had now
so fair accasion to seize upon; and that if he who was held Apollo's right eye,
only that he might keep the Rivers of Lepanto free from so pernicious a Pyrat,
what other man, how great soever, should be paralel'd to him, when he should
have vanquished Barbarossa? 'Ts said that Romagasso replied in these i^entical
words; My friend, The greatness which you see I am now in, is so annexed to
Barbarossa's power, as I cannot discomfeit him without ruining my self. And
know, that the very first day that I should have committed this error, thou
should see me be the most abject fellow of all this Court: For faithfulness
in Officers is almost banished out of the world, more through the ingratitude
of who commands, then through his falsehood who ought to obey. Whence it is that
disorders are grown so great, as that Officer whose ultimat end is not to keep
his Prince in perpetual need of his service, is more man, then a wise man. And
the modern Militia of us Captains, is turned to public Merchandise; which is
not occasioned out of any fault of ours, but for the defect which is even
graven in the bones of many Princes, of making no account of clothes, but when
it rains.

The XXV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Epictetus, a Stoic Philosopher, who finding his Sect to grow much deformed,
asks leave of Apollo to ground a new Sect of Reformed Stoics; and is rather
reprehended by his Majesty, then commended.

EPictetus, that famous Stoic, had this day long audience of Apollo, to whom
he was overheard to say with great submissness, that the exemplary life,
certainty of Doctrine, holy customs, quiet and fruitful leisure, that he had
formerly seen in the Sect of Stoics, had forced him to embrace that Sect, in
which he had lived with great satisfaction for the space of 25 years; but that
it being now much fallen from the former severity of life, and good behavior,
nothing of good remained in it, but the bare and still reverenced name, at
which he was both much afflicted and scandalized, and was forced to forgo it,
that he might still live in his ancient purity of demeanor, poverty of life,
humility, and peace of mind. That therefore (if it should stand with his
Majesty's approbation) he, and some other of his fellow-Philosophers who were
of the same mind, desired to withdraw themselves, and to ground a new sect of
reformed Stoics.

Apollo, not without some apparent signs of displeasure, answered Epictetus,
That he was so far from being willing to multiply the Sects of his
Philosophers, as for the good of Sciences, unity of Opinion, and for many other
weighty respects, he was resolved to reduce them to a lesser number; and that
if the Stoics were any ways fallen from their former good orders, he wished
him to know, that such a one as he, ought rather to hide their defects, then
scandalously publish them to the world by new Reformations; it not being
possible to admit of a sect of Reformers, without necessarily acknowledging a
deformation: And that a Philosopher so cried up for Wisdom, and sincerity of
soul, as was Epictetus, should not endeavor to purchase reputation to himself,
by defaming others; and the rather, for that by the laying a foundation of new
reformed Stoics, he made it appear evidently to the whole world, That the
Stoics disorders were grown so great, as that they were become incorrigible,
even by the exemplary life of such a one as himself: That therefore it was the
duty of every good Stoic, when he saw his Sect forget their Rules, to strive
to reduce them to their duties by his own good example, it not being only
shameful ingratitude, but wicked impiety to abandon his Sect in its most urgent
occasions, and greatest necessity: For certainly that Pilat were very wicked,
who seeing his Ship ready to be lost in a fearful storm at Sea, should abandon
his companions, and seeking to save himself in the Ship-bo^t, could find in his
heart to laugh at those that were in distress: And that if he should open the
door in Parnassus to reformed Sects, that progressus in infinitum, must of
necessity follow, which ought to be so shunned by every wise Prince. For every
thing necessarily growing old and corrupt in time, by consequence the reformed
Stoics transgressing their rules, would in time divide themselves into new
reformed Sects. And because the planting of Vinyards, and founding of Sects of
Philosophers walked hand in hand, it was to be considered, that the wise
Husbandman, when he saw his Vinyard, which before was very fruitful, go to
ruin for want of dressing, did not suddenly fall to plant a new one, but
endeavored by diligence and assiduous labor, to make it fruitful again, and
never resolved upon the planting of a new Vinyard, till he clearly found, that
it was impossible to reduce the impaired Vinyard to its former condition, by
any whatsoever diligence.

In which case, at the same time that he plants his new vinyard, he plucks up
the old one by the very roots, and turns it into earable ground; for otherwise,
in a short time, he would have foolishly encombred his whole Patrimony with
wild Grapes. Apollo said also, That Epictetus should reflect much upon the
unfortunate condition of the present times, wherein the whole world being
infected with the pernicious disease of Politicians, whose particular
profession it is, not to adhibit faith to such actions as have a certain
affected appearance of extraordinary goodness, it was shrewdly to be feared,
that they would interpret his good will, and excellent intention, of laying a
new foundation of reformed Stoics, to be but Hypocrisy; giving it out (as it
is their custom to do) in every corner, that Epictetus, a Philosoper of so well
a composed soul, would forsake the old Stoic Sect, whereof he was but the
tail, out of ambition to become the head of a new one.

The XXVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Nobility of the Commonwealth of Achaia, not being able any longer to
endure the insolency of the Commons, who Governed the State, send Ambassadors
to Apollo to obtain a Prince, who may govern them; and receive a gracious
answer.

THe Modern Commonwealth of Achaia, which (as all men know) is merely
Democratical, is by reason of the insolent peoples great sedition, so full of
tumults, slaughters, rapine, and all other sort of confusion, as the Nobility,
oppressed by the violence of the seditious people, to free their Country from so
cruel Tyranny, thought it a more tolerable condition to live under the command
of any one Prince, how cruel or avaritious soever, then to suffer the insolency
of a domineering people: Insomuch as they said it was necessary for the common
good, to call in a Foreign Prince, who might govern the afflicted State, and
might curb the insolency of the rabble-rout: And to this purpose they summoned
the people to a Parley, and deplored the public miseries; the sole remedy
whereof they said was, to submit the Country unfortunately free, to the
command of a Prince.

The ignorant people, who in weighty resolves know not what they grant, nor
what they deny, easily assented that a Foreign Prince should be sent for, who
re-ordering the confused State, might govern their Country, which was incapable
of living free. In this Assembly two Ambassadors were chosen, who were to
obtain from Apollo, a Prince fitting for their urgent affairs. The Ambassadors
came to this Court three days ago, who having made their desires known in a
public audience, they were answered in his Majesty's name. That he would
quickly send them away contented. Many prime Subjects of this State, used all
the means they could, to be sent to command so Noble a Principality; amongst
the most remarkable whereof, were Anna Momoranci, a famous French Baron, very
much assisted by Francis the first, King of France, and Don Ferdinando di
Toledo, Duke of Alva, befriended by the most Catholic King Philip the second;
not so much out of any affection he bore to that his servant, as to rid his
Court of one, who not able to tolerate an equal, much less a superior, was very
troublesome to him and to his Court. Apollo resolutely chose the Duke of Alva;
wherein he did so highly displease the King of France^, who complained
grievously that Apollo's Majesty had preferred the Duke of Alva, a man in
rigor of Justice not only severe, but inexorable, as had plainly appeared in
his Government of Flanders, before one of so exquisite goodness, and of so
exact judgment in State-Government, as Momoranci was known to be.

Apollo answered King Francis, That he had preferred the Duke of Alva before
Momoranci, who was a Gentleman of a mild and sweet spirit, only by reason of
his extraordinary severity; which was very requisite in this present occasion,
the other being unaccustomed to the difficulty of taming a coltish people, born
free, with the cudgel of new servitude. And the K. of France not being
herewithall satisfied, but saying with some commotion of spirit, that his
French men, when occasion did require, could also not only be severe, but
cruel: Apollo in an angry tone, bad him hold his peace, and told him, he
wondered that sheep and lambs should pretend to play the part of wolves, as if
there had never been any Gaspero Colonni, any Monsieur de la Nove, and so many
other great and little flies, which none of his generation could ever find the
way how to keep from about their noses.

The XXVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo having for a just cause removed Gulielmo Budeo from the Lord Treasurers
place; confers the aforesaid place upon Diego Covarruvia, a Noble Spanish
Literato, and Dean of the College of the Grand Sages of this Court, though he
was much gainsaid therein by the French Monarchy.

GUlielmo Budeo, a Parisian, who for his being very expert in the knowledge of
moneys, has for many years, and with much reputation, exercised the place of
Lord Treasurer in this Court, was on the sudden on Monday last, not only with
great disgrace removed from that place, but by express order from his Majesty,
banished for ever out of Parnassus; which affront was the greater, for that it
is said, that the occasion of this so high resentment was, because he was
infected with those modern heresies, which being invented by ambitious men,
only to make subjects rebel against their Princes, are not worthy to be
followed by those who professing Learning, ought to let the world see that they
do not only know, but do infinitely abhor the popular errors of the ignorant,
who are apt to be carried about by the impostures of impiety. After Budeo his
expulsion, it was suddenly noised in Parnassus, that his Majesty had destined
Diego Covarruvio to be Treasurer, a great Spanish Lawyer, a man as excellent
for Learning, as for his plain-dealing, and sincerity of an irreprehensible
life. As soon as this Apollo's resolution was known in Parnassus, it begot
great jealousies in the French Monarchy, who thought it stood not with her
advantage, that a Spaniard should be called up to so high a Magistracy, wherein
she was much interessed. The jealousy and suspicion of so great a Queen, was
the more augmented by Covarruvia's austerity, his steadfastness to what was
just, his inflexibility, and for that always preferring his Princes honor and
service before all other respects, he seemed to value the favor or hatred of
any whatsoever Prince in this Court, very little, or not at all, as long as he
with incorrupt sincerity discharged the place of primo Savio Grande.

This powerful Monarchy sent first (according to the fashion of great Courts)
diverse of her friends to Apollo, who appearing to be well wishers to
Covarruvia, and very zealous of the public good, did in a seeming way of
praising him, blame him, and persecute him by the cheating way of feigned
favors. But this way of proceeding being too well known to Apollo, these
hypocrites did easily receive a repulse from his Majesty, in so much as the
very French Monarchy her self, taking off her mask of Court-dissembling, did at
an extraordinary audience which she obtained from Apollo, appear so implacable
an enemy to Covarruvia, as she could acquaint him, not only with the greatest
faults that he had committed even from his birth, but with every his least
imperfection (so narrowly do Princes observe the ways of those who were likely
to come to advancement in great Courts.) Apollo, who infinitely wondered to hear
the French Monarchy make so strict a scrutiny into the life and manners of
Covarruvia, with that freedom which is proper to her; replied, That he did not
so much abhor human imperfections in his Vertuosi, but that if amongst a
hundred defects, they had put one pair of perfections, one only rare virtue, he
thought he had got an excellent Officer for his service, it being his custom to
counterpoise vices with virtues; and that Covarruvia (whatsoever he were in
other things) in his Charge of Savio Grande, which he had for many years
discharged with such sincerity and discretion, had not only proved himself
worthy of the Lord Treasurers place, which he was resolved to give him, but of
any other whatsoever better place in Parnassus; and that he would honor so
high a place, by removing that signal subject from the sublime Senate of the
Savi.

To this the French Monarchy answered, That the Lavi Grande of Parnassus were
twelves, so as his Majesty had scope enough to satisfy her in what she
desired, by choosing other instead of Covarruvia; which would be the easilier
done, for that the Savi Grande were all of them men greatly learned, and of
singular worth. All the standers by perceived that Apollo was highly displeased
at this pressure, who angerly answered the French Monarchy, that it was a very
wicked resolution to give distaste unto, and take from the reputation of such
Officers, who by their assiduous service, had deserved chiefest employments
from their Prince; and that when a Prince took out any person from a Senate, or
from a College, to advance him to a higher preferment, it was a dangerous thing
to choose the worthiest; for in such elections, the Prince his intention, were
it never so good, was interpreted partiality; and that upon such occasions, the
true Judge of worth was Senioriti, and that Covarruvia being Dean of the Senate
of the Savt Grande, he had such a vantage of labor, and such advancement of
merit, as he could not without some apparent injury, be left out by his Prince;
for in all Senats, that Senator deserved the prime preferment, who had labored
longest at the continual duties of his place: A just and good precept; which
when it was inviolably observed, every honored Vertuoso propounded to himself
his Princes service for the ultimate end of all his labors; whereas by doing
otherwise, to the ruin of Justice, and confusion of all business even the Savi
Grande (a Senate whereon did consist the good Government of the State) and all
other his good and best Officers, forgoing the honorable way of merit, and
virtuous endeavor, would betake themselves to the shameful Idolatry of adoring
such as by their favor in Court, were likeliest to help them: That therefore
for the aforesaid weighty respects, he, not out of any passionate affection
which he bore to Covarruvia's person, but for the duty he ought unto his
merits, would reward that Vertuoso's labors with the Lord Treasurers place, and
encourage the other Savi Grandi, willingly to take pains in their places, since
they saw their reward was not only certain, but (which was a thing of more
importance) lay only in the Prince his bosom. To all these things the French
Monarchy answered, That his Majesty was Patron and supreme Arbitrator of all
rewards and punishments in Parnassus; That therefore without any prejudice to
his honor, he might gratify her in her request. To this new pressure, Apollo
more incenst then formerly, replied, Nor am I, nor any man in the world, master
of that reward which is proposed by just Princes, to the labors and deserts of
faithful Officers; for the highest dignities are by good Princes conferred upon
their servants out of obligation, though modest Officers acknowledge to receive
them out of their Princes favorable liberality. And know, French Monarchy,
that that Prince who does not reward him that has deserved well at his hands,
commits a greater tyranny then he, who without any reason, sheds his subjects
blood, and takes away their livelihoods. After so resolute an answer, the
French Monarchy confessed ingenuously, that Covarruvia being by Nation a
Spaniard, he was consequently one whom she could by no means confide in. Apollo
was so incensed at these words, as he broke forth into sudden fury, and said,
Get you hence, you who will play the Master in other folks States, and learn
confidence at home; I, for my part, glory at my home to be an humble slave to
men's merits, which when nothing but it is found in an Officer, although he be
naturally never so discourteous, yet God, whose will it is, that he who does
well, should be rewarded, takes it in good part. Whereas on the contrary, his
Divine Majesty (the true Master of Metamorphosis) has made those
self-affectionate people, in whom Princes, in the collation of their highest
dignities, do only require confidence, prove perfidious, and so strangely
ungrateful (only to confound man's depraved judgment) as they have revenged
themselves of received benefits, as if they had been mortal injuries, as is
clearly known to all men, by so many unfortunate examples which have happened in
Princes Courts; by which you Princes may learn, that to do righteously, is to
be preferred before all other human interest; for when a Prince exalts one that
is ungrateful, though otherwise known to be deserving, all the shame redounds
to him that has received the reward; whereas when it falls out otherwise, all
the shame and loss redounds unto the Prince, who foolishly thinks that he may
receive advantage from men by offending God.

The XXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Monsieur Jovanni de la Casa having presented Apollo with his most useful
Galateo, meets with great difficulties in many Nations, in having it observed.

THe Reverend Signor Iovanni della Casa, who (as you have heard by our former
Letters) was with extraordinary pomp, admitted into Parnassus, after having
visited all the illustrious Poets, and ended his Complement with all the
Principi Literati of this Court, presented Apollo with his beautiful and useful
Gallateo, which was so much approved of by his Majesty, as he forthwith gave
strait charge that it should be inviolably observed by all Nations. And at the
same instant commanded Casa to make presently a Galatea, for that the women of
this modern age, had as much need of amendment, as had the men. This Edict
caused great commotion in some that were subject to Apollo's Dominion; for
neither entreaties, nor threats, were able to make those of Marca give way to
the receival thereof, who freely professed they were resolved rather to forgo
their Country and their children, then leave their laudable custom of honoring
their Masters with sincerity of heart, and loving their friends with candor of
mind, rather then with coursies, and other Courtceremonies, gotten without
book. It met with greater difficulties amongst Princes; for the most powerful
French Monarchy would never give way to the observancy of Gallateo's rules,
Nisi si, and in quantum: which she ingenuously professed she would rather mind,
then good manners, which she would only observe with a certain outward show.
The Spanish Monarchy promised to submit to Gallateo's rules, provided Monsieur
de la Casa would leave out one Chapter: That when she should be at Table with
other Princes, she would not have it be reputed ill manners, if she should take
a bit with her hand, from off her neighbors trencher; neither would she be
thought to be over-greedy, if she should chance to eat all her next companions
whole part.

The Venetians said, that they would willingly admit of Gallateo, if that
Monsieur de la Casa would declare, that to endeavor by all means possible, to
know another man's affairs, was not ill manners, but arerequisite point of
policy.

All the Italian Princes readily embraced Gallateo, only said they would be
allowed to eat on both sides their mouths, without being held ill-mannered.
But the Dutchmen stormed mightily, for they did not only deny being bound to
the Italian sobriety in d^inking, but did obstinately require Gallateo to
declare, that the Dutchmens overmuch drinking, and being continually drunk, was
one of their chiefest virtues, and one of the most requisite things that their
Princes and Commonwealths did for their safety-sake, desire in their people.
The which request was blamed by all the Litterati, as impertinent and absurd,
and therefore gainsaid: Wherefore the Dutch were very much exhorted, and
desired to submit themselves to Gallateo, touching the particular of Sobriety;
because they were even pointed at by the best Nations of Europe, for their
immoderate drinking, and being so often drunk.

To which the Dutch did stoutly answer, That those sober men deserved to be
esteemed drunk, that living under the slavery of Princes, were hardly used, and
grieved every day by the capriciousness and beastly passions of one man, and
that the drunken Dutch ought to be highly esteemed, who had wit enough, both to
vind cate their Liberty, and to maintain it when they had got it. And added,
That they were to be chained up for fools, that did not believe that the
drunkenesse of the German Nation, was the true foundation of so many famous
Republiques as were seen there. For the safety of a State, and the peoples
universal peace, depending wholly upon the fidelity of State Officers, and upon
the candor and sincerity of every man's soul, what greater Jewel could there be
desired, then to see the Germans by their drinking too much Wine, continually
vomit up their very intimate secrets, and most concealed thoughts: They added,
That it was clearly seen by long experience, that those did best counsel their
Countries, who having drowned their private Interest, and choked their fair
pretenses (which sobriety uses to beget in men's minds) with good store of
Wine, spoke like Germans from their hearts, and not as do the Italians, and
those of other sober Nations, from the mouth outward only, with false and
feigned words.

They said also, That the Dutch, which did so much affect the glorious name of
Soldiers, as was well known to all men, had not patience to listen unto the
counsels and deliberations of of sober men, which were usually apprehensive,
and full of lewd circumspection, covered over with the veil of wisdom; but to
the end that their resolutions might be bold and generous, they would not
suffer any man to counsel his Country, whilst he was fasting; but when by
having drunk much Wine, they had inflamed their hearts with generosity: It
being the proper virtue of Wine, rather to drive fear from the heart, then to
rob the understanding of judgment. And that therefore the Germans with much
reason,

De reconciliandis invicem inimicis, and jungendis affinitatibus, and
adsciscendis Principibus, de Pace denique, ac Bello plerunque in conviviis
consultant: tanquam nullo magis Tempore ad simplices cogitationes pateat
animus, aut a magnas incalescat. Tacit. de Mor. Germ.

That whether it concern the reconciling of enemies, the making of affinities,
the choosing of Princes; finally, be it about Peace or War, they for the most
part consult upon it in their cups; as if the soul were at no time more open
for civil thoughts, or set on fire for great ones, And they further added, That
if the Italian sobriety were introduced amongst the Germans, those false
hearts, and double minds, those deep thoughts, those turn-coats, full of
treachery, conspiracies, plots, of false souls, masked over with hidden hatred,
and feigned love, would begin to be found in that faithful and sincere Nation,
wherein the Nations which glory in their sobrietry, do so much abound; a thing
so true, as the French, who have been held to be so glorious by all the world,
for their ancient candor and sinceri^y of soul, in being always faithful to
their King; since many of them have given over the laudable custom of taking
off their Cups, and being drunk after the Dutch fashion, had suffered
themselves to be wound about into such treacheries as the world took too much
notice of. And that if that little window to be contrived in the breasts of
men, the better to discover the hearts of certain damnable cheaters, who being
Devils inwardly, study to appear outwardly, Angels, was thought to be so
necessary for the good of mankind; with what ground of reason could any man
blame the laudable custom of being drunk, it being clearly seen, that by
drinking of too much Wine, men's bodies became Diaphanous and transparent.

For these reasons, which were very much approved of, and praised by Apollo it
was resolved, That as touching the particular of sobriety in drinking; the
Noble German Nation should not be subject to Gallateo's Precepts; the use of
being drunk, being rather a piece of public cunning amongst the Dutch, then a
vice of private men: It being apparently known, that those Nations are very
well advised, both in times of Peace and War, who, like the Dutch,
Deliberant, dum fingere nesciunt; constituunt, dum errare non possunt. Tacit.
de Mor. Germ. Deliberat whilst they know not how to counterfeit, and do
ordain whilst they cannot err.

The XXIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo finding that wicked men, by making use of the Sword of Justice to
injure honest men, do make his Tribunals become very hateful, to remedy so
great a disorder, institutes a Commit of the greatest Subjects of this State;
but has but bad success therein.

THe perfidiousness of wicked men is arrived at that height, as that the sacred
Seats of Justice, erected for the safety of good men, and to punish the wicked,
are made use of to persecute and afflict those that are honest, and mean well;
a disorder which his Majesty is very angry at; who can by no means tolerate,
that through the so much mischief of wicked men, the Seats of Justice should
become hateful: Wherefore Apollo, to try whether the wit of man could find the
true Antidote to this raging Poison, chose many months ago, some of the best
Philosophers, skilfullest Politicians, and men most esteemed for wisdom, that
are in the State of Parnassus; all which he caused to be shut up in that
Apartment which stands by the Delphick Library, and straightly commanded them not
to stir from thence, till they had healed so dangerous a wound by fitting
remedies.

All the Vertuosi of Parnassus thought such a business might be dispatched in a
few hours; but it was eight months ere these men opened their doors, at which
time they desired Audience of Apollo, whom they told, that after having been so
long shut up in that place, wherein they had diligently examined a thousand
opinions, and maturely sifted an infinity of applications, they could find no
expedient means whereby severely to punish false accusations, without
affrighting true ones.

The XXX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Marcus Brutus desires Justius Brutus to show him the perfections of the
Conspiracy which he so happily brought to pass against the Tarquins, and the
Imperfections of that Conspiracy which he so miserably executed upon Caesar.
And receives desired satisfaction from him.

MArcus Brutus, who lives still discontented in this Court of Parnassus,
because that important business which he undertook of recovering the Roman
Liberty, by the murder of the Tyrant Caesar, did not succeed well; went the
other day to find out Lucius Brutus, whom he earnestly desired to aquaint him
with the reason, why both of them, being spurd on by the same generous thought
of reducing their Country into Liberty; they did so much differ in the effect,
adding, that he should be very much satisfied by knowing the excellency of his
Conspiracy and what the faults were of that which he himself plotted against
Caesar. Menante, who by great good fortune was by, when this demand was made;
assures every one that Lucius Brutus did thus answer his kinsman. A good
intention is not sufficient Cozen Marcus, to reap renown by great actions, it
must be accompanied by judgment. Know then that in purging the Roman Empire
from the ill humors of Tyranny, wherewith I found her greatly oppressed, I
successfully imitated the art which skilful Physicians use in restoring health
to a body that is sick of a Malignant Fever: which had you done, you would not
only not have committed that great error which caused so many mischiefs to your
self, and to our whole Country, but should have happily acquired that glory,
which has made me immortal. Know then, that when I resolved to restore Liberty
to our Country, I did first exactly consider the body of the State of Rome in
its sick condition, the quantity, and quality of the humors which she did
abound within her sickness of servitude; and like a wise Physician, I prepared
the peccant materials, and digested the crude Humors, with the syrrop of
discontent and bad satisfaction which I daily sowed in the People of Rome
against the Tarquins; and the insolency committed against Lucretia, proved very
lucky to me: for the unbridled lust of the Tyrant Tarquin, brought the people
of Rome to that point of hatred and despair, which I had always desired, so
that finding the materials of discontent to be excellently well prepared, by
the water of the common peoples continual exclamations, with two only ounces
of laxative syrrope of Roses (resolution) which I knew how to make, by
appearing head of the enraged Romans, with permition of the sick Commonwealths
Militia, the bad humors of Tyranny were purged out, without the pains of death,
or any alteration of Tumults, in lieu whereof the health of Liberty returned to
our Country. But you Cozen did not duly consider any of these important
particulars. For having with a rash resolution given your self over in prey to
the zeal of recovering lost Liberty, the light of your understanding was so
blinded, as made you fall into a more cruel servitude, and this was, when by
the immature counsel which you put into action against Caesar in the Capitol,
you gave the Roman Liberty a strong Purgation, compounded of Colloquintida, and
Antimony, and other violent ingred ents, with which whilst you thought to
evacuate the Crude humors, you did infinitely increase that malady, which
having first wrought your ruin and the like of all your associates, occasioned
at last that so famous sickness (the sad proscription) which did kill outright
the most excellent Roman Liberty; and the Proverb is as true as common, that
Conspiracies are not made out of curiosity of changing the Prince his Face, but
for the important interest of changing Tyranny into Liberty. And therefore in a
business of such concernment, a man must confine himself by the Charity which
he bears unto his Country, within the bounds of the love of Liberty, and hatred
of the public Tyrant; and among other considerations which ought to be had in
a business of so great concernment, the chiefest is, to consider with exact
diligence, the means whereby a Tyrant has possessed himself of his Countries
Liberty, which whilst they continue in their vigor and strength, that Citizen
wishes no good unto his Country; but is rather a cruel enemy thereunto, who by
plotting against the Tyrants life, is cause of greater slavery to his fellow
Citizens, and of much greater scandals to his Country. The Tarquins maintaind
themselves in their usurped Liberty, by the love which they had cunningly won
from the Romans, which when by their cruelties, libidinousness, and avarice,
they had lost, the foundation of their greatness failed; and therefore it was
not hard for me to restore my Country to her ancient Liberty. For I did not
drive the Tarquins out of Rome by my Conspiracy, till being ready to be thrown
headlong down by the public hatred, I gave then a justle. But you did not do
so; for it is evident that Caesar had possessed himself of the public Liberty,
by the great good opinion he had in his Army, of which he had so many years
been head, and by the miraculous affection of the people of Rome, which he had
won by his profuse liberality. And by killing him whilst he was master of these
two powerful means, you did nothing else but change Caesar (who did study to
secure himself in the State, only by his clemency, and by his obliging every
body) into Augustus, who having seen the unfortunate end which Tyrants make, by
using the indulgencies of Pardons, thought it a safer way for the perpetuating
of his Dominion, to make use of that cruel great Proscription, the only cause
whereby after having reigned happily so long, he had power to transmit the
Roman Empire, as Hereditary, into the Person of Tiberius.

The XXXI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Marcus Cato having to the infinite dislike of Princes, writ the word Libera
underneath the Motto, Pugna pro Patria, which was set upon his gate, is
commanded by Apollo to put is out.

SInce the first day that Marcus Cato, one of the Lavii Grandi of this Court
built his house in Parnassus, he made these words Pugna pro Patria, be
engraven, and written in gold Letters upon his Portal, to the which some few
days ago he added Libera: which the Princes of this State observing, they made
great complaints to Apollo, protesting that unless that seditious word, which
might set all the world on fire, were rased from off the Portal, great
mischiefs were likely to arrive in Parnassus. And did further very much desire,
that Cato, being the first instituter of that wicked generation of men, who
that they may appear to the base Plebeians to be lovers of Truth, do practice
an impertinent Liberty, and superstitious pride over men, might for the
correction and dread of others, be severely punished. Cato was immediately sent
for by Apollo, whom his Majesty blamed for having given just occasion of
complaint and rumor to Princes, by the addition of that word. Cato boldly
answered, that good men ought not to forbear to do or say any thing that became
them, and what their Consciences bad them do, for the threats of whatsoever
Princes; that it was a cruel thing, and which only became ignorant and
malicious men to cozen others with, sentences which were only specious in
words: and that he thought it was great impiety to make the common people
understand, that they were bound to defend that, even with their lives and
faculties, as a thing properly belonging to them, wherein they had not the
least interest: that therefore the word Libera was necessary, to declare the
full signification of the sentence: for as it would be a great folly in one to
take upon him to defend the title of a House, which he had only hired, so that
Country deserved to be defended by teeth, and hands, even to the effusion of
the last drop of blood, wherein a man commanded like a Master, not that wherein
he obeyed like a slave. Apollo answered Cato, that he was in a great error; for
it was not only gross ignorance, but tending to sedition, to affirm that
Princes had not Authority to compel their people to take up Arms, and to defend
their common Country, when they were assaulted by their enemies. Cato replied,
that he did not deny but that Princes had such Authority, but confessed he said
that there was neither any power or violence, which could enforce a man who
took up Arms against his will, to shoot right forward, but that he might let
his first shot fly rather toward his friends then toward his enemies. To
this Apollo answered, that Princes had likewise Authority to force their
soldiers to shoot justly, and to behave themselves courageously, but that they
must be good Princes who have this Authority, such as by their Liberality, and
great love, shown in their excellent Government, did force their subjects to
defend their Princes Dominions, with the same gallantry and undanted valor, as
they did their own private Patrimony: and that only avaritious Princes, and
such as thirsted after their subjects blood were too far from reaping any good
by those soldiers, whom they forced to go to the wars; as that they found them
to be cruel enemies. That therefore he commanded him, to take the word that was
added to the Sentence, immediately from off his gate, which was not only
superfluous for the Reasons which he had given, but for that when it was
otherwise, gallant men understood it to be there, though it were not written;
it not being fitting that the baser sort of people should be acquainted with
the great secret, that that is only the freemans Country where he is born; the
slaves, that where he is best accommodated.

The XXXII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Socrates being found dead in the morning on his bed, Apollo uses all possible
diligence ta learn the true reason of so sudden a death.

THis morning Socrates was found dead in his bed, who, was well when he lay
down the last night; and his body, being exceedingly swollen, many do more then
suspect that he was poisoned, and the Perepateticks, bitter enemies to the
Socratical sect, were very much blamed; the rather, for that every one knows
that Aristotle, the Prince of so great a Sect, is very well verst in handling
poison. The very same morning, Socrates his whole family was imprisoned, out of
which nothing could be got, but that some days before Socrates was seen to be
very much troubled, and seeming to be exceedingly grieved inwardly, he often
times cried out, O corrupt world, O depraved Age, O most unfortunate mankind.
Apollo who was exceedingly grieved at the loss of so famous a Philosopher,
commanded that his body should be carefully opened, and that it should be seen,
whether any signs of poison were to be found by his bowels, which being done,
all his intrails were found to be open. Whence it was clearly known, that
Socrates, having taken too much wind of scandal, at the great discomposures,
and infinite misbehaviors which he was necessitated to see in this depraved
age, did even burst. Great were the Obsequies which were made for this noble
Pesonage; and Marcus Tullius Cicero, (one who was very affectionate to the
Socratical Sect) having in an elaborate Oration infinitely praised the truth of
so famous a Philosophers Doctrine, and his exemplary life, did with many tears
bewail the sad calamity of these present times, wherein it being under pain of
severe punishment, forbidden to play the Satyr, gallant men who saw things
every day committed, which ought to be publicly declaimed against, were forced
to see, to say nothing, and to burst for vexation.

The XXXIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Hereditary Princes in Parnassus, do very much press Apollo, that the
Emperor Tiberius may be removed from their Classis, and placed in that of
Tyrants, and he defends his cause Victoriously before his Majesty.

IT is above 1500 year since Tiberius, who succeeded Augustus, was admitted
into Parnassus, and had an honorable place allotted him, amongst the Legitimate
hereditary Princes, where he has lived with such glory and splendour, as he
has always been held by the greatest Potentates of Parnassus, to be the Prince
of wisdom, the very picture of vigilance, not only the Counceller, but the
Oracle of all those Princes who go about by violence and severity to establish
not only a new Tyranny, but the mastery of any newly conquered State. For
though it be to be confessed by all men, that Caesar the Dictator was he who laid
the first foundations of the Roman Empire, and that Augustus raised up the
walls thereof even to the highest Cornish, it is not yet to be denied but that
Tiberius, when by happily transmitting it over to his Nephews son Caligula, he
made it hereditary in the blood of the Iuli^ and Claudii, did wisely establish
it, and gave it complete perfection. A great action certainly, and only
becoming that Tiberius, who knowing so excellenly well how to conceal his own
private passions, made himself be known to be an excellent Dr. in the cunning
Art of discovering other men's thoughts; by which he may be said to have set the
roof over the Roman Monarchy. A great Conspiracy was discovered some few days
ago against this so mighty an Emperor, which was long before plotted against
him by the greatest Princes of this Court, who accused him before his Majesty
of being a Tyrant, as he who to the prejudice of Augustus his heirs, had by
wicked means possessed himself of the Empire, which they said he had governed
with unheard of barbarous cruely for the space of two and twenty years, showing
himself always to be an implacable enemy of the Nobility, ravenous over the
wealthy, bloody to men of great worth, and ungrateful to those that had served
him faithfully; and this shameful accusation was aggravated by the Testimony of
Cornelius Tacitus, who having ever appeared by all his actions in this Court,
to be circumspect, suffered himself notwithstanding to be so far carried away
by the violent Passion of hatred against Tiberius, as he made Affidavit before
his Majesty, that under the rigorous government of this Monster of Nature,
Nobilit^, opes, omissi, gestique honoris pro Crimine, and ob vertutus
certicimum exitium. Tacit. lib. 1. Hist.

This accusation wrought much with Apollo, who truly said that it was a great
error, to have placed so cruel a Tyrant in the honorable Classis of Legitimate
Princes; and at the same instant gave command that Tiberius should have notice
given him, to appear in the Court the next day, and defend himself against that
accusation. Then did all men call to mind the unfortunate condition of Princes,
when Tiberius was seen to come out of his house alone, and forsaken by all his
friends, to appear before the Judges; who though he thought that disertion to
be an evident sign of his condemnation, yet entered he the Court with an
undanted spirit; where though he was received with severe looks, and threatening
jestures, both by his Majesty and the whole Senate of Vertuosi, yet he seemed
even then to be fullest of courage, when his danger appeared to be greatest.
Silence being then proclaimed, Egiddio Bossio the Attorney General, read the
accusation to Tiberius, and then Tiberius was commanded to say what he could in
his own defense. Whereupon he thus began: Prince of Learning! the accusations
laid unto my charge by my ill-willers, are two; that I possessed my self of the
Roman Empire by bad means; and that by the Government thereof I have used much
cruelty toward the Nobility and other subjects of much merit and worth: the
first is false; for how can it be objected that I came by the Roman Empire
fraudulently, since by his last will and Testament Augustus made me his Heir, I
confess that Agrippa Posthumus, and Germanious were near allied in blood to
Augustus, but it must be considered that Augustu, was not so great a fool, as
to be deceived by any, how crafty and fraudulent a wit soever, in so important
an affair, as the leaving of an Heir who might succeed him in so great an
Empire. It must be believed that some weighty respect moved him to prefer me,
who was not at all akin to him, before his Nephews: and thought I could upon
this occasion, much to my praise, relate the excellent Art I used to work my
self into the good will and affection of this great Prince, I will in this
place only mention this, that if Augustus had found such qualities in those of
his blood, as he knew were requisite in him who was to be his heir, and which
by all exquisite diligence I endeavored to make appear to be in me, neither
would the love which Tacitus says Augustus bore to my mother, nor her
allurements, nor all my cunning, ever have been sufficient to induce that wise
Prince to do so cruel an act as to disinherit his Nephews, and make a stranger
his heir. But it will make for me, in this place, and upon this occasion to
make known that my action, from whence I have always acknowledged my access
unto the Roman Empire, as that which did compel Augustus to love me so
immeasurably. It is well known to al men that after the death of Marcus Agrippa,
Augustus gave me his daughter Giulia for wife; it is likewise known to all men,
what a one that great Princess proved; so as being scorned, by the pride and
lasciviousness of that unchaste woman, when I found my honor wounded, I knew
how to make use of that very occasion for my greater advancement, which was
likely utterly to ruin all the hopes of my good fortune, wherein I had made so
good a progress. For considering, that if (as my honor bound me to do) I should
revenge the injury done me by my wife by putting her to death, the little
respect which I should have born to Augustus his blood, might alienate him from
me, and make him give over his intentions of exalting me: and long arguing with
my self the great difference that there was between an injury received from a
wife of a disproportionable greatness to her husband, and that which is done by
ones equal, I put on the bitter resolution of preferring the glory which I
should win by obtaining the Roman Empire, before the shame of being publicly
cuckolded by Iulia. Tiberius had gone thus far in pleading his own excuse, when
a loud voice was heard in the Court to cry out thrice, O Traitor. Tiberius
thinking that this was meant by him, protested to Apollo that that scorn was
put upon the Court, and not upon him; Apollo finding how little he was
respected by that rash fellow, whosoever he was that had said those words,
commanded that he should be diligently sought for, and imprisoned, which was
forthwith done, and it was found to be Iacomo Count of Marcia, a famous Prince
of the blood of France; yet Apollo preferring the injury done unto himself,
before the lineage of that Prince, commanded him to be led to prison. Then the
Count did publicly profess, that he had not said those words either to injure
his Majesty, or Tiberius, but that to unburthen himself of somewhat which lay
heavy in his heart, he had called himself Traitor, not meaning Tiberius, nor
any other person; for when he was married to the unchaste Queen Jane, by his
foolish proceeding against her, (who had brought with her the Kingdom of Naples
for her portion) as if she had been a private Gentlewoman, and by the severity
which he like a Coxcomb used toward her, he to his infinite shame, lost both
his wife, and Kingdom and consequently his reputation; and was forced to fly
from Naples, and to bury himself alive in a Monastery in France, where he dyed
for mere madness; and that he had learnt by Tiberius his wise demeanor in the
like case, that it had been more honorable for him to have lived a cornuted
King in Naples, then a private man of honor in France. Apollo did then pardon
the disturbance which that noble Frenchman had occasioned, and bad Tiberius
proceed to make his defense, who said: And because the too great connivance at
the shameful life which my wife led in Rome, would certainly have rendered me
contemptible both to the Senate and people of Rome, (a thing which would have
been of equal danger to such a personage as I, who lived in hope of that
greatness which I afterward acquired, as the resentment of such an injury by
way of revenge would have been) I chose the middle way between these two
dangerous extremes, which in dubious resolutions proves always best. So as not
to be an eyewitness of that injury which I could neither revenge nor tolerate,
I went from Rome under a pretense of living privately, and hid my self in
Rhodes. This my modesty, this great respect which I bore to Augustus his blood,
was the true and chief cause which did not only induce him to love me, but
which did oblige him to demonstrate that his love, in such sort as the world
has seen since his death, For this Pr. who was as wise as he was glorious,
pitying my so much scorned condition, and infinitely loathing his daughters
infamous life, behaved himself so rigorously toward her, as his demeanor may
serve for a rule to every wise Prince, how to handle their unchaste daughters.
If then so great Patience, if the respect, reverence, and perfect obedience,
and so many other lawful pieces of cunning, which I continually used to work my
self into Augustus his affection, be vicious comportments, and fraudulent
deceits, (as my enemis have represented them to your Majesty) I refer my self
to those who are to judge upon my reputation. I now come to the second Article
of my impeachment. I acknowledge the cruelty which I am accused to have used
toward the Romish Nobility to be true, and all that Tacitus has said of me in
that point, to be very true; but I desire that such difference as ought to be,
be put between the cruelties used by a new Prince, and those which are
practiced by an ancient and hereditary Prince: for if I have taken away any
man's life out of an innate cruelty, or thirst after humane blood, or out of any
capricious inhumanity, I submit my self to the rigor of the Cornelian Law, as
if I were one of the meanest and most abject plebeians of this State; but if it
were mere State necessity which forced me to be cruel to those of Augustus his
blood, to the chiefest Senators, the commanders of any extraordinary worth, and
in fine, even to worth it self; I desire every one to consider how new Princes
are necessitated to do horrid and cruel acts, though it be much against their
Inclination. And upon this occasion, I will for my defense make use of my
implacable accuser Tacitus his words. He has openly professed that the horrible
Proscription made by Augustus (which I confess did surpass all the most immense
cruelties, that were ever commanded by cruel man) was done not out of any
inclination to severity by those who of themselves did infinitely blame such an
act, but only out of mere State necessity. Sane Proscriptionem Civium,
divisiones Agrorum, neque ipsis quidem qui fecere Laudatas. Tacit. lib. 1 ^nnal.

These are Tacitus his words. Which if it be true, am I to be condemned for
having wisely known how to establish my self in a new Principality, and for
having had the wit to execute those precepts, which not only every other
Politician, but even Tacitus has published? and if it be true that indulgence,
mansuetude, and clemency are then vices in a Prince, when such signal virtues
are used toward those, who though they be pardoned, keep malice in their
hearts, and covet revenge; is there any one here present who thinks that if I
should have suffered Agrippa Posthumus, Germanicus, and the others of Augustus
his blood, to have lived, that they would ever have sincerely loved my
greatness? and if it be a grounded precept in Policy, that Princes ought to
endeavor above all things, to reign void of jealousy, and if a Prince can
never be said to be safe in a State, whilst those live who were driven out of
it, or who pretend more right thereunto then he, will not every one, how little
knowledge soever they have of worldly affairs, confess with me, that it was not
any innate cruelty in me, but mere necessity of state Policy which forced me to
appear so severe toward those of Augustus his blood: for a Prince is wise in
his cruelty, when (as Tacitus himself says he runs danger by being merciful.
Moreover, the many slaughters, which I, and after me many other Emperors gave
order for, against the chiefest of the Roman Senators, ought not to be imputed
to our cruelty, (as they do unjustly affirm who do now persecute me) but to the
indiscreet pride of those Senators, who though they law Liberty banished from
out their Country, yet through a proud stubbornness of not putting on the cloak
of humbleness, or rather through a foolish ostentation of free speaking, when
they were inslaved, and of commanding in subjection, did every day more and
more irritate Princes to use all sorts of severity and inhumanity, against
people so proudly spirited. Hence it is Sir, that neither Tacitus, nor any
other who writes my story, could ever say that I was severe against any
Citizens, or any of the Roman, or Provincial Plebeians; for they never gave me
any just occasion of suspicion, but only say that which I confess to be true,
that I did persecute the noblest of the Roman Senate, the which I did to abase
them, to terrify them, to make them mistrustful one of another, to disunite
them, and to make them endure that slavery, which I saw they did abhor: nor can
any Politician teach me any better rules then these, to be made use of to the
Nobles of a Country, which being but a little before bereft of its Liberty,
will not only not accommodate it self to servitude, but foolishly pretends to
limit the Princes Authority in commanding, and in servitude keeps the pride of
freedom, and an enraged mind, upon any good occasion, to revenge the injury
done unto its Liberty: whence it is, that hang-men, spies, and
Atturney-Generals are the fittest instruments to establish a man's self in those
new states which but a little before has lost the Liberty of a free
Commonwealth; for every cruel action is held a prudent resolution, when it
secures the life, the state, and honor of that new Prince, who knows how to use
it. Moreover I heartily desire every one to consider, that those who boasting
of their worth and great virtue in the Roman Senate, would be known to be of a
better condition then the rest did it not for that they were inamored of
Virtue, not out of that only nobleness of mind which ought to be in every
one, who can be content to dye a private man, but that they might have a noble
retinue, to win popular favor, and the Armies love: a great truth, and which
has not been better taught to such a Prince as my self by any writer, then by
thee Tacitus: for thou freely say, that new Princes meet with no worser nor
more wicked a subject, then that worthy Senator, who makes use of Virtue, to
chalk out the way to the ambition which he has of Government. For after thou
in thy Annals have painted to the life the demeanor of that Traitor Sejanus,
thou say these following words, which clearly prove my intention. Palam
compositus pudor, intus summa adipiscendi libido; ejusque causa modo largicio,
and luxus, saepius industria ac Vigilantia, haud minus noxiae, quoties parando
Regno finguntur. Tacit. lib. 4. Ann. And thou have said well: for in a new
State, not being yet secured in an hereditary descent, and where the tumultuous
choosing of a Prince has so large a scope, as it is lawful even for him that
murders the Prince to aspire unto the Empire, those great subjects, those
worthy, and all-deserving Officers, who are so much admired by private men, as
they are thought by them to merit their Princes integral love, the highest
preferments, best rewards; are notwithstanding known by him that reigns to be
most pernicious, and fit to be rooted out. So as, the condition of the Roman
Empire being no less disorderly in her hereditary succession, then greatly
tumultuous in her election, required in me that severe way of proceeding, which
was only able to save my life and preserve the State. Nor can I see how any
man can blame the cruelty which I used toward the Roman Nobility, and the
worthiest subjects of the Empire, since it would have been thought a great
defect, and much mis-becoming such a one as me, if I should have used that
clemency toward them, that mildness, and familiarity, which Caesar to his cost
did, whose miserable end, dos clearly teach all men, that states which are
fraudulently possessed, ought to be established by extraordinary severity. For the
Nobility of subjugated Commonwealths, make use of the new Princes Clemency,
only as of an excellent means to suppress him by Conspiracies: nor does it any
whit at all avail (as a man would think it should do) for the allaying of that
rage of hatred, or quenching the great and perpetual desire which they have to
vindicate the injury done them in their lost liberties, though thereby they run
the greatest hazards and danger that can be incurred.

The Judges did much approve of Tiberius his defense, for they did not only
allow of Augustus his last Will and Testament, and consequently of the
legitimacy of Tiberius his succession, but they also considered that he being a
new Prince, no ways allied in blood to Augustus, and there being many Roman
Senators better born then himself, according to the true rules of Tyrannical
Policy, he was forced to use cruelty there where that veneration and Majesty
was wanting, which the being born of Royal blood brings with it, and made his
way, by sword and poison, making himself be dreaded by those, who presumed too
much upon themselves, and dared to paragonise their private Nobility, with his
immense fortune who reigned; and that where to use clemency was prejudicial to
the new Princes, the use even of unusual severity ought to be esteemed lawdable.

The XXXIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Hyppocrates having advised Apollo how to prevent the frequent deaths of sick
folks, occasioned through the ignorance of Physicians, and proving unfortunate
in that his advice, is in great danger of being severely punished by his Majesty.

HYppocrates, that great Physician told Apollo some few days ago, that the
world was so pesterd with ignorant Physicians, as unless some sudden remedy
were taken for it, all mankind would be destroyed: for that sick folks were
cured by ignorant Physicians, by new experiments, by contrary medicines, and
rather by Mount banks receipts, then by canonical and true rules of Art; whence
it was that many sick folks dyed, who if they had been administered unto by
learned Physicians, might easily have been restored to their former healths.
Apollo being advised by so famous a man, resolved to remedy so great an evil.
Wherefore some six months ago he constituted a College of the most famous
Physicians that the world ever had, the chief whereof were Cornelius Caelsus,
Galen, Avesine, Fracastoro, Filopio, l'Altozmari, and the most meritorious
Girolimo Mercuriale, and made Hyppocrates, that Prince of Physic, head of the
College, which he endowed with ample Authority to provide experimented
Physic, and of known virtue for mankind. These Physicians first distributed
out their orders, and Physicians were sent into all places, who for the greater
safety of men's healths and long lives, were commanded to use nothing to their
Patients, but common Glisters, Roman Ointments, usual Purges; and in pestilent
Fevers pectoral waters; but that when they should have occasion to let blood,
to cure malignant Fevers, double Tertians, or other grievous maladies, they
should be commanded to acquaint the College speedily with every particular
accident that befell the sick party, with the condition of his sickness, with
his several accesses of Fever, and that in such cases they should be very
careful of sending the water and excrements of the sick person every morning
and evening to the College, to the end that they might with better
satisfaction to the sick party, take order for necessary Medicaments. The
Physicians very willingly did what they were commanded by the College. But it
was not long ere the world was aware that those orders which were given with so
much zeal to the public good, wrought not that good effect which his Majesty
persuaded himself they would have done; for the Physicians who administered
Physic to the sick, were so perplexed in putting on due resolutions in their
observations of the several alterations and changes of the maladies, as they
durst not upon any sudden accident that should arrive, succor the sick parties
with any requisite and speedy help, but showing more obedience to the College,
then charity to their Patients, refused to meddle with those maladies which
would admit of no delay, without express Order from their superiors; and truly
it was sad to see, that the time which should have been spent in the cure of
their Patients, was employed to no purpose by those Physicians in writing
eloquent relations, and many learned advices to those of the College, to whom
with all diligence they sent the water and excrements of the sick, which
altering by reason of the length of the way, it unfortunately fell out that the
College not being able to make any perfect judgment thereby, the Recipes which
they sent proved often times clean contrary to the malady of the Patient;
moreover, the sickness whereof the Physicians had given an exact account,
changed also before the answer could be brought; wherefore they were forced to
send new relations, and new advertisements, which occasioned the necessary
ruin of the sick parties, and often times whilst they lay expecting medicaments
from a far off, they arrived after the parties were dead, to whom they should
have been applied. All which were so foul inconveniences, as many men dyed more
then had wont to do, insomuch as Apollo hearing thereof, he marvelled how so
charitable a resolution could have so bad success. Wherefore Apollo thinking
himself much abused by Hyppocrates, who under a pretense of public Charity,
minded chiefly his own ambition, said in a public Audience, that he now found,
that Physicians near at hand, though peradventure ignorant, were better for
sick persons, then those that were more learned, if afar off; and afterward
dismissed the College, resolving to take some notable revenge upon Hyppocrates.
But was dissuaded from it by Esculapius his earnest entreaties, who confessing
Hippocrrtes ambition, excused it by alleging the common desire which all men
of Honor have to command, that they may not seem to hold the candle unto
others, but be held to be somewhat more then ordinary.

The XXXV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Francisco Mauro, a Noble Italian Poet, having married the most virtuous Lady,
Laura Terecino, is soon after jealous of her, and kills her.

FRom the very first day that the lovely L. Lauro Terecina was admitted into
Parnassus, and that the most excellent Euterpe had taken her to be her waiting
woman, she began to be much courted by many Amorous Poets, but those that made
oftnest addresses to her, and which she peradventure liked better then the
rest, were Francisco Maria Molza, and Francisco Mauro, being both of them very
famous Poets of this Court. Illustrious Euterpe considering Laura's youth, her
exquisite beauty, and how she was courted by so many Vertuosi, resolved to mary
her speedily, and acquainting Laura with her intention, she found her very
ready to obey her. Euterpe left it to her choice whether she would chose Mauro
or Molza for her husband. Virtuous Terracina who would not resolve upon a
business of such importance, by what was most pleasing to her eye, as many
foolish women use to do, but, as the wiser sort do, by what appeared best unto
her judgment, desired that she might see both their Poetries; which after she
had perused several times, and duly considered them, she laid aside le Fitche
del Molza as related in a weak and languishing style, and chose Mauro's Fava,
wherein she thought she found quainter conceits, and that it was more solidly
written. The match being concluded, the marriage was soon celebrated. And
Maurus being so meanly stockt as that he had nothing to trust to but his
Capitola della Fava, had by his wife by way of Joynter, 15^0 Octavoes ready
paid down, besides an infinite number of Madrigals, Sonets, and Songs, made by
that virtuous Lady. They had been married above a year, when Mauro observed
that his wife wore a very rich Garter imboidered all over with pearl on her
right leg, and on the other an usual slight one; and not being only moved
thereat, but greatly scandalized, for that he had often marked, that his wife
was very proud of that Garter, and that when she met with any Vertuosi she
would hold up her coats on that side higher then in modesty she ought to have
done, he asked his wife what the meaning thereof might be, and whether there was
any thing of secret therein or no? Lawra told him, that Edward the sixth King
of England, in acknowledgement of her devotion toward him, had given her that
Garter, which for her greater honor she wore upon solemn days, and that as
being very affectionate to that great King, she had sworn to serve him upon all
occasions, and to be always his most devoted faithful servant. Mauro grew so
mad hereupon, as flying upon her, he said. Have thou then been so affronted
thou wicked baggage, as (being the wife of an honorable Poet) to shame me,
under the color of Honor, by knowing an other man, and by receiving gifts from
any other then thy husband, and shall not I, being thus injured in my honer,
revenge my self? and this being said, it nothing availing the unfortunate and
miserable Terecina to beg pardon, nor to protest that she had never in any
manner whatsoever injured her Nuptial bed, he laid hold upon a prohihibited
verse of six syllables, which he had about him, wherewith he stabd her sundry
times in the throat, and killed her. This bestial resentment did not only
mightily displease all the L. Poetesses of this state, but did very much
trouble all the greatest Litterati of Parnassus: so as both of them in great
numbers appeared before Apollo, and with bitter words aecused Mauro, who was
there present, that without having any just occasion, to the great scorn of the
honor of Knighthood of one of the greatest Kings of Europe, he had vilanously
slain the most virtuous Lady of all Parnassus. To this Mauro courageously
answered, that it was true, he deserved to be severely punished by his Majesty;
not for the just revenge he had taken of his unchaste wife, but for that he had
so long deferred the revenge due to the reputation of a man of honor, it being
many months since he was aware of the lewdness of that Garter. All the Princes
that stood by were strangely moved to hear Mauro utter these words, who not
being able to endure that honors conferd by them upon noble Forraigners, who
did adhere and were affectionate to them should be accounted Vituperius, raised
a great Noise in the Court, when Apollo to quench the fire in the beginning,
which he foresaw was likely to break forth into a great combustion, said thus
unto them. WriteO you Princes, in you^ hearts, with characters not to be rased
out, this misfortune which has befaln Laura Tercina, for which Mauro ought
rather to be remunerated by me, and commended by you, then punished by my
Judges, and by you blamed: and believe it for a certain Truth, that these
favors, and honors which Princes confer upon Foreigners, are plain preludiums
to their wanton desires of domineering, which they continually meditate how to
bring about. The souls of subjects are linkt to their Princes by the straight
bond of chaste, and holy Matrimony, and therefore, as chaste wives, they ought
not so much as with their eyes, to acknowledge or know any other P. then him
whom Gods Laws has set over them and the Laws of men, so far is it from being
lawful for them to love them with their hearts, and vow loyalty to them: and
you are great fools, if to revenge the infidelity of your subjects you wait the
time till you can take them in the very act of adulterous Fellonies. For wounds
which cause dishonor, are warded, and put by by good Fencers before they hurt,
they are fools that cure them when they are received; the very self same hour
that you see any subject of yours but cast an eye upon a Foreign Prince, do as
Mauro did, hold not your thumbs underneath your girdles, but employ Gallowses
and Ropes; and if upon your greatest occasions, and particularly when you wiil
appear with honor before an Enemy Prince with your subjects Arms in hand, be
not seen with a pair of horns on your head.

The XXXVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Thais, that famous Curtizan of the Comic Poets, is at last though after much
debate, admitted into Parnassus; who much to Apollo's satisfaction, tells what
good she hopes to bring to his Court.

IN the great Council which was yesterday held in Parnassus by all the
Litterati, and the most famous personages of this State, many, learned in all
the Liberal Arts, who were lately come to this Court, were propounded to have
honorable places allowed them in Parnassus; amongst which Thais, that common
whore of the Comic Poets, was named for one, and found favorable suffrages,
being extraordinarily assisted by Publius Terrentius, who was so partial on her
behalf, as he held secret practice with all the Poets. And it happened that
whilst the gates of Parnassus were opened to her, to the end that she might
present her self before Apollo, and the Senate of the Vertuosi, to thank them
for the favor she had received, the illustrious Cardinal Alexander Fernese,
accompanied by a train of Prelates, withstood Thais as she was about to enter,
crying out aloud, that if so unworthy a person, from whom nothing but public
scandal could be expected, should be admitted into Parnassus, he for his part
would rather be gone from thence, then see virtuous places profaned with such
polutions, which were only aboads for those Litterati, as by their words,
writings, and exemplary lives, could prescribe wholesome Precepts unto others,
and that he knew there were many Vertuosi who would put on the same resolution.
Whilst the Cardinal spoke thus, and that he endeavored by force to keep her
out of the gate, she was so strongly assisted by a numerous squadron of Poets,
who backed Terrentius, as there began a very dangerous dispute at the gate. But
wary Thais, who knew that she had always come by the worst in all the quarrels
that she at any time before had ever been the occasion of, said aloud, that she
did no ways intend to enter into Parnassus by force, but with the goodwill of
every one, and more particularly by the approbation of those most illustrious
and Holy Prelates: and that if they were thought worthy of an abode in
Parnassus who could give excellent Council unto others, and wise Precepts, she
should be unjustly dealt withal if she should be denied to inhabit in those
venerable places, and that though she knew she might of right claim an abode in
Parnassus, yet she would acknowledge it as a singular favor, and especially
from those that did most withstand her: and that those that did not love to see
her in Parnassus, were much deceived in the ill opinion they had of her, for
that there was not any one in those blessed habitations, to whom she was not able
to give such advertisements, as wiser nor more necessary, could not be given by
any whatsoever Moral Philosopher; and that it was not so much for the
purchasing of Eternity to her name, that she desired to live amongst the
Vertuosi in Parnassus, as to be assisting unto many by her perpetual walking in
the streets, and admonishing every one to live modestly ever amongst their
neighbors; and to shun the foul vice of calling their companion whore, as they
would shun death; if their own Consciences were not clear: for that there being
many wrangling Courtiers, they had often times fallen at such odds, as by blows and
calumnious speeches they had wounded their reputations: and that Officers who
went to have the Government of Provinces, could not learn the important and
difficult Philosophy of getting moneys in their governments, with reputation,
from any more learned instructress, then from her, for that only Thais knew
the accurate Art of fleecing the flock with such diligence and dexterity, as
they would rather seem to be tickled and rejoice, then exclaim or make any
noise, in which practice she boasted her self to be so singular, as she had
seen her sweethearts a thousand times, to be then most in love with her, when
being flead to the quick, and galled to the very bones, she had sent them raw
and naked to the Hospital, from whence they have notwithstanding sent her
amorous Epistles. That they who were greedy of riches, who did everywhere, and
by all means, sweat and labor after the accumulating of Gold, might learn by
her only unfortunate example, that wealth ill got, through Gods just Anger
vanished into smoke; for of all the innumerable moneys which she had sucked from
out the veins of her lovers, and the great riches which she robbed many families
of, she had now nothing remaining but those four lashes which every one might
see upon her back; when if God had given a blessing to the moneys which had
past through her hand, instead whereof she had had a thousand curses; she might
have vyed for wealth with any Princess. Next, that every one might learn, by
her face which was so pleasing to her friends, by her flatteries, and falacies
with which she used to delude and allure and entice those ill advised young men
which she got into her hands; by her continual smiles, by which she covered her
ravenous mind, and that sharp Rasor, wherewith without any manner of
discretion or piety she did shave, nay, even flea her lovers; never to trust
appearances, grateful acceptance, fair words, and offered courtesies, and never
to give themselves over into any ones power, unless they had first perfectly
anatomised them. For many such as she, had pleasing aspects, good looks, and
sweet breaths, whose disguises being taken off by discreet persons, and their
inside of their souls discovered, they were found to be stinking carren, full
of festered wounds, and to have false souls, and fraudulent hearts, and
infinitely interessed. Then turning toward Cardinal Fernese; Thais said, And
who when I shall have opened my house in Parnassus, ought more to frequent my
school then your Excellency my most illustrious Sir, wherein you may learn
that important virtue of newtrality, which the Popes Nephews, such as your
self, have so much need of: a Science wherein I am so well known, as I may read
it in the schools; for never being whilst I lived in the world, without twenty
Pamphilioes, all inamored of me, who all of them hated one another by reason of
the jealousy which uses to be among young rivals, yet by my sagacity I have
always known how to behave my self so dexterously with them, as I have rather
taken their weapons from them, then put them into their hands: by which means I
was able to reap great advantage from them, without ever loosing any one of
them. A rare Precept, and a piece of cunning as singular, as hard to be put in
practice: and the more necessary for such as your Lordship, for that you do not
like me, who keep my lovers fast imprisoned by the strong chains of Lust; but
you hold those whom you have been a Benefactor unto, by the weak thread of
gratitude; which is broken by every least shadow of distaste, though it be
unwarily given. And I have known many such as you, who by having unwisely been
inamored on some one person, have not only lost their own interest, but
greatly ruined that friends Fortune whom they would exalt, by the jealousies
which they have raised in all the rest of their followers, foolishly furnishing
them with weapons, whereby they have forced those, who would otherwise have
been very grateful, to change the defect of partiality, with the vice of
Ingratitude. All which are so true and necessary Advertisements, as if they be
observed as they ought to be, by such as you are, you shall never have any
reason upon any dislike, to complain more of your friends infidelity, then of
the hatred of those that love you. It being an observed rule by such as I am,
that he who will be attended by many loving followers, must not be adulterously
in love with one only person.

The XXXVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Ambassadors of the Province of Marca being sent to this Court, in a
public Audience complain unto his Majesty of an unfortunate affair which has
befaln his inhabitants of that Province, for which Apollo provides sufficient
remedy, with singular demonstration of true love and affection.

THe Marchian Orator who came the last week to this Court, made his solemn
entrance yesterday, being attended by the greatest part of the Nobility, and
being clad in a long mourning weed, he appeared in the College of the
Litterati, where after having made his low reverence to Apollo, he spoke thus.
Monarch and Father of Learning, and you other Princes of the Cujus who hear me
speak, whilst learning flourisht in the world, la Marca was so famous therein,
as she had the fame to have Poets, Philosophers, Orators, and other great
personages no whit inferior to those of Mantua, Athens, or Rome; in so much as
she has been by some great wits compared to Greece her self, that fruitful
mother of all Sciences. But since her Litterati have been hewn in pieces and
starved by Barbarians, Learning has been also so trampled upon by them, as
after the burning of so many famous Libraries, wherein the labors of the most
learned writers perished, having lost the Noble Latin tongue, the very raze of
Doctors were quite lost, whose ruin has occasioned the very last displanting
of the noble Province of Marca; for the noble Marchians being first called by
the famous City of Iesi Piceini Aesini after the lamentable loss which they had
of Dipthongs, as I have said they are remained Piceni Asini: so as truly I do
not know any other greater calamity that ever befell any Nation, which can be
compared to this of ours, which by the loss of one only Dipthong, has so far
lost her ancient reputation, as the unfortunate Marchians cannot traffic, nor
appear in the company of any gallant men, but they must be twitted in the teeth
with Asino. Here the Orator with abundance of tears ended his discourse, nor
was there any one Litterato in that Audience who were not very sensible of the
Marchians misfortune, insomuch as Apollo himself being much moved at the misery
of so noble a Province, called for some Paper and Ink, and with his own hand
did again set the Dipthong to Iesi; and commanded Virgil, who was the Regent of
scanning Verses, that the first syllable of Iesi should be pronounced long; and
ordained upon pain of grievous punishment, that no man for the future should
dare to call the Marchians Asini, since it was very true that mother Nature had
sowed L'Asinita in so just a measure amongst all the Nations of the world, as
every one had a share thereof equal to her companion.

The XXXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Gonzalvo Ferrante Cordova desires Apollo that the title of Magno or Great may
be confirmed unto him, and instead of being granted his request, receives a
very unsatisfactory Answer.

GOnsalvo Ferrante Cordova, called by the Spaniards il Gran Capitano, appeared
some days ago in Parnassus, with a noble train of many Castilian Gentlemen, and
having in a haughty Oration related unto his Majesty, his famous actions in
war, demanded the confirmation of the Title Magnns, which was given him by the
consent of the whole Militia, and by all the Historians of Europe. Gonzalvo was
graciously received by Apollo, who bad him give in in writing all his Military
enterprises, and commanded afterward that they should be diligently examined
by Giovani Giovanno Pontano, by Francisco Guicchardin, and by the most reverend
Paulus Iovius, and that they should make an exact report thereof to the Senate
of History, to the end that if they should be found to be such as did deserve
the Title of Magnus, they might confirm it unto him by his Majesty's Authentic
Letters Pattents. Gonsalvo delivered unto those Historians a very perfect
Commentary of all his Actions, which were by them diligently examined, and
weighed; and afterward made a full relation thereof in open College, where
they resolved what answer should be given to Gonsalvo; who being sent for into
the Court, Titus Livy the Master of the College, told in the name of the whole
Senate; that they had very exactly considered his war enterprises, and had at
last concluded that for what he had done in Granada, being things done under
the command of a C. who was his superior, according to the style of the Court
of Parnassus they were not to be reckoned upon, the whole glory of victory in
such cases being given to the Captain General, who commanded the Army in chief;
and that though he had been General at the business of driving the Moors out of
the Kingdom of Granada, they thought the action was not such as might
deservedly confer the glorious Title of Magnus upon the Commander in chief; for
it was no great business for all Spain to drive out a few Moors, who were
divided amongst themselves, out of Granada. Then Livy added, that his
enterprises done in Africa, in the taking in of some small places, were not
thought worthy to be considered in a subject, who demanding the high
Prerogative of the Title of Magnus, must make it manifest unto the world that
he had achieved enterprises which were t^ly Great; and that it appeared
clearly by his writings, that he had won all his reputation in Military
affairs, in the war which he managed in the getting of the Kingdom of Naples,
wherein two field battles were famous and worthy consideration; the one given
at Saminara, the other at Garigliano; which if they were sufficient to purchase
a man the Title of Magnus, there were so many Bellisarii, Narsetti, Carli
Martelli, Scanderbegs, and other famous Captains in Parnassus, who had done
more memorable acts, as their would be more Magni in the world then Parvi, to
this Gonsolvo replied, that he thought that in the Neapolitan war, they ought
not to reflect upon particular actions, but to the whole noble work and
enterprise which he had gloriously brought to an end, by winning a flourishing
and strong kingdom unto his King and Master. Livy replied, that they had also
taken into their consideration, his winning of the whole Kingdom of Naples,
wherein he seemed to suffer much in his reputation, as having therein used more
fraud, then true Military valor; and th at therefore the History College, had
adjudged that Neapolitan enterprise not to deserve the name of an honorable
achievement; and that he was therefore to know that the glorious Title of
Magnus was by a particular Prerogative only granted to those who had achieved
valiant enterprises, by their mere Military worth and virtue: that therefore
the College could not possibly think that Gonsalva could pretend to have won
the kingdom of Naples by force of Arms, whereinto being called but a little
before as a friend, by the ill-advised Neapolitan Kings; and that he might
defend them, afterward when those unfortunate Kings stood in greatest need of
help, and just then when they had put the whole kingdom into his hands, he had
the heart to declare himself their Enemy, which whether it was an action
fitting to confer the Title of Magnus upon him that did effect it, the History
College would make Gonsalva himself judge. Livy said moreover, that his
obscu^e Catastrophe, might be added to what had been said; misbecoming such a
one as Gonsalvo, who desiring to be styled Magnus, desired to be the Protosavio
of the world, since after the acquisition of such a kingdom, not knowing how to
secure his reputation, he most ignorantly suffered himself to be disarmed, to
have the government of Naples afterward taken from him, and to be brought back
to Spain and be confined, and dye there mad. Gonsalva then exclaimed, and said:
That Pompey had made a much more unfortunate end then he, and yet had obtained
the title of Magnus. To which Livy answered, that according to the institutions
of Parnassus, those who to compass an Empire lost their lives, or came by any
other unfortunate end, lost no reputation; nor had Pompey the great any ways
done so, who had always the same generous thought, (though he knew how to
conceal it) as C^sar had. In fine, Livy said, That the two inexcusable errors
which Gonsalva made in his managing the taking of the kingdom of Naples, did
much derogate from his desire, for that he did not only exceed the bounds of a
Commanders Liberality, and Authority, when after the conquest of so great a
kingdom, by rewarding so many Barons. Commanders, and other deserving men, he
had purchased unto himself an attendance of so many signal subjects, not having
the requisite head of leaving means unto his King to show himself thankful to
those who had served him: and that with affability, and behavior far differing
from the austerity of his Nation, he had appeared openly to affect that
attendance and love of the Neapolitan Barons, which ought mainly to be avoided
by such a oneas he, who was the Officer of a King naturally very jealous, by
which foolish proceeding he raised in him those jealousies, which he could not
free himself of without Gonzalva's ruin of reputation; and that the
apprehension of affecting the government of other men's kingdoms, was neither
given, nor born withal in wise men; for to be lukewarm in such cases, proved
always a mortal advice to them that used it. Gonsalvo was much incenst to hear
Livy speak thus, who could not forbear saying that he had served his King with
such Loyalty as became a Castilian Baron, that the cunning how to betray a man's
Prince, was not known in Spain, and that the Lords of his Nation reputed it a
greater honor to receive injuries from their Kings, then to betray them. To
this Livy replied, that if he were of so well a composed mind, he might do well
to desire to be styled an honest man, which should willingly be granted him,
and not Magnus, which he should have then deserved when he should have thought
it more glorious to dye King of Naples, then to be confined to a poor Castle of
Spain, only for having deserved such a reward as could not be countercambiated
by any thing else, then by the ingratitude which was used toward him. Then
Gonsalva, without bearing any respect to the place wherein were so many eminent
persons, said, that they proceeded unjustly with him; for that blaming his
constant loyalty, they affirmed unto him in public, that he should have
received a better reward in ^arnassus; if he had been guilty of a thousand
trecheries; and that King Ferdinando's ingratitude did not only not obscure
his reputation, but did infinitely add unto his glory; and that the reason of
state which taught men that to measure their actions only by the compass of
interest, not by the yard of reputation, was a Do^e which better became great
Kings and Princes, then such Captains as he was, in whom Perjuries, Treasons,
and I recherie, were always accounted infamous, whereas the gaining of kingdoms
by supreme Potentates, though by foul means, were termed glorious
achievements. Livy then replied unto Gonsalva in bitter language, that the
Italians were not so ignorant but that they very well knew that the Title which
was given him in the business of Naples was Capitano Major, which in Italian or
in English is General, not Magnus; that he put too great a value upon himself;
and that the History College had rather bereave Bawdy-houses of the Title of
Signoria, where it was buried through the vanity of Ambitious men, then that
they would send the so highly esteemed name of Magnus thither.

The XXXIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Many of the French Nobility entreat their Monarchy, that according as the
Nobility of Commonwealths do, it may be lawful for them to use Marchandizing;
and are by her shamefully denied.

MAny of the Nobility of France, went some few days ago to visit the
illustrious Venetian Liberty, and though they did much admire the Laws of
living free, the excellent orders by which she maintains her self in that
Liberty, which is now so hard to be found amongst men, yet they infinitely
admire, and envy the greatness of the Noble Venetians, and did chiefly wonder,
that the prime Senators of so excelse a Commonwealth, did freely exercise
marchandising, which their Kings of France had declared to be mechanic, and
they thought it very strange that the French Nobility should be made to
believe, that the exercise of Arms, wherein men usually lose all their own
estate, should be more Noble then that of Merchandise, which does very much
enrich men. Wherefore some of the prime Nobility of France, appeared not many
days ago before their Monarchy, humbly desiring that she would be pleased, to
declare by public Edict that it was as honorable for her Nobility to follow
Traffic and Marchandising, as it was held to be in the famous Commonwealths of
Venice, Genua, and in many other Republics. The French Monarchy was much moved
at this unexpected request; and as if something of unseemly, or misbecoming had
been asked her, she with injurious words and an angry countenance, bad them be
gone; and they thinking themselves greatly wronged, by being in so severe a
manner denied a request which they thought to be so just, appealed presently to
Apollo, to whom they gave a particular account of all that had past between
them and their Monarchy, and made the same request unto his Majesty. Apollo,
who thought the French Nobility had demanded nothing but what was just,
signified un^o the French Monarchy, that if she should not satisfy her
Nobility in the point that they might follow marchandising, without any blemish
to their honor, he could not choose but gratify them therein. When the French
Monarchy heard so great a novelty, that she might prevent so great a r^ne which
she foresaw was likely to fall upon her, came presently before Apollo, to whom
she said, that his Majesty knew the true basis of her greatness, and her
chiefest power lay in the swords of her Nobility, who having drunk in the
opinion together with their milk, that merchandising was a thing as becoming
Mechanic men, as mis-becoming those that were nobly born, and that the mystery
of war, the managing of Arms, were the true Traffic, and proper Merchandise of
the Noblesse: and that to overthrow those solid foundations, would be no better
then to annihilate not only the kingdom of France, but those likewise of
Spain, England, Poland, and other Monarchies; which knowing very well the great
necessity that powerful Potentates have of always keeping their Noblesse armed,
had by mysterious cuning kept them from any thought of Merchandising, and that
it was most certain that as soon as her Noblesse should taste the sweets of
Trading, they would presently throw away their Arms, whereunto they were bred
up, preferring the continual gain of Traffic, before the perpetual expense of
war; and that the effect which the use of Merchandising produced amongst
Senators, was plainly seen in all Commonwealths, where for greediness of
maintaining Traffic, they were seen to be too much inclined to peace. The same
Monarchy did likewise put his Majesty in mind of the necessity she had of
keeping her Noblesse in Arms, for she had found in all her most important
actions, that a few of the Noblesse had overcome great Armies of Plebeians; for
there was no comparison to be made between the valor and fidelity of the
Noblesse who fought to win their Princes favor, and to purchase glory; and
those foot taken up in the streets, who took up Arms only for the poor gain of
three Crowns a month. Apollo was much satisfied with these reasons alleged by
the French Monarchy; wherefore he not long after told those French Noblesse,
who were returned to receive an answer of their business, that having reflected
maturely upon their request, he thought it not convenient, that the French
Noblesse famous throughout all the Nations of the world, for being born
warriers, and whose true element was the perpetual managing of Arms, should now
obscure their glory by the sordid gain of Merchandise; and that the ends of
Republics did very much differ from those of Monarchies: for the exercise of
Merchandise, which by its continual gain did evidently abase men's spirits, made
the expense of war seem odious and disarmed those who gave their minds
thereunto, was not only good, but very excellent in Commonwealths; where such
Senators whose Genius led them to the wars living in perpetual jealousy of
their liberty, were not a little suspected in free Countries, who desired that
their Senators should rather be prudently wise, and greatly given to peace,
then overmuch warlike; and thus were these French Noblesse dismissed by his
Majesty. And it is publicly said in this Court, that they were so exasperated by
this repulse, as one of them was heard to say, O great God! What cheats, what
cozenages are these which are put upon the Noblesse in Monarchies? and how can
it be conceived by any man, what humane Law, what justice of God does command,
that to gain for a man's self by Merchandise should be thought shameful, and to
plunder by Arms for others, should be held an honorable employment.

The XL. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Honorable Title of Messere, being fallen into a miserable condition, is
shamefully driven out of the Kingdom of Naples; and not being received into
Rome, (as it thought it should be) for its last Refuge has its recourse to
Apollo, who assigns it a very satisfactory abode.

IN the public meetings of the Seats of Justice at Naples, (which the
Neapolitans call Chiazza) it was two months since resolved, that the Title of
Messere should be expelled that kingdom, upon pain of grievous punishment if his
worship were not gone within three days. And because that honorable Title
thought it had not deserved so scornful usage, to appease those Princes and
Lords who were so highly incenst against him, he alleged the Authority of
Giovanni Scopa, Antonio Mancinello, and other excellent Grammarians, who did
all agree, that the Barbarians, who from the Northern parts overran Italy, they
had not only through their ignorance of the Latin Tongue, corrupted the
supreme Title of Here into Sire, but that those that followed after, changed
that likewise into Messere which signified as much as My Here which is my
Master; and that such a Title with which the Kings of France are pleased to
honor their sacred Persons, was unworthily so abused by the Italians; but it
being hereunto answered, that in the important business of Titles no respect
was had to the true worth thereof, but to the rate according to which it went
in the Market, unfortunate Messere was forced to hide himself in the houses of
some worshipful very old men, who complained very much that worshipful Messere
should be so hardly dealth withal, even by shopkeepers, with which they
remembered that in former times the Kings of Naples made their own style to be
honored, and reverenced. But the business growing at last desperate, Messere
took his journey for Rome by the weekly Carryer, at the same time that those
honorable Titles of ^agnifici, Spectabili, Sereni, and Generosi, fled secretly
from the kingdom for fear of the like affront. When Messere was come to Rome,
he was but badly received, by those Courtiers who long before had thought it
much scorn to be cloyed with the jacket of Illustre, Molto Illustre, and who
hoped shortly to manumit l'Illustrissimo. Wherefore Messere took his way
toward Parnassus, whether he came some few days ago, and presenting himself
before Apollo, acquainted him first with all his persecutions, and then
earnestly entreated his Majesty, that he would appoint him out some abode,
where he might rest quiet, till such time as the flood of Ambition, which had
infected even good men, were parted from the world. Apollo did much
compassionate the persecutions of that honorable Title, and having first
communicated the business to the Censors, he resolved to recommend him to the
care of the Ambassador of Marca, by whom being received with great
demonstrations of Love, and carried home into his Country, letters of the
twelfth of this month, are come by the ordinary Post from Marca, which say that
that kind and loving Nation has not only willingly received Messere, but
has in great pomp admitted him into its Country, under an imbroydered cloth of
state; and that Messere in recompense of that very great civility, taught the
Marchians the very next day after his arrival, the true way of rosting the leaf
of a Hog, and of sopping their bread in the Dripping-pan, letting that smoke go
up the Chimney; which the Neapolitans, and other Nations which study appearance
more then substance, feed much upon.

The XLI. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Censors of Parnassus, having by order from Apollo, published a rigorous
Edict against Hypocrites, are forced to moderate it, by reason of a weighty
particular discovered unto them by Plato.

THe public Censors of this Court, having learnt for certain, that a kind of
goodness which is lately discovered in some of the Litterati of Parnassus, is
but a composure of artificial appearances, and real falsehood, and that hellish
hypocrisy gets every day more footing in men's minds, to the end that all
Parnassus may not be infected with so contagious a disease, published by order
from his Majesty, a severe Edict six days ago against Hypocrites. And is it not
a great wonder that Plato himself who is held by all the Vertuosi of Parnassus
to be the true Idea of all purity and sincerity, and the very pattern of
goodness, should presently appear before the Censors Tribunal, and openly
opposing himself to the Edict which was so generally well received, saying with
his wonted freedom, that through the manifest ignorance of modern men, in
judging upon the true condition of men's manners, it was a very pernicious
resolution which was taken in Parnassus, to extirpate all that Hypocrisy, by
which in these unfortunate times, even good men were forced to keep up their
reputation; for plain-dealing men, people of open hearts and clear minds,
enemies to cunning and double dealing, who in former times were honored and
admired like so many Demigods, were so far from being well esteemed of in this
present Age; as to speak the naked truth, and to proceed in all a man's actions
with sincerity, were nor esteemed good nor virtuous things, but rather
scurrility, a relaxed life, a licentious way of proceeding, an unpolisht
behavior; wherefore even the best men, and those that formerly walked in the
approved way of been vivere, and Latari, and who appeared to be capital Enemies
to Hypocrisy, yet that they might by so wicked a vice maintain that credit and
reputation, which they saw they lost by living honestly, were much against
their will enforced to use Hypocrisy. The Censors did so much approve of this
Counsel given by Plato; as they soon embraced it, and by a new Edict which they
published, complained, that in this so depraved Age, to the calamity of good
men, and great good fortune of knaves and varlets, words freely, and merrily
spoken in public by jovial people, were more censured, then all the wick
edness done in Private by modern Hypocrites; wherefore Apollo, (though much
against his will) granted leave to all gallant people of whatsoever sex to use,
without incurring any punishment, the four-scoreth part of one grain of fine
Hypocrisy.

The XLII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Immense bulk of the Ottoman Empire which was thought by the wisest men to
be everlasting, does now of it self so destroy it self, as it threatens present
ruin.

THe vast Fabric of the Ottoman Empire, (as is well known to all those that
deal in Pernassus) is of so large a circuit, as it seems to be a great City,
the walls whereof being built (though the Princes thereof be barbarous and
illiterate) in an excellent way of politic Architecture, are of so solid
materials, and with so corresponding Bulwarks, Courtines, Platforms, Ditches,
Ravelins, Scarfes, and Counterscarfes, as it was not only thought by many of
those who of late did consider it, to be as eternal as the world, but seemed as
if by means of those Emperors who are still more and more ambitious to make it
greater by the addition of new appertiments, it would like Nero's golden house,
possess whole Pernassus; the strong Bulwarks of Tauris, Servan, Giorgia,
Darbecca, and most of all those of Armenia, are not only almost all of them
fallen to the ground, but that strongest Bastion of the lesser Asia, has lost so
large a collop, as it threatens sudden ruin; so as those walls which seemed to
be everlasting, do now of themselves moulder away and fall to ruin. A novelty
which makes the beholders wonder very much, and puts them in mind of the
instability of humane greatness; for though nothing appear more potent and
immortal to the eyes of men then great Empires, yet we see they suddenly and
easily are overthrown. For if a man will demolish a Tower which is strongly
built, he must labor long about it with Canon and Pick-axe; but to the ruin
of any Empire how great and potent soever, one only puff (though but very
weak) of a Princes folly, or of a private man's ambition, who has good store of
Followers, Money, and Wit, is able to make it totter, and fall, before the ruin
be expected.

The XLIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Prince of Helicon desires by an Ambassador of his, from Apollo, the
privilege of ordaining birthright amongst the Nobles of his State; which his
Majesty denies to grant.

THe Prince of Helicons Ambassador, who came three days since to Pernassus, had
audience given him yesterday by Apollo; whom he acquainted that his Prince,
after having imbellished his flourishing state, with all those singular
Ornaments which render great kingdoms respected, wanted nothing, but that the
numerous Nobility which he had instituted there, might keep up their greatness
perpetually; and because he knew that it was riches which only preserved the
splendour of great Families, he foresaw that the gallantry of his State would
through peoples usual fruitfulness, in a short time turn to its former mean
condition, if the fathers estate should be divided in equal parts amongst many
brethren: and that the famous Nobilities of France, Spain, Germany, Poland, and
other kingdoms, had maintained their greatness many hundreds of years, only
by the advantage of birthright; wherefore his Prince (who was much his
Majesty's servant) did humbly beseech him that he would vouchsafe to grant him
the privilege of instituting the Law of birthright amongst the Nobility of his
state. Apollo answered the Ambassador, that he perceived his Prince did not
consider what he asked; for it seemed he did not well know what it imports in a
state, by rich patrimonies, and Pretense of Nobility to put the Bulls horns
upon the head, and Woolves teeth in the mouths of meek sheep, ready to be milkt
with both hands, and shorn to the very quick, when they wanted the pretension
of that vainglorious Nobility, which teaching others only how to command like
Lords, made the base slavery of obeying known; and that those Potentates who
had endeavored to found and maintain a great Nobility in their states, by the
institution of birthright, were at last aware that they had foolishly made them
the heads of those people, who when they had wealthy men for their guides, and
such as were remarkable for their Nobility, were dreadful to all Princes; and
that great Families in all States served only for Lanterns, which in the
obscu^est times of revolutions, gave light to the common people who walked in
the dark. Wherefore in States where there was a numerous Nobility, it behoved
Princes to live with the punctilio of respect which was an unsufferable
burden; which those kingdoms wanted, where no such impediments being found,
their possessors might justly and with much reason term themselves true and
absolute masters of their States: and that there wanted not examples of Noble
men in France, Flanders, and elsewhere, who in foul Insurrections made by
themselves, durst take upon them the Title of Fathers of their Country, and the
peoples Protectors; and who that they might Tyrannise over the people, and give
Laws even to their natural Princes, were not ashamed to guild over their
seditious taking up of Arms against their King, with the specious and
charitable pretense of public good. To this the Ambassador answered, that the
example of the warlike Nobility of France, was the only thing which had induced
his Prince, to desire it so much in his State, for he found clearly that the
treachery of those who had made insurrections against their King, had been
overcome by the glorious French Noblesse; and that the noble kingdom of France,
being armed by a no less numerous then warlike Noblesse, had taught the whole
world, how much a numerous Noblesse imports in a kingdom; for 'twas they alone
who by their unvanquishable swords had quenched the fire of those French
Insurrections, which in a kingdom that had wanted so great a benefit, would
have burnt eternally. Apollo answered, that all this would have been true, if
the French Insurrections, of which he spoke, had been raised only by the
people, but that being apparently kindled by a great many of the Noblesse of
that kingdom, the Physician would prove very ridiculous who should glory in the
cure of a malady, of which through his gross ignorance he had been the only
cause: and that every wise Prince ought to keep from the fault of nursing up
and nourishing Companions and brothers in his kingdom, since those Monarchs
reigned most securely, who put the greatest distance between their greatness,
and the lowliness of their subjects. That it nauseated his Majesty, as much as
ignorance it self did, to see that there should be so arrogant and
vainglorious subjects in one of the chiefest kingdoms of Europe, who by the
proud pretense of their Nobility, durst affirm they were as nobly born as the
King himself; as if any comparison which was not infinitely ridiculous and
hateful, could be made between a spindle, and the Mast of a Tree, between Flies
and Elephants, between commanding, and obeying. And Apollo added, that it was
this monstrous petulancy which made the Ottoman Emperors hold it the chief
means of their security and greatness, and that not without reason, not to
allow any the least shadow of Pretense to Nobility in their Dominions: and that
those who would see narrowly into the effects which the Noblesse occasion in a
kingdom, did not so much blame the resolution of those Emperors, as some did
who understood very little of worldly affairs. For those great Princes, who in
their affairs minded only substance and not appearance, did infinitely abhor
the boasting and vainglory of those things which seemed to be, and were not:
and they abhord to see that a Nobleman who had no experience, or was not any
ways skild in the affairs either of war or peace, should notwithstanding
through the sole pretense of his empty Nobility, think those qualifications in
the Militia to be due to him, which a Prince is so necessitated to confer upon
the only worth and merit of such Commanders whose hairs were grown gray under a
Murrion, and who by perpetually wearing of Curasses in actions of war had made
their breasts and backs as hard as horn; and that that which above all other
things made such people hateful, was to see them so wilful, as not to obey
ancient Commanders of a less noble extract, though they themselves were but
young; it being certainly an insufferable pretension, to desire through fool^sh
ostentation, that the gifts of fortune should be esteemed by a Prince to be
indowments of mind. In fine, Apollo said, that he though tit was greater
cruelty, and high in^ustice, that the estate should not be equally divided
amongst those brothers who had one and the same Father and Mother. That he
thought it fit some Prerogative should be given to the Primogeniture, but that
it should be such as should make him appear to be the head of his house, not
the Master of his Brethren: and that the rich and just right of Eldership which
Fathers ought to leave in their Families was love and concord between his
Children. And that it would be both great folly, and cruelty to introduce that
primogeniture amongst private men, which occasioning such scandals in the blood
of Princes, as might be seen registered in history, was only born withal for
the public peace sake, which the people would not enjoy, if kingdoms were
divided, and that Primogeniture being only advantageous to Princes, subjects
who were excluded from Paternal Inheritance, were necessitated for their
subsistence to take pay of them, and to be trained up in war, by which Princes
secured their States; that they might be furnished with the same abundance of
Military men as now they had with high injustice and the peoples ill will, if
they should admit all Brothers to Paternal Inheritances; for that was only the
laudable Primogeniture which neither Princes, nor Parents, but brothers
themselves by joint agreement do erect in their Families, when one only of
them betaking himself to propagation, all the rest labor to augment the common
Patrimony. Apollo concluded his answer with this, that he absolutely denied to
grant the Prince of Helicon the Primogeniture which he desired, because he
could no longer behold those horrid Tragedies, and cruel machinations which
were plotted amongst Brethren in those States where the use of Primogeniture
was practiced; for those who were excluded from paternal Inheritance, left no
sort of cruelty, or treachery unindeavoured to recompense the foul injustice
which was done them. Moreover, that all Primogeniture being grounded with much
loss of blood, he feared he should not be able to find out any form of
privilege with so strong and strict proviso's, as would be able, to keep
people excluded from their inheritance from making, by a dagger in their hand,
their Fathers last Will and Testament ineffectual.

The XLIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Duke of Alva being accused of cruelty, for having with exquisite diligence
caused two of the prime subjects of his new Principality of Achaia, to be
imprisoned, slain, and afterward secretly buried in their very prisons,
defends himself stoutly before Apollo.

SOon after the Duke of Alva had taken possession of the new Principality of
Achaia, of which you heard at large by our late Letters, that severe spirit,
who being wholly composed of wariness, and vigilance, seemed to be endowed by
nature with all requisites in a Prince, who will with security govern States
newly acquired. After he had exactly observed the humors, and behaviors of some
chief men of the State, he endeavored to know who they were who had occasioned
those many popular insurrections which had so much endangered the free State of
Achaia: and at last he found apparently that all the former evils had had their
rise from the ambition of two principal men, who being wealthy, liberal,
courteous, and more ambitious of government then became subjects, to be:
qualities, which in any whatsoever corrupted Commonwealth, or newly founded
principality, make him who possesses them formidable, and by those means
infinitely beloved by the people; the Prince, to secure the quiet of his State,
thought it very necessary to rid the world of so dangerous subjects; so as with
admirable dexterity and secrecy he got them both into his hands, and with
necessary resolution, made them be put to death and buried the very hour that
they were imprisoned. This cruel and resolute action, not usually heard of, nor
seen, in a State, which never having known what belonged to servitude, was not
acquainted with those severe resentments which Princes through jealousy of
State use to take, gave that bad satisfaction to the Nobility, which the
severity of a new Prince usually does, when it is exercised against those
ambitious popular Chieftains who by their seditions abuse Liberty, and
precipitate it into Tyranny; and was of great terror to the common people; who
though they were much incenst against their Prince, yet when they saw their
leading men were taken from them, they neither had courage nor wit to move;
but as is usual upon such like occasions, changed their insolency into
admiration or vvonder, their boldness into fear, their acting of resentments
into complaints by word, and to threatening that revenge, which of themselves
they had not wit to execute. The end of their rancor was then, the making of
such appeals to Apollo against their Prince, as his Majesty straightly commanded
him to make his present appearance in Parnassus, and plead his justification
against those imputations. Alva obeyed, and having acquainted his Majesty with
their tedious conditions, shevved him clearly, that to secure himself in the
Government of his new Principality, he was necessitated to use the wonted
remedy of taking off the heads of the seditious people, which Apollo seemed to
be but little satisfied with; but told Alva, that though the death of those two
seditious men might be requisite, yet he could not approve of the manner; for
that Princes who in the important resolution of putting any of their subjects
to death, did not proceed by the rules of known Justice, injured their own
reputation, and interest; and that Princes were obliged to make known to all
the world, the true reason which made them proceed with severity against their
subjects; and that the Delinquents punishment ought to be public, not only
for the Prince his Justification, but to terrify others, and keep them from
doing amiss. The Prince grew pale, to hear Apollo speak thus positively, and
answered, that the aforesaid two persons were so mightily beloved by the
People, as if they should have been proceeded against by the usual course of
Justice, and that they had been executed (as he acknowledged they should have
been) in the public Piazza, it was odds but that the People would by violence
have taken them from the hands of Justice; which disorder though it might have
been prevented by guards of armed men, yet it was most certain, that the
public death of such prime men, and who were so dearly beloved by their State,
would have caused such compunction, and such alteration in the minds of his
Vassals, as, if not at that instant, they would at least at some other time
leave nothing unattempted to revenge it. Which respects made him keep from
purging the body of his State, from those malignant humors which it abounded
in, by approved Medicines; for certainly he should have stirred up such store
of more pernicious humors, as would have much aggravated the malady. That it
was a trivial politic Precept, to frighten the meaner sort of people from
committing wickedness, by the spectacle of mechanics in the Piazza's, and
other public places; but that personages of quality, who were beloved by the
People, and whom Princes put to death, only for the safety of their State,
their deaths and burials must ensue their imprisonment, in secret places; for
to punish signal men publicly upon scaffolds, did not beget fear in men, but
rage of revenge. Apollo then asked the Prince, how long it had been since he
had learned that Precept; the Prince answered that whilst he was a young man he
learned it of a Florentine, who was his Master in the Politics; Apollo asked
him again, why he practiced the contrary in the memorable, and fatal resolution
which he took in the business of Prince Egmont, and Count Horn; Alva boldly
answered his Malesty, that the interests were different in him who governed a
Province as an other man's substitute, and in him who was absolute Prince
thereof; and that Nature had made men wiser in governing their own particular
affairs, then those of their Masters; and that many who seemed to be blind in
the government of other men's States, were more then Argus-eyed in their own
affairs.

The XLV. ADVERTISEMENT.
A chief subject of the Province of Macedonia, being hired by the Prince of
Epire at a great salary, when he came to know the right cause why that pension
was given him, does magnanimously refuse it.

THe Prince of Epire, who gives great Pensions to the chief Counselors of
diverse of his neighboring Potentates, has for a long time past, paid great
sums of money yearly to a chief Baron of Macedonia, who is very well beloved,
and has many followers in that Nation: who believing that this the Prince of
Epires Liberality, proceeded from mere love, and sincerity of mind, to free
himself from the superiority of any other Prince, which might disturb him in
his service, that he might be the more able to serve the Prince of Epire to the
utmost of his power, sold all his estate in Macedonia, and by the moneys which
he got for it, purchased great store of Land in Epire, whither he went to make
his abode, intending for the future to make Epire his Country; and applied
himself with such assiduity, and so faithfully to the service of that Prince;
as he surpast all the rest of his Highness servants in his diligence, and care
in all those things of importance, wherein he was trusted. But going to the
pay-masters to receive his wonted half years Pension, he much to his
astonishment found, that by order from the Treasurers, his Pension was taken
away. Which he presently acquainted the Prince with, and complained that whilst
the merits of his service increased, his reward was lessened. The Prince
answered, that he having changed his Country, and being of a friend become his
servant, his case was altered. That he could purchase that of his equals which
though he named it not, yet the Baron might be wise enough to understand; that
upon all occasions he could purchase loyalty, and diligence a great deal better
cheap of his own vassals. The Baron understood then whither the Pension tended
that had been assigned him by the Prince of Epire, and blushing very much,
stoutly answered him, Sir, the reputation which I live in in my Country, has
cost me an ounce of blood for every ten pounds worth thereof, in all the war
that has happened in Europe since I wrote man; let not your Highness think me so
great a Prodigal, as that I will sell it you for 3 shillings the pound. And
after this having withdrawn himself from his new Barony which he had purchased
in Epire, he took his leave of the Prince, and returned to his own Country,
admired and commended by all men for that his noble resolution, but imitated
but by a few.

The XLVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
The tenth of June is observed as a sad and mournful day in Parnassus; in
memory of the unfortunate loss of the Decads of Titus Livy.

YEsterday which was the tenth of June, was (according to custom) observed as a
day of mourning in Pernassus; for that on that unfortunate day, by the burning
of the Library in the Capitol, the greatest part of Livies Decads were lost;
which loss is bitterly bewailed, and will ever be so by all the lovers of
learning. On which day, in sign of extraordinary sorrow, the Royal Palace
dis-robes it self of all its Majesty: and together with all public Schools,
and chief Market places, is lined with mourning Bays; and the very Delphick
Library, (a thing not done upon any other sad occasion) is shut up all that
day. Honorable Obsequies were made to so famous writings; and the Ceremony
being ended, Rafael Volaterano in a mournful Oration lamented so great a loss:
and just as he was in the height of his inveighing against the ignorance of
those sacrilegious persons, it happened that a nimble Poet, were it either out
of mere compunction of mind, or that he would purchase reputation, by showing
the whole College of Vertuosi, how very sensible he was of that loss, broke
forth into so loud lamentations, as the Orator could be no longer heard, and
not being able to quiet himself, though he was willed to do so by the Censors;
Apollo who was present at the Obsequies, and who upon this mournful occasion
had covered himself with a dark Cloud, being impatient to hear that noise, and
that he might the better behold his face who wept so downrightly, by the
violence of his beams rarifyed the Cloud, and found it to be Caesar Caporali,
who not caring to see the yet remaining Decads of that admirable writer, did
with such lamentations bewayl those that were lost: which extraordinary
affection caused so loud a laughter in all the standers by, as Volaterrano's
Oration, which in the midst thereof was interrupted by the general lamentings
of the Literati, could not be ended by reason of every ones great laughter.

The XLVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo having appointed Hospitals to every Nation, for their fools, puts down
that of Florence, by reason of the few fools that are found amongst the
Florentines, and adds the Revenue thereof to the Lombards Hospital, which by
reason of the greater number of fools that flock thither, was run far in
Arrears.

IT being found by long experience, that there is no Nation in the world,
wherein there are not great store of fools, Apollo, that he might find timely
remedy, according to his custom, for men's miseries, erected many hundred years
ago, an Hospital for fools in every Nation; which he endowed with rich
Revenues; to the end that they might be furnished with all things requisite for
the cure of such as Divine Justice had for their misdemerits punished, by making
them shallow braind. And because the Hospital of the noble Florentine Nation,
by reason of the very few fools that it produces, is at little or no cost, and
it being on the contrary seen, that there is so great a concourse of Lombard
fools, as their Hospital is not able to receive them all, nor can supply the
great expense which it is forced to be at; his Majesty some few days ago, of
his own mere motion, put down the Hospital of the Florentine fools, and gave
the Revenues thereof to that of Lombardy, the Lombards being for the most part
besotted with the foul indignity of playing the Hectors, holding it to be a
great honor, to be followed by a great number of Swashbucklers.

The XLVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo's Sea-Captains, having in one of their Assemblies made many useful
Decrees for their Militia, his Majesty orders that they be made known to
Courtiers, and commands the punctual observancy of them.

THe many meetings had by his Majesty's Sea-Captains, ended not before
yesterday; whereupon the General, Andrea Doria, came this morning with the
Constitutions therein established to Apollo, to have his Majesty's Royal assent
thereunto: It is known that his Majesty received great satisfaction by the
Decree made touching the Gallislaves, who when they are beaten by the Masters
Mate, may not turn about to look upon him, not fence the blow, not complain,
and much less rail at him that beats them, upon pain of undergoing thrice as
many lashes; but they must so patiently, and so contentedly receive their
correction, as their great humility moves the Masters Mate to be rather
charitable then severe unto them. After Apollo had much commended this Decree,
he gave order that it should be judiciously intimated to all those miserable
creatures, who for their secret misdeserts, are by Divine Justice condemned to
tug at an Oar in the Court of Rome, or in any other Court, to the end that they
may learn with patience to suffer the blows (the misusage) the lashes (the
distasts) which they in Courts receive from their Masters; and that they do not
murmur thereat, but may rather thereby with courage suffer tribulation, and
betake themselves with the better will to the oar of slavery, and by so doing,
enforce the Prince to be rather liberal and gracious toward them, then to
redouble their blows (their discourtesies) their lashes (their ill usage.) For
to murmur, complain, or call their Master ungrateful, does beget in him such
obstinacy, not to reward one who may otherw^se be of some desert, even as the
curses and blasphemies which the Gally-slaves use to those that correct them,
are the true causes which draws on their more severe correction. Which is so
true a thing, as Princes hold it for an undeniable maxim, That an open enemy,
and a distasted Courtier, Differant nomine, nonre.

The XLIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Natalis Comes, an Historian, is severely punished by Apollo, for having said
somewhat in an Assembly of the Literati, which did hainously offend his Majesty.

Whilst Natalis Comes, the Latin Historian discoursed some days since under
Melpomenes Porch, together with many other Literati of this Court, of the glory
of those great Princes, who have left eternal memory behind them, of their
honorable actions; according to the custom of Historians, termed the seizure
or getting of a Kingdom, made by a Potent Prince, without any title of right or
justice, a glorious achievement: Which being suddenly carried to Apollo's ear
by those malignant spirits, which both the air and earth do continually abound
in, his Majesty grew so incenst against Natalis, as at the very instant that he
was brought prisoner to him, he forbad him entrance into any of the Libraries
for three year: And though his Majesty has been entreated by the chief
Historians of this State, to show some mercy to this his Vertuoso, he has not
only denied to do it, but has freely said, that since there could be no
greater wickedness committed, then the unjust liberty which some Princes have
usurped to bereave one another of their States; an action which has filled the
whole world with those sad disorders, wherewith mankind is so much afflicted;
he thought it too sore an iniquity, that any so perfidious Literato should be
found in his State, who should dare to call those wicked thefts, which are not
committed without a million of aggravating circumstances, glorious
achievements.

The L. ADVERTISEMENT.
The chief Monarchies of Europe and Asia, which now reside in Parnassus, fall
sick at one and the same instant, and not being to be cured by Esculapius,
Hippocrates, or any other able Physician, they are restored to their health by
a skilful Farrier.

EVery one in Parnassus did infinitely wonder, that upon one and the same day,
all the chief Monarchies of Europe and Asia should fall desperately sick, which
many thought occasioned through the putrefaction of the air, or by some
unauspitious aspects of the heavens. Apollo did not only send excellent
remedies to all those Potentates, but all the chief Physicians of this Court;
and commanded that great Esculapius should himself be assistant to their cure,
so as no remedy was left untri'd by so rare Physicians, that so eminent
personages might recover their healths; but all proved to no purpose; for all
the Physicians did infinitely wonder, that though their Medicines were most
generous, and very proper for the malady, yet they did not work according to
their particular virtues; that their Manna, Laxative Syrup, and Sena it self,
though given in great quantity, should rather prove restringent, then cause
usual evacuations; by reason of which strange novelties, wise Esculapius, and
the rest of the rare Physicians, thinking that Nature yielded to the malady by
reason of her weakness, gave over the cure, as desperate. It happened in this
interim, that a learned Politician went merely by way of visit, to see one of
those sick Princes, who had been his ancient Master; from whom he understood the
condition of his sickness, and then desired to know what remedies were applied
unto him; and when he was satisfied in this his desire, he found fault with the
Medicines which were given him, and exclaimed mightily against the Physicians,
not sticking to call them all ignorant puppies, and forthwith sent with all
speed for the Farrier of Parnassus, who is trusted with the cure of Pegasus.
Who suddenly appearing, he staid not to hear the relation of the sickness, from
the Patients own mouth, as Physicians use to do, but without either feeling of
Pulse, or casting of water, he presently knew the quality of the infirmity, and
straitwaies made a composition of Dragons blood, Bolearmenick, whites of Eggs,
and spreading it upon lint, made Plasters of it, and applied them to those
Princes, and then made large swathes for their legs and arms, afterward he
gave them a Laxative potion to drink in a syrup, ordained by Galen. These
Medicines which were very much blamed and laughed at by Esculapius, Hippocrates,
and all the prime Physicians, did in a few hours work so well with these
Princes, as they soon forsook their beds, and ran skipping and leaping about
more nimbly then ever they had done before. Whereupon all the Vertuosi of
Parnassus, when they saw such admirable effects, were much astonished, that
Empires, Kingdoms, and great States which could not be cured of the disorders
which they were run into, by skillful Physicians, with their Rubarbs, and other
Canonical Medicines, should be so soon restored to their healths, by a drench
for a horse, given them by a silly Farrier.

The LI. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Achaians being much incenst against the Duke of Alva, for his cruel
proceeding against their two Chieftains, take up Arms, and drive him out of
their State.

Whilst the Duke of Alva, after the execution of the two chief Heads of the
People (whereof you lately heard) sought to secure his State, by using great
severity in the taking away of men's lives, his Country grew still more and
more unquiet, it not being always true, That to fall at the first, in new
gotten and jealous States, to the extirpating of such as are most eminent,
either for birth, attendance, worth, or riches, does free Princes of the
jealousies which they have of the Nobility and people: For some chief men of
Achaia, as soon as they saw those two Ringleaders of theirs put to death, only
because they were much esteemed and beloved by the people, began to apprehend
their own ruin: And because gallant men cannot live long in fear of danger,
they thought it not only a safe way to be speedy, but (not being able to live
quietly and void of suspicion) they fell cheerfully upon rash counsels; many of
the best wits of Achaia made themselves the peoples heads, being grieved to see
that the love which they bore to those two who made so unfortunate an end,
should be judged a fault deserving death. So as the Duke of Alva's severity
wrought the effect, which is usual in new Tyrannies which are crept into Free
Countries, by reason of the discord between the Nobility and Commonalty, of
reuniting the Nobles and Plebeians in perfect love and charity, that so they
may recover that Liberty by union, which they lost by foolish civil discord.
The whole people of Achaia therefore, led on by the Nobility, took up arms upon
an appointed day, and falling foul upon their Prince, drove him easily out of
the State. And it is now two days since Alva recovered Parnassus, and came
immediately to do his obeisance to his Majesty, who did not only rece^ve him
very coolly, but was sorry that he had been deceived in the good opinion he had
had of him. The Duke would have excused himself, and have alleged reasons for
his discrimination, but Apollo bad him hold his peace, and told him that such a
one as he ought to know, that it was unwisely done by them who intended to make
a Free People willingly to accept of slavery, to use cruelty (as he had done)
at the very first beginning, and open inhumanity against the chief Personages
of the State; whereby the people being made to despair, they would try all
means to free themselves from that heavy yoke of servitude, which they were
unacquainted with; and that a business of such importance must be purchased by
length of time, by little and little, insensibly introducing slavery amongst
the people, and bereaving them of their Liberty, whilst they were not aware of
it. The Duke replied, That he had learnt by Augustus his Proscription, by which
extinguishing all the prime Nobility of Rome, he bereaft the people of their
Chieftains, that new Principalities were to be grounded by such means as he had
used which counsel he had likewise learnt of Tacitus, who says, nihil ausuram
Plebem principibus amotis. Tacit. lib. 1. Annal.

To this Apollo answered, That he failed always in his resolutions, who
governing his own present actions by former examples, had not the same
requisite circumstances as they had whom he took for his safe President; and
that he ought to have considered, that in new Principalities, he could only
safely practice that Ta^quinian Precept of cutting off the heads of the highest
Poppies, and which great Augustus knew so well how to put in execution, who had
the like circumstances as that great Emperor had, who being armed, and
victorious, could not only with safety make that so famous Proscription, but
might easily quel any popular insurrection in Rome, by the same forces whereby
he had annihilated the Roman Nobility: And that the Duke wanting that
leaning-stock, in the using of the same severities which Augustus had happily
practiced, was much deceived; and that the example of the unfortunate Duke of
Athens, who was called in by the Florentines to Govern their Country, being
very like his case, did make it clearly appear to the whole world, That
Principalities whereunto others are called by reason of the dissension of
Citizens, are not secured by sudden and severe cruelties used against the chief
Subjects, but by cunningly keeping up, and heightning those divisions between
the Nobility and common people, which having occasioned the expulsion of the
ancient Liberty from out the Commonwealth, had introduced new slavery; and that
such Princes ought, above all things, to keep themselves from doing any thing
which might cause such universal distaste, as through mere despair, might make
the people reunite themselves with the Nobility; and that he saw every day more
clearly, that the Spaniards wit was miraculous in the well governing of those
people, which being born, and having perpetually lived under Monarchy, received
all servitude willingly; but that in Governing Nations that were either
naturally Free, and endowed with ample Privileges, or which being lately past
from Liberty into Slavery, Nec totam Libertatem, nec totam servitutem pati
possunt. Lib. 1. Hist. was a business which did not suit well with the wits of
those Nations, which having Promptum ad asperiora ingenium. Tacit. lib. 1.
Annal. were extrordinary Prompti ferocibus.

The LII. ADVERTISEMENT.
An Italian Gentleman, for having lost much blood in the service of a great
Prince, is honored by him with a Noble Order of Knighthood, who being but
slightly esteemed of by those of his own Country, asks Apollo by what reasons
he may satisfy those his deriders, that he was the more richly rewarded, in
that he was paid in Honor, and not in Gold or Silver.

THe Gentleman of Italy who came to this Court the last week, did not (as many
did believe) negotiate the public affairs of any Prince, but treated of some
things concerning his own particular self: For being brought to have Audience
of his Majesty, he told him, that having for many years served a great Prince
in his important Wars, for the much blood which he had lost, and moneys which
he had therein spent, he was rewarded by that liberal Prince with a most Noble
Order of Knighthood; and that when he returned to his own Country, that rich
reward was laughed at by those his fellow-Citizens, who love nothing but ready
money: That therefore he most humbly beseeched his Majesty that he would be
pleased to furnish him with such reasons as might serve him to convince those
his deriders. To this Apollo answered, That he might sufficiently satisfy
every one by giving an account of the annual Revenue of the Commendum of his
Order of Knighthood. The Gentleman said, The Order of his Knighthood had no
advantage of Commendum. To which Apollo said, That his affairs being in so sad
a condition, it could not by any conclusive reason be proved, that the honor
of Knighthood added more to him who received it, in point of honor and
reputation, then what he had formerly merited by his honorable actions; but
that it was the simplicity of mind, and sincerity of heart, which did believe
well in the favor of Princes.

The LIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo finding that his having allowed the use of the 80 part of one grain of
hypocrisy to his Vertuosi, had wrought very bad effects, does not only recall
that his favor by public Edict, but thunders out exceeding severe punishments
against hypocrites.

YOu heard by our former expresses, That the gallant men of this Court, who
follow the noble Rule of Been Vivere and Laetari, not being sufficiently
informed of the malice and wickedness of those false hypocrites, who by way of
loose life, and corrupted customs, have the liberty of speaking from their
hearts, were by Plato's means persuaded to desire leave of the Censors, that
they might make use of a little hypocrisy; which they obtained with very bad
consequence; for they soon were aware that hypocrisy is like a contagious
disease, never so little whereof spreads soon over the whole body: A disorder
which those gallant men which have been spoken of, found to be very true: Who
though they did strangely abhor so lewd a vice, and consequently bore a mortal
hatred to hypocrites, yet that eightieth part of one grain of hypocrisy which
they took, was sufficient to infect, in a few days, all their sincere and
plain dealing. For they grew so in love with the credit and reputation which
they got by that seeming modesty, and counterfeit devotion and charity, as they
gave themselves wholly over, both in soul and body, in prey to that horrid
vice, which but a little before they did so much detest: And all this with such
disorder to the affairs of this State, as in a short time whole Parnassus was
nothing but hypocrisy. As soon as Apollo found this inconvenience, he resolved
by all means possible, to extirpate so venomous a plant by the very root from
out his State. And knowing that cankers, and fistulated wounds must be cured by
fire and razor, he forthwith fell upon an extraordinary piece of rigor; for on
Tuesday morning he caused an Edict to be published in the place appointed for
such purposes, whereby he strictly commanded every one that was subject to his
Jurisdiction, That within three days he should cleanse his soul from that
wicked filth of hypocrisy; declaring, That from that time forward, he did
annul and make void that permission which a little before was by his Censors
granted to gallant men, of the use of the eightieth part of one grain of
hypocrisy: And that those three days being over, which he peremptorily
prescribed as the utmost limit of time to all men; all such as should be found
guilty of so infamous a fault, should not only be declared open enemies to all
virtue, incapable or any fame or glory, or of ever acquiring any honor, but he
declared them to the whole world, to be viperous creatures, shamelesly
infamous; and that by all the Plenipotentiary power which he had over his
Vertuosi, he declared them from that time forward to be grossly ignorant.
Moreover, that so ho^id a monster should for the time to come, be for ever
banished from out his Vertuosi, and be by them detested and abhorred; he
commanded that those who should be known to be guilty of so foul a fault,
might without any punishment to the inflicters, be shamed, vituperated, and
rendered infamous; as putrified members, fit to be amputated from the body of
the Literati, by Satirical Poets with their biting Verses, by Orators with
their stinging invectives, and by all the Vertuosi, with all sorts of weapons
apt to derogate from the same of any man: And that not only all ^nds and sorts
of testimony, how weak soever, should serve for full proof against any one that
was impeached of so wicked a fact, but that it should be lawful for any man to
bastenado, or stone one who was noted for an hypocrite, though it were but by
suspicion, or any other remote cause: And that to be much scandalized at
matters of small moment; to speak much of charity, without ever giving any
alms; to wear a threadbare Cloak, and yet be very rich; to appear poor in
public, and yet live plentifully at home; to be damnably avaricious, and yet
boast of Angelical devoutness: to speak slow, and with a weak voice, and under
color of finding fault with public vices, to speak bitterly against
particular men; to bow the head with much humility, and yet to have a proud
mind; and to preach that to others, which it was plainly seen that they
themselves did not practice; should be esteemed and reputed sufficient proofs
to condemn any one of such a vice.

The better sort of the Literati of this State, thought this his Majesty's
Edict too severe; who to secure their lives and reputations from the ignorance
of the meaner sort of people, who are not wise enough to discern between true
and counterfeit goodness, presented themselves before Apollo, whom they desired
that wicked hypocrites might be severely punished, but so as that good and
honest men might not incur the danger of being hardly dealt with; and they said
that Judicial Astrologers, and hypocrites, were a certain race of men, who were
always banished, and yet every place abounded with them; not for that Princes
wanted Authority to extirpate them out of their Countries, but for that those
very Princes who did prohibit them, did nourish and foment them; and that the
only cure for hypocrisy was, That Princes should love, cherish, enrich, and
exalt such as being ambitious of glory, thirsting after riches, and desirous of
their good will, who affected those things out of mere worth and merit; and
that they should suffer great hypocrites, who covered their devilish pride with
the cloak of humility, an unquenchable thirst after gold, with a vail of
poverty, and execrable ambition of dominiering over the whole world, by seeming
to despise the world; to live in their condition of appearing humility, of
feigned poverty, counterfeit solitariness, and retired life: A Council whereby
Princes would be sure to keep from erring; for if piety, humility, contempt of
worldly vanities, which some do so much boast of, were realities, and things
done from the heart, they would by this way of proceeding, give men their own
delights, when they should be justly punished by their own false weapons, it
being very true, that Princes could not better discover hypocrites, then by
suffering them (like Oysters) to stew in their own water.

The LIVE. ADVERTISEMENT.
Guiccardine having spoken many things prejudicial to the reputation of the
Marquess of Piscara, In an Assembly of diverse Vertuosi, that renowned Commander
does sufficiently justify himself before Apollo.

DOn Francisco Ferrando d'Avalo, Marquess of Pis^aro, being told some few days
ago, that in an Assembly of the best Historians of this State of Pernassus,
Francis Guiccardine had spoken words of him, tending much to his dishonor:
Piscara, who was naturally high minded, and very proud, was so incenst at the
injury done him by Guiccardine, as he made his complaint to Apollo; to whom his
Majesty, who very well knew Guiccardine's circumspect proceeding, and exact
wisdom, answered, That it not being likely that Guiccardine should have spoken
of him, otherwise then became a true Historian, and free from any passion of an
ill-affected mind, he would, as in justice he ought to do, hear them both speak
for themselves, before he would resolve any thing in the Cause: And that if he
should find that Guiccardine, in speaking of a man of his quality, had unjustly
wounded his reputation, he would take such course as he should think himself
sufficiently satisfied. Which being said, he forthwith gave Guiccardine to know
by the public Censors, that he was to appear before him at ten of the clock
the next morning, to make good the words which the Marquess of Piscara
pretended he had spoken to the prejudice of his reputation. At the news hereof,
the Literati, who were very curious, and hoped to hear somewhat of execellent
discourse in that point blank argumentation, came in great numbers thither.
Guiccardine failed not to meet at the appointed time, and freely told the
Marquess, who was there likewise present, that he might very well have
purchased favor from the Emperor Charles the fifth, by discovering the
conspiracy unto him, which many Princes of Europe had plotted against him, but
that in the worlds eye he had thereby purchased eternal infamy; not only for
that most men did firmly believe, that from the very beginning his intention
was to prove false to Caesar, but for that though he had been still faithful to
him, yet that by so many cosenages, and such double-dealing, he should have
encouraged so great Princes, and enticed them to join in conspiracies with
himself, that he might have occasion to betray them, and aggrandise himself by
sins which he had by fallacies and flatteries drawn on, appeared generally to
be an action of infamy. Though all the Vertuosi thought this to be a very
heinous impeachment which Guiccardine had made against the Marquess; yet that
Commander, who in most desperate cases was still most undaunted, answered
Guiccardine, That it was an usual fault amongst Historians, but infinitely
unsufferable, to be mistaken in their penetrating into the hidden sense of
their actions, who had done great things both in peace and war, and in rendering
the true reasons thereof, to give so rash judgments, as they were often times
seen to blame worthy actions, and praise such as were to be blamed; and that he
was very much scandalized that there was not some severe Laws published by the
College of Vertuosi, against men who by their pens do daily occasion great
shame, and irrepairable blame to others; which Laws should ordain, that
Historians (as it well became their profession) should only meddle with the
bare Narration of things done, and that they should leave the judgment
thereof, and the Princes secret meanings therein to be judged of by the Reader,
and that with all due reverence and respect to the place wherein he spoke, they
lied who durst say, that from the beginning, Ierollimo Marone discovered unto
him the conspiracy which was a framing by the greatest Princes of Christendom
against Caesar, his intention was to prove false to his Master. For those who
understood the true bounds of Policy, knew that whilst a man communicates a
conspiracy to any great Officer, which is in agitation against his Prince, the
Officer ought at that very instant to resolve whether he liked the business or
no; for to be doubtful in such a case, was interpreted by Princes to be an
ill-taken resolution, a mind not only contaminated, but already wholly
putrified with the disease of Rebellion, and that he had not encouraged Marone
(as Guicciardine had been bold inconsiderately to say) with an intention of
double-dealing, nor yet to purchase his Princes favor by the sins of others;
nor had he enticed the Princes who endeavored to make him rise, to discover
unto him all the particulars of the Conspiracy, but by strict tie of honor,
and to serve his Master completely; as also because the weighty business which
he had in hand did force him so to do: For such wounds ought not to be
discovered to their Princes by wary Officers blindly bound up without knowledge
of the particulars, but plainly laid open with perfect knowledge of every the
least circumstance; and that for one like him, to have shown the least
negligence, or to have been never so little remiss in a business of so great
jealousy, would have been thought so shameful an omission, as would have
redounded to his apparent damage, and perpetual blame; and that the reason
hereof was very evident; for he who heard conspiracies plotted against his
Prince, must have his eyes open, and his ears stretched out, and must be
exquisitely diligent in perfectly understanding and discovering every
particular; for by doing otherwise, a man might be justly thought by his Prince
to be a foolish servant, and an unfaithful Officer; and that in such cases,
negligence was rather punished then excused; that therefore before he was to
reveal the conspiracy to Caesar, as it became him well to do, he would inform
himself of all the particulars of each person that had a hand in it, and of
every other necessary circumstance: and that he did not believe there was any
one in that honorable place, who did not very well know, that no greater
misfortune, nor mo^e certain danger could befall a Soldier of reputation, then
to be sought unto by great Princes to betray his Master: For to quit a man's
self of a business, to the undertaking whereof he is as good as compelled by
the entreaties of powerful personages, and think to save both his life and
reputation, was to act the part of common ignorant people; and that the only
way for a wise man to shun splitting against so dangerous a Rock, was to live
with such a reputation of honor in all his actions, to be so ambitious of
doing his Prince faithful servic, and appear so desirous of purchasing a place
^n his affection, as that these good parts, and honorable qualities might deter
any one from communicating any such wicked affair unto him. But that though he
had very much observed this rule, yet had it no ways availed him; he knew not
by what dishonorable action, by what appearing avarice, or by what appearance
of inclination to commit wickedness, he had encouraged the Princes that
conspired against Caesar, to make Marone acquaint him with a business so
dissonant from his genius, so contrary to his nature. That he did not deny, but
that after the noble victory at Pavia, wherein his comportments were witnessed
to the world by Paulus Iovius, he was not well satisfied with Caesar, as
thinking his service not sufficiently acknowledged, nor himself enough
rewarded; but that he did not think any such behavior in a Prince so wise,
should be thought sufficient to make one rebel against him; for if his distaste
ar ose, from not being so highly favored by his Prince, as he thought his
fidelity deserved, they might consider, that by discovering the conspiracy,
they had furnished him with moneys, whereby he might purchase so much of the
Emperors favor as he knew he wanted, to obtain the Supreme dignity of General,
and the Government which he so much desired of the Duchy of Millan, and which
afterward he had, that no man who professed himself to be an honorable
Soldier, could receive a greater affront, then being sought unto, to do an
unworthy action; for whosoever treated with any one about such an action,
showed clearly that he thought him he treated with, to be a man inclined to
wickedness. That he could not (as he knew it became him to have done) revenge
this great injury done him by Marone, with his Dagger, because his Princes
service, which required other resolutions from him, kept him from so doing. And
that if his duty to Caesar had not moved him (as certainly it ought) to
propagate such a machination, certainly he should have been moved thereunto,
more out of rage to revenge himself for that great injury which the Princes did
him, when they seemed to esteem one like him, a Traitor, and vainly ambitious,
then out of any other reason: And that he should have been very simple, if he
should have imbarqued himself in the business, by reason of their promises; who
for reward of his treachery, assured him that they would make him King of
Naples; for that Spaniards, of which he gloried to be one, were better pleased
with such a little Marquisat as Piscara, gotten by Loyalty, and by fighting
valiantly in their Prince his service, then with the Kingdom of Naples,
purchased by treachery. That Francisco Davalo was not so shallow-brain'd, nor so
little versed in worldly affairs, as not to know, that the Princes of the
League; who did so much covet his Rebellion, aimed more at keeping Caesar from
the total acquisition of the Dukedom of Millan, then at the making him King of
Naples. And that it was known to him, as it was to the whole world, by so many
sad examples which had happened, that great Princes, after they had imbarqued
an ambitious personage, out of their several ends, in vain hopes, and wrought
him into the certain danger of treachery, and after having made good use of
him, did so totally abandon their protection, not only because Graviorum
Facinorum Ministri, quasi exprobrantes aspiciuntur. Tacit. lib. 4. Ann. but to
give examples to their Subjects, not to commit the like wickedness, by proving
completely ^famous, as they were likely to be the first who would deliver them
up into the power of their incensed Prince; as (to leave the more hateful
examples of modern times) the world saw it formerly fared with Charles Duke of
Burgundy, toward the unfortunate and ill advised Count Saint Paul, unluckily
employed by him; and that though Spaniards were thought by all men to be puffed
up with the wind of Ambition, yet was it not that vainglory, with which some
Princes of Europe have of late years swollen many French Ballowns, and not a few
Flemmish Pilots. But that those of his Nation being very hard to be imbarqued
in the getting of great riches by indirect ways, sinned only in their too
immense desire of being honored and respected in the places, which they by
their faithful service had deserved of their Prince; and that they were far
from coveting by oblique and shameful ways, those greatnesses which they saw
they could not arrive at, with secure peace and quiet: that to be a Coy-Duck
for other men's ambition, so to become afterward the peoples laughing stock, or
Town-talk, was a thing abhorred by his Spain; and that it would have been too
great a folly for one like him, to suffer himself to be persuaded that the
Kingdom of Naples, which was always hereditary in the blood of Spain, and
which would never accept of any Baron of the Kingdom, though some of them had
been very powerful and ambitious, and who by the effusion of their blood, had
driven out Princes borne of the Royal blood of France, who would have conquered
it, would accept of him, who was inferior to many Barons of that Kingdom, and
of a Nation so hateful to the Neapolitans.

That in Hereditary Kingdoms, as was that of Naples, Kings were there borne,
not made or chosen: And that those fools who would aspire thereunto by any
other means then by lawful succession of the bloud-Royal, did climb up a
Mountain of misery, to fall down headlong with the greater shame into the
valley of infamy: And that if any one should compass it by fraudulent means,
he would be like those ridiculous Kings of Beffana, who that they might afford
pastime to the rabble-rout, failed soon after their creation. That he had
always kept firm to the resolution which he was born with; rather to die a
glorious Commander, then a shameful King. That he had rather sought to
deserve, then that he ever coveted greater Titles then that of a Marquess; and
that having observed by what he had read, and in consideration of the present
times, that all conspiracies begin merrily, with high thoughts, but end basely
with weeping, he was contented to serve the Prince whom God had set over him,
with those means which he had been pleased to bestow upon him; for too immense
greatness promised by Foreign Princes to such as he was, were but breaknecks.

Apollo was so well pleased with Pescara's Apology, as he answered
Guicciardine, who still affirmed, that to entice the prime Princes of Europe,
with so much duplicity of heart, to join with him in conspiracy, of purpose
that he might have the better occasion to discover it afterward, had rendered
the Marquess eternally infamous, that Pescara had not enticed any Prince to
join with him in framing any conspiracy against the Emperor, that afterward
he might make advantage by revealing it: In which case he would justly have
incurred infamy; but that much to his praise he had used requisite double
dealing, to discover the Accomplices of the Conspiracy, and every other
particular, which for his Masters better service, he was to know; and that the
Marquess was the more to be praised, for that by his honorable fraud, he knew
how to overcome the Princes so artificial deceits; and that upon that occasion
he had so fully done what became him to do, as he deserved to be imitated by
every worthy Commander who might fall upon the like misfortune.

In Conspiracies which are communicated to others, both he who accepted
thereof, and joined therein, and he who refused, yet held his peace, incurred
the same penalty; in so dangerous affairs, the best counsel was to precipitate
into the sudden, but clear revelation of so unfortunate enterprises: And that
in the most mortal infirmities of Conspiracies, two of the Politic Hippocrates
his Aphorisms were very true: That, Qui deliberant desciverunt, and that In
ejusmodi conciliis periculosius est deprehendi quam audere.

And that they that were desired to enter into a Conspiracy, were fools, and
self-murderers, if in so miserable a case they pitched their thoughts only upon
the sweet of revenge, the accumulating wealth, or preferments to
Principalities, and Kingdoms, which might be propounded to them in reward of
such wicked actions; and those wise and charitable, who held before their eyes
the pictures of Fetters and Gibbets, which are the right rewards, and certain
acquirements of desperate and ambitious people, and of such as were
giddy-headed.

The LV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Giovan Francisco Pico, not being able to reconcile the differences between
Plato and Aristotle, Apollo commands those two great Philosophers to end the
business in a public Disputation; and being therein obeyed, they do not
notwithstanding part friends.

THe task which as you heard of late the Count Giovan Francisco Pico della
Mirandola, that Phoenix of the Vertuosi undertook by order from Apollo, of
reconciling the immortal differences which are discust between the two supreme
Luminaries of Philosophy, Plato and Aristotle, has been to so little purpose,
as not having given any satisfaction to his Majesty, nor to his Literati, it
has kindled new, and much more eager argumentations in Pernassus. Wherefore
Apollo for the quiet of his State, for the agreement between his Vertuosi, and
for the honor of Philosophy, caused Plato and Aristotle to be sent for on the
first day of the last month, to appear before him, to whom with an austeer look
he said; That there being but one truth of all Sciences, they much injured
Philosophy by the diversity of their opinions; that he did love peace and
agreement between his Vertuosi; that he likewise knew that the multitude of
Sects, was that which occasioned great mischief in States; and that he might
obtain from them such concord between themselves, which he knew to be
altogether necessary for his State, he was pleased to use such respect to them
both, as not to proceed against them with violence, but did let them know that
he should be very glad that both of them would so much honor Philosophy, as to
agree in opinion, in point of the greatest differences that were between them.
Then turning toward Aristotle, he said, That it made not for his honor to
dissent from the opinions which so great a Master as Plato had read unto him in
the Schools; and then told Plato, that he suffered much in his reputation, that
the world should see so great a Rebel as Aristotle should issue out of his
School.

Both Plato and Aristotle seemed very willing to yield to each others opinion,
when by good arguments, and sufficient reasons, they should be made appear to
be the better; and jointly agreed that they would dispute the business in two
several chairs, hand to hand, without any Moderator. Apollo did not only accept
of so glorious a defiance, but for the consolation of his Vertuosi, made papers
be fixed that very hour upon the gate of the greatest Philosophy-School, and in
other public places, wherein all the Vertuosi were invited to come and see so
gallant a spectacle; and to the end that those who inhabit in far Countries,
might have time to come to Pernassus, and be present at so famous a contest, he
allowed the two Philosophers twenty days to appear in the field. The mean
while, for the Vertuosis better commodity, many Skaffolds were built about the
great Court of Urania; and on the day appointed for the Disputation, Adriano,
Orlando, Ciprione and many other modern Musicians, sung first in several
chorusses, their excellent Compositions, accompanied not only by the Organs,
Viols, Harps, and other grave instruments which are used at the meetings of the
Vertuosi, but (according to the defect of the modern age) with the
interposition of the Lute, Cornet, Theorbo, and of the very Violin, taken but a
little before out of the ignorant Consort of trivial Fiddlers, who play fum fum
in the meanest Assemblies. The Music being ended, the two famous Paladins of
Philosphy appeared in the field, and their dispute held for six hours together;
but it was not notwithstanding possible to meet with the desired agreement. For
in the curious Philosophical wrestling, which is so delightful to the
Vertuosi, the Arms of solid and stout Arguments are only made use of, backs of
efficacious reason, strange nimbleness of foot in apparent demonstrations; and
yet that last Effort which is so pleasing to the spectators of seeing the enemy
thrown flat upon his bac^, overthrown and convinced by undeniable Arguments,
does never ensue: For Philosophical wrestlers, though they fall resolutely to
catch where they catch can, yet by means of distinctions which they have at
their fingers ends, they still keep themselves on foot. These two great
Luminaries of Philosophy gave such content to the standers by, as they did
infinitely admire the reach of humane intellect, which having waded through all
the Heavens by the excellency of her specula^ion, did not only exactly know the
quantitas, qualitas, and the motus of them, but is arrived even at the knowledge
of God himself, and of the Divine Nature, of which she can discourse very
handsomely. With these wonders did the Disputation end, which afforded as much
content to the Literati, as if those two Philosophers had been perfectly
reconciled and agreed; only Apollo, by the apparent sadness which was seen in
his face, disturbed the universal mirth; wherefore great Averroes asked him,
whether Aristotle and Plato had not given him such satisfaction as he desired:
To which Apollo answered with a sigh fetched from the bottom of his heart; that
those two Princes of Philosophy had fully satisfied the opinion which all men
had of them; but that he had seen that in this Argumentation, which would keep
his mind perpetually afflicted: For he was forced to bewail the infinite
corrupt condition of this age, wherein sensuallity was grown so great amongst
men, as he who saw their hidden passions, had clearly found, that many were
come to these disputations even from far Countries, rather to please the itch
of the ear, by hearing the Music, then to feed their souls by those
Vertuosissimi, which he said were introduced into the world by those wicked
Mountebanks, who in their defect of too much mingling pleasure with profit,
were gone so far, as having admitted of Jack-puddings, and Pantalouns into
their company, many flockt to them rather to laugh at their sports and
wantonness, thento buy useful medicines for their maladies.

The LVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Gonsalvo Ferrante Cordua, not having obtained the confirmation of his desired
Title of Magnus, from the reverend College of Historians, demands an other
place in Pernassus of Apollo, from whence he is likewise excluded.

GOnsalvo Cordua was very much grieved at the repulse which he received from
the History College when he was denied the Title of Great; and to try whether
the favor and recommendation of Princes were available to effect business in
Pernassus, which justice could not do, he addressed himself for help to his King
Ferdinando; whom having acquained with his business; and received for answer
from that wise King, that he should have thought them very simple who should
have favored a subject of his in obtaining the Title of great to be conferred
upon him, which made him Little: that he was none of those who would commit so
great an error, as to desire such glory might be achieved by others, as did
greatly lessen his honor, and that his Conscience told him, he must be so
charitable to himself, as to endeavor that the whole glory of the purchase of
the kingdom of Naples might be attributed more to his wisdom, then to Cordua's
valor. Wherefore Gonsalvo being much incens't at so resolute and sharp an
answer, went presently to Apollo, and told him, that since it had not pleased
the College of Historians to think him worthy to be ranked with Pompey,
Alexander, Charles the Emperor, and others, who for their glorious Actions had
deserved the Title of Great; that yet he might be favored with adm^ttance into
the squadron of his Majesty's Gens d'Armes, wherein was that famous
Bellisarius, Bartholomeus Alvianus, Pietro Navarro, Antonio de Leva, Count
Petigliano, Lorenzo de Ceri, and many other famous warriors. Apollo graciously
granted Gonsalvo what he desired; but it fell out that whilst in his Majesty's
presence, the ceremony of putting on the accustomed upper weed was a
performing, whereat all the chief military men of this Court gave their
attendance, Bossio the Attorney General accused Gonsalvo of Perjury. Apollo,
who does very much abhor those who are noted for falsifying their words with
men, much more those who are perjured before God, allowed the Atturney-General
three days to make good his impeachment, and ordered that Gonsalvo's business
might be adjourned until then. Gonsalvo being very much troubled at this foul
imputation, told the Attorney Bossio, that he had always profestfidelity, and
that he did not only wonder, but was very much scandalized, that so wicked an
accusation should be laid upon such a one as he, born and bred up in a kingdom
where loyalty to his King, and fidelity to every private man, did abound as much
as in any other place of the world. Bossio answered him, desiring that he would
be pleased to relate the case of the imprisonment of the Duke of Calavria, how
it had been carried, for for what appeared to him, it would be proved, that he
was not troubled without reason. Gonsalvo said, that having besieged the young
Duke of Calavria in the Castle of Taranto, who was son to Frederick the last
King of Naples, he capitulated with that young Duke when he resolved upon
rendering, that he should have free leave to go whither he pleased best, and
that he plighted his faith to keep this promise, and thereupon he received the
holy Eucharist; but that afterward falsifying his oath, he made sure of the
Dukes person, whom he sent with a good guard prisoner into Spain. Apollo seemed
then to be mightily offended with Gonsalvo, and told him, that so wicked and
execrable an action rendered him altogether unworthy of any place in Pernassus,
and therefore willed him to get quickly out of his State. Gonsalvo was much
confused and astonished at this so severe sentence, and answered in his excuse,
that though he acknowledged it to be a very foul action, yet that he was
necessitated to do it for his Kings service; for it being a practiced rule
amongst good Politicians, that no Prince does securely possess any conquered
State, whilst they live who were driven out of it, the noble acquisition of the
kingdom of Naples, could not be esteemed a complete victory, unless he had
secured that Prince his person: Apollo was so far from allowing of Gonsalvo's
excuse, as growing much more incenst, he bad him be sure not to be seen any
more above two days in Pernassus, which should not be a receptacle for those,
who by their actions showed they more respected the service of men, then the
good will of God. Then did his Majesty's Masters of the Ceremonies, drive
Gonsalvo out of the house; who whilst he went disconsolately down the stairs,
told the Attorney Bossio, that apparent wrong was done unto him; for Caesar,
who to purchase the Roman Empire, had not only violated the laws of God and
man, but was the first Author of that wicked saying, That all things were
lawful which conduced to government, was seen to have a glorious place in
Pernassus, from whence he was so unjustly driven out. It Is said that Bossiv
boldly answered Gonsalvo, that Caesar's example did not square with him; for it
was one thing to commit foul actions, thereby to purchase a kingdom to a man's
self, and another thing to do the like to purchase one for ones Master. For by
the laws both of God and man, a Pander deserved greater punishment, who merely
out of the malignity of a depraved mind delighted in doing ill, then he who
committed Fornication out of the frailty of the flesh.

The LVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
A Barque loaded with inventors of new grievances running shipwreck upon the
shore of Lepanto, his Majesty treats them well, though he do greatly abominate
such like men.

THe dreadful storm at Sea occasioned some days ago by the furious southwest
winds, drove a Vessel upon the Strand of Lepanto; to the succor whereof, all
the inhabitants along the river side made in, (for they saw it was fraught with
passengers) and were so fortunate therein, as though the Barque split, they
saved above fourscore persons that were in her; who were by order from Apollo
commodiously lodged, and were then asked, who they were, whence they came, and
whither they were bound. They answered they were all of them Italian
Arcigogalanti, and were lately come from Italy: which when his Majesty
understood, though he be naturally very courteous, yet does he so abominate
those cruel enemies of mankind, as he had almost repented the aid which he had
given them, thinking those wicked ones unworthy of commiseration, who spend
their lives in nothing else but in inventing execrable grievances, by which
many modern Princes so cruelly torment their miserable people. Yet some
Vertuosi said, that since there were so many of those rascals in that Barque,
all of them come from Italy, they must needs believe that they brought the good
news to Pernassus, that the Italian Princes had put on the noble resolution of
purging their States from that wicked sort of men. Apollo commanded that they
should be asked, wherefore they parted from Italy, and whither they were going;
they answered, that having happily finished all the most witty inventions,
whereby to empty the peoples purses, and fill the Princes coffers therewith,
since they had raised the Gabels and Taxes as high as it was possible for them
to do, and having nothing more to work upon in Italy, they had ran over France,
and Spain, in which noble kingdoms they had so behaved themselves, as they had
left eternal memory in both of them of the Florentines, and Ge^efes. That
afterward endeavoring to get into England, the Low Countries, Germany, and
Poland, all of them Provincees abounding with gold, and wealthy inhabitants,
and where they thought to have done wonders, they were driven out with cudgels
by those people who were born to a kind of Liberty, and who might be said to be
sheep, which giving their shepherds a little milk by way of recognition or
Fealty, in a certain little marked measure. And who will not suffer
themselves (as it is usual elsewhere) to be milked at discretion. Wherefore
like those famous Trojans led on by Aeneas, they went plowing up the Sea with
that their little vessel, to find out new people and new Countries, where
to the praise and glory and profit of Princes, and to that perpetual desolation
of the people, which occasioneth security in reigning they might use their
Talent, and open their shop. When the Literai had heard these things, many of
them presently beseeched his Majesty that he would publicly revenge the
injuries done to so many Nations, which through the malignity of that race of
Vipers had been flead by their avaricious Princes, with the rasor of exorbitant
grievances, making them be burnt in the remainders of that their Vessel. But
Apollo, whose deep judgment exceeds all humane wisdom, having understood the
shameful profession of those rascally people, commanded that their
entertainment should be doubled, and that they should be better treated; and
causing money to be given them, and great store of victuals, sent them to
Constantinople, willing them to see whether they could reduce the Ottoman
Empire, which was so Capital an Enemy to Learning into that desolation, and
desperation by their exorbitant damned new inventions, into which they boasted
themselves to have brought France, Spain, and Italy.

The LVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
By letters intercepted, which were sent by an express from some Princes to the
Lake of Avernus, People come to know that the enmities which are seen to reign
in the Nations of the world, are occasioned by the cunning of their Princes.

A Post was robbed on Monday night last between the coasts of Pindus and
Libetrum, which some great Princes had dispatched away in much haste, toward
the Lake of Avernus. And because the Post had no injury done to his Person, it
was believed that the excess was committed only to take his Letters from him,
as it proved afterward. For they only took from him a packet directed to the
three infernal Furies, Alecto, Tisiphone, and Megera, by which it is known for
certain, and not without great scandal, that some great Princes did hire those
Furies, to sow, and foment perpetual strife and discord, not only between
Nation and Nation, but often times between the subjects of one and the same
Prince. And to aggravate the distastes, there was a letter of exchange found in
that packet, of ten thousand Crowns for six months pay. The subjects to these
Princes who writ these letters, have sent them by some of their Deputies to
Apollo, heavily complaining that their Princes, who ought to study nothing more
then the peace, and unanimous agreement, not only of their own particular
subjects, but that also of all Nations, did by ready money purchase sedition
amongst others, and mischief to themselves; and that they had not till now
learnt, that it was merely the cunning and machinations of Princes, which
caused those several divisions and inhate hatreds between Nations, which are
the true root of those evils wherewith mankind is so afflicted; which if they
were extirpated out of the world, men would enjoy the comfort to see the French
love the English; the Spanyard the French: the Germans the Italians: and
perfect peace would be amongst all men. Whilst these Deputies were reasoning
thus, Apollo was seen to weep bitterly out of mere compunction of what he had
heard. Insomuch as the standers by believed that his Majesty would have broken
out into some great heat against the Princes who were accused of so foul
faults, when he spoke thus. My friends, your complaints are as true, as
grievous; but you must know, that the excesses which you now complain of, are
not occasioned by the ill nature of Princes, but out of the peoples seditious
spirits; whose instability is such, as the universal peace of mankind cannot
be better compassed by any other means, then by sowing that discord amongst
Nations, and those divisions which you now so much complain of: for long
experience has taught Princes; that the great frame of reigning securely is
wholly grounded upon the sound foundation of dividing well. And it is apparent,
that were it not for Princes that govern them, people would of themselves fall
into greater seditions, then those which are sown amongst them for the public
peace, and universal good of all men. All which, my welbeloved, are necessary
evils, though it exceedingly grieve me to see, that the disease of universal
discord which reigns amongst men, cannot be sooner cured by any other medicine,
then by that bitter Pill, which you complain so much of.

The LIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Prince of the Laconicks Nephew, being after his Uncles death, to return to
a private Fortune, shows no well composed mind in making so dangerous a
passage.

THe Prince of the Laconicks Nephew, who during his Uncles life of famous
memory, did with extraordinary Authority govern that State; by reason of the
choice which was made some few days ago, of a new Prince, was two days since to
return to a private life. And because the parting from Authority after the
sweet thereof has been a while tasted, is a thing much more fearful then the
parting of the soul from the body; and it having formerly happened in Parnassus,
that the too great ambition of Government has so suffocated the virtue of
humility and those vital spirits of the minds moderation, which keep a well
composed heart alive, as so great a passage is not to be made without
reluctaney; Apollo compassionating such sad cases, that he might provide for
the saving of so great men's honors, in that time of terror, Instituted in
Parnassus many years ago, the charitable company of commiseration, whereof the
chief Moral Philosophers of this State are members. The night preceding the
day, wherein this Prince was to make so sore a change of condition, Reverend
petrarch made him a v^si with his book De remedi is utriusque Fortunae, as also
learned Giorolimo Cardano, with his work De utilitate capienda ex adversis: and
Annaeus Seneca the worthy President of the Company, with the precious writings
of Boethius Severinus de Consolatione Philosophiae: whom after a long preamble
of fair words, they acquainted with the sad return he was to make the next
morning to a private life. Certainly most unwelcom news; and which he heard
with such impatiency and disturbance, as with exclamations which deafened all
that heard him, and howlings which reached Heaven, he began to lament and bewail
his perverse fortune, by which he said he was assassinated: crying out that she
had hardly suffered him to taste the sweet of Government, the suavity of
Command, when she hurryed him down to the miseries of a private life, making
him to swallow down the unpleasant potion of changing Command, for Obedience;
often recommending his honor in this his Agony to these his comforters, and
earnestly desiring that they would not abandon him in this his urgent
necessity. Then both Seneca, Cardano, and Petrarch, did with unspeakable
Charity embrace this Prince, entreating him courageously to undergo this his
adversity, and the more to comfort him, they alleged all they could in praise
of a private life, letting him know how great a happiness men found in knowing
how to govern themselves and their affairs, and making him often repeat those
words of the Master of the Politic sayings; Quam Arduum, quam sub ectum
Fortunae, regendi Cuncta Onus. Tacit. lib. 1. Annal. Excellent words, which
being chewed by a Palate that knows truly how to taste them, are of such
efficacy, as they had the power to make the great Emperor Charles the fifth,
(who had been more ambitious of government then any other) to withdraw himself
into a Monastery, and become an Hermit. But these consolations wrought so
little upon this Lord, as he said more then once to those Reverend Comforters,
that to prefer a private life before Reigning, was a most odious Paradox; a
thing which, was uttered by the mouth, but not believed by the heart: a
Doctrine which they did mainly hate, who went about to make others believe it.
The next morning this Gentleman was stripped of all his jurisdiction, which
caused such a passion of the heart in him, as the Comforters not being able to
keep alive the spirits of his Patience, he swowned three times in their hands,
wherefore the unfortunate Gentleman was carried half dead out of the Palace;
who when he saw his own private House, fell into yet greater Agonies; so as
these Comforters labored very much to make him use in so dangerous a nick of
time the virtue of a well-composed mind, which men of strong complexions can
show in cases of Adversity, when they seem to do that cheerfully, of mere
choice, which they are forced unto by inevitable necessity. But this Gentleman
despairing every hour more and more in his misfortune, grew so horn-mad as to
call every man ungrateful; and it was clearly seen that the new Prince his
happiness, the Grandetsa of his Nephews, and the prosperity of his more
intimate servants and friends, did vex him more then his own Calamity. When he
was come to his Paternal House, he had not heart enough to look upon it, but
still kept his eye fixed upon the place where he had been. Wherefore the
Comforters to do the very utmost that they could, to save this Gentleman's
reputation; which was in so evident danger of being lost, blind-folded him: he
was no sooner come into the Hall, (so drunk are men with the thought of rule,
when they have once tasted it) but he called for the Agents, and Princes
Ambassadors, as if he had been under the cloth of State in the Palace, and
would negotiate with them, having no business at all, and seemed as if he would
still govern the world, though he had no Authority; entertaining himself
continually with grave Affairs, not having any thing to do. By which Actions
this ill advised Gentleman made every one know, that the being in greatness,
with absolute power of Command, makes men seem wise ^olomons to others; who
when they return to their private Fortunes, are found to have no more Brains
then a Goose:

The LX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Antonio Perez of Aragon, having presented Apollo with his book of Relations,
his Majesty does not only refuse to receive it, but commands it to be
presently burnt.

ANtonio Perez, formerly Secretary to Philip the second King of ^pain, knowing
the ill opinion which people have of a Secretary who parts distasted from his
Prince, as soon as he was got into France, he published in his own discharge,
those his unfortunate relations, for which he has been so much blamed: for
whilst he should have endeavored by all means possible to conceal them, he had
the boldness to present them on Thursday morning to Apollo; who as soon as he
saw the book and was informed of the contents thereof, he was so incensed
against him, as he made it be immediately burnt in the chief Marketplace, and
told Perez, that he had given his Relations such a place in Pernassus, as they
deserved: to the end that other his fellow Secretaries might take example, and
might learn to prefer secrecy and faithful silence before the love of their
own lives, or of themselves. For as he deserved the name of a wicked man, who
upon any new distaste discovers the secrets wherewith he was trusted in time of
former friendship; that Secretary was to be held a thousand times more base and
infamous, who for whatsoever bad usage he could receive from his Prince,
published those secrets to the world, which being made acquainted withby his
Prince, when he had formerly had confidence in him, should not only not be
willingly divulged, but ought not be extorted from him by any whatsoever
Fortune.

The LXI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo to afford past-time to his Literati, makes two useful Sceans be
represented upon Melpomenee's Theater. In one of which he shows the lesser
Princes with what wariness they ought to preserve themselves from a greater
Potentate; and in the other, lets Senators of Republics know how ill advised
they are who thorough partiality side with a subject of their own faction, who
notoriously ayms at Tyranny.

THe Ancient Romans, Carthagenians, Athenians, and other the famousest
Commonwealths and Monarchies of the world, have with much reason always thought
public shows and entertainments to be the best means to maintain States in
that universal peace, and quiet to every particular man, which is easiest
received by a people, who live content and satisfied in perpetual jollities.
Wherefore the ancient Romans built magnificent Theaters, and Amphitheaters, in
which to delight their subjects, pleasant spectacles were (not without immense
charges) represented: it being a dangerous advice for such as govern, to keep
their people discontented, and buried in sloth and idleness. Hence it is that
Apollo does not employ himself more willingly in any business, then in what may
rejoice the minds of his Literati, by diversity of shows. It is true, that
whereas in Rome, Athens, Carthage, and other places; all the delights which the
people found in those shows, were occasioned sometimes by the obscenity of
Players, often times by the cruelty of their gladiators, and their hunting of
wild-beasts, the delight of the Vertuosi of this State consists wholly by
extracting useful Precepts from noble representations, thereby to enrich their
minds. Apollo therefore having finished the icy way of Winter, when he was to
begin his pleasant journey of the Spring, was pleased, for the better
satisfaction of his Literati, to have extraordinary solemnities used at his
entrance into Aries: To which purpose he caused two several shows to be
represented on two several days in Melpomene's Theater, which were
extraordinary useful, and of great content. The first that entered upon the
Theater, were the Associates, Confederates, Friends, and the sort of Militia
which the Romans called Auxiliary soldiers. And to the end that his Vertuosi
might be the better satisfied by the sight of so numerous Armies, he commanded
that such soldiers should appear upon the Theater, with the same Arms,
Ensigns, and with all those warlike Instruments, with which they had served in
the Roman Armies; and all this was performed with so great a number of Foot and
Horse, with so Magnificent Pomp of Regal Ensigns, and with the sound of diverse
Instruments of war, with such rich acoutrements, and other things thereunto
appertaining, as all that were present at it freely confessed, that they never
saw so curious a show in Pernassus. After that this Militia had marched diverse
times round, both within the Theater and without it, Apollo sent for the chief
leaders thereof, and bad them withdraw for a while to within their quarters,
and that they should return to the Theater in the very same posture, in which
they ended their unfortunate Militia with the Romans. Not long after, those
very soldiers who had appeared upon the Theater in the aforesaid Pomp, were
seen to come naked with their hands tied behind them, stripped of all their
goods, loaded with Irons, full of wounds, ill handled by executioners, robbed by
the avarice of rapacious Consuls, Proconsuls, by the Emperors Agents, and other
Officers of the Roman Empire. So as the Romans who at their first entry made so
stately a show, whom Pernassus had seen so noble an Auxiliary Militia, who had
raised their Empire to such an immensity, and who were so glad to hear their
civil Government so exagerated by all the Literati, in being able to dilate
their Empire by the blood of other men, were forced to quit the Theater, and to
hide themselves in holes, that so they might shun hearing the scorn and
injurious speeches which were uttered against them by all the Literati that
were present at the show. For the noble Vertuosi, hating from their very souls
the Roman cruelty, and ingratitude used toward those Nations, who by their
expense of blood had deserved so well at their hands, asked where was the
Faith, where the sacred Friendship, where the Gratitude used to those their
Friends, to those who had so well deserved of the people of Rome, and by their
lives had exalted their Empire to so great a height? And whether these were
Actions becoming that Roman Senate, who made so great a show, and boasted so
much of Religion, Faith, and unviolable friendship, insomuch as all did detest
that execrable reason of State, which following only that which brings men
apparent advantage can so impiously turn its back upon what is just and honest,
and which when her occasions are served, forgets all Obligations, how great so
ever. As soon as this miserable sight was ended, Guiccardin by order from
Apollo, got up into a very high place, and made a long Political discourse upon
the little discretion, and upon the want of Charity, of great Monarchs toward
petty Princes, that are of less power then they: wherein he said, that when in
a State consisting of many Princes, one Prince more great then any of the rest,
took up Arms to bear down one of the other, all the rest, to keep from being
suppressed, should think their Companions loss, their own ruin, a means to bring
them into slavery, a preparation for their overthrow; and that therefore,
absolutely forgetting all private hatreds, and heart-burnings, they should all
of them embrace the public Cause, and ^un by their common forces jointly to
assuage that fire which was likely in a short time to reduce their own homes
into ashes: for in former times, Asia and Africa, not at all betaking
themselves to Arms, were unfortunate spectators of the servitude of whole
Italy, subjugated by the famous Romans: and in more modern times, the whilome
powerful Kingdom of Hungary, to its now great sorrow, laughed at the overthrow
of the Grecian Empire; that therefore in like dangers, every Prince should have
the two golden Sentences of that Master of true Policy Tacitus, written in
their hearts; Omnibus perire quae singuli amittant. Tacit. in vita Agriculae.
It being very true that in such like cases, Singuli dum pugnant, Universi
vincuntur. And that they should esteem such honors as were done them by those
who were more powerful then they, shameful disgraces; alliances which they
might contract with them, preparations to betray them; the advantage which they
might get by Pensions, hooks bayted with poison; tricks to lull them asleep,
only that they may afterward, with a little money purchase that their liberty,
which cannot be paid by mountains of gold. And that above all things else, they
should take example by the slavery which they had seen of the Romans
associates, and should think that the ambition which the more powerful have to
reign having no Orison, the accomplishment of conquering an Enemy, was the
beginning to subjugate a Friend.

The second day Apollo commanded, that upon the same Theater, all those great
Senators should first appear who had assisted Caesar his Tyranny, and that of
Augustus, out of the Interest of private Ambition, or out of mere avarice,
which being forthwith done, he gave order that all those should appear who were
wickedly slain in the cruel Proscription made by the Triumviri, and in Augustus
his long reign, and those who had been put to death by Tiberius his cruelty,
Caligula's bestiality, and by Nero's fierce Nature. This was the most sad and
lamentable spectacle that was ever seen represented in the memory of man in any
place whatsoever; for then all Pernassus broke forth into deep sighs, and shed
tears in abundance, when those that had assisted Caesar in his Tyranny, saw
that not only Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, and Nero, but even Augustus
himself, forgetting the obligations which they ought to their posterity who had
aided them in atchieving their Tyrannical power were by them destroyed and
cruelly put to death. For Children not inheriting their fathers humors, as they
do their Estates, many of the sons of those Senators, who following Caesar's,
and Augustus his Colors, had appeared enemies to public liberty, were
afterward cruelly slain by the ensuing Tyrants, only for that they discovered
too much their love to live free; others for proving more virtuous Senators,
then would stand with Tyrannical Govenment: and an infinite number by the mere
bestiality of those that governed. This so horrid sight, at first occasioned
great silence, wherein the Vertuosi considered, that since not any Plebeian
appeared amongst the vast number of those that were slain, nor any other
principal subject of the Provinces, but only worthy Senators, and Gentlemen of
infinite desert; the cruelties used by the Tyrants who reigned in the Roman
Empire, against the Senators, and nobler sort of Gentry, were for the most part
occasioned, through the defect of the Nobility; who not able to preserve public
liberty by peace, (as they ought to have done) could never submit themselves to
receive that total servitude which must of necessity be embraced under the
Government of one only man: but by their many Conspiracies, by continual
misgovernment of their Tongues, and by their pride of speaking like free men,
whilst they were in slavery, did so provoke and anger them that reigned, as
made them become cruel Butchers of the Roman Nobility. This useful
consideration being ended, those unfortunate Senators, who to make Caesar, and
Augustus great, had with their swords in hand, and with so much effusion of
blood, banished liberty from out their Country, ran as if they had been mad, to
embrace their children, grandchildren, and great grandchildren who had been so
Tyrannously treated; but being by them driven away with reproachful speeches,
those Senators more afflicted then ever, said; You have reason to look upon us
your Progenitors, with an incensed eye, and to drive us like enemies out of
your sight; for you may truly say these your wounds were occasioned by these
our hands, the Tyranny which has made you so miserable by our imprudency, your
calamities by our foolish Ambition, all the inhumanities whereinto we have most
imprudently hurryed you, by our unfortunate jars, and deplorable discord; and
now, when repentance serves only to make our afflictions the greater, we
clearly see by this your miserable spectacle, that nothing is sweeter, that
there is no greater consolation, no greater Jubilee of content then by
forgetting injuries, pardoning offenses, and embracing enemies, to live in a
free Country, in such peace as eterniseth Commonwealths, so to keep from
falling by desire of revenge, into those mischiefs into which we are ran, who
out of our capricious humors having lost the Liberty of our Country, have
wickedly precipitated our Families, and our blood into those dire miseries
which we are bound to behold; and have learnt to know at last, by the blood
which you have lost, that great dignities, and supreme Magistracies in a free
Country ought to be conferred upon the virtue and merit of honorable Senators,
and ought to be sought for by such, not upon those who endeavor the procurement
thereof, (as we have wickedly done) by private disorders, sedition, and civil
wars; there not being any greater folly, then for a Senator to adhere unto a
friend that is a Tyrant, out of vain hopes of bettering his condition, and
Family in public slavery.

The LXII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Lewis de la Tremoglia, a Noble French Baron, renounceth his Nobility, and all
the priviedges which he thereby enjoyed, in presence of the Monarchy of France.

When the Illustrious French Monarchy, was (like the King of Bees) environed
the other day by an infinite number of the Barons of his Nation, Monsignior
Lewis de la Tremoglia a Noble French Lord came before her Majesty, and boldly
said, That though he were born a Noble man of France, yet he freely renounced
his Nobility, and all the privileges thereunto belonging, contenting himself
to be numbered in the third rank of the people of France, Those who were present
at this so great Novelty, say, that the French Monarchy, which never knew what
fear meant, showed manifest tokens of Apprehension at the hearing of this his
so resolute deliberation, and some are of opinion that it was occasioned, for
that Tremoglia being known by all the Nobility of France to be greatly wi^e,
the French Monarchy doubted lest this example might make many others take the
same resolution; a disorder which might, if not altogether deprive him of the
gallant and courageous sword of his warlike Nobles, might at least very much
weaken it by the admirable worth whereof she had not only founded, and
augmented so powerful a kingdom, but did maintain it in great tranquillity. This
opinion was increased, for that the French Monarchy seemed not only not to be
offended at this scandalous resolution, of Tremoglio's but taking him by the
hand, led him into his private Cabinet, where for a good while he had private
discourse with him. The French Barons who stood without, though they were very
desirous to (...) what past between Tremoglia and their Monarchy, yet could
(...) ^t possibly learn any thing of it; they only observed by Tremoglia's
laying often his hand upon his breast, that he seemed as if he made some Oath
to the French Monarchy to keep some certain promise which those ^arons thought
might be, that he would never discover the reason to any one, which had made
him put on so strange a resolution. Every one wondered to see that so gallant a
personage could resolve to relinquish the honor of the French Nobility, which
is held in so great esteem, as those who have purchased it at the prise of much
blood, thought they came cheaply by it. But some great men of this Court, whose
usual custom it is to endeavor to know, and freely to speak their minds of all
men's actions, said, that Tr^moglia having found at last with what tricks the
French Monarchy does fetch about her Nobility, would by renouncing his
Nobility, let the world know, that the condition of the common people of
France, who satisfy their impositions by ready money, was much better then
that of the Nobility who being bound to serve their King in his wars, pay it
with their blood.

The LXIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Don Ferrante Gonsaga being Governor of Corinthus, is exhorted by Domitio
Corbulone severely to resent a great excess, committed by a chief personage of
that City: which Counsel Gonsago wisely refutes.

DOn Ferrante Gonsaga was sent some weeks ago to be Governor of Corinthus; an
important and difficult charge, that Province abounding in a powerful, and
wealthy Nobility, given to be proud, and lovers of Arms: who do not only
(according to the usual custom) deal hardly with those that are less powerful,
but by reason of their ancient Factions, living still contentiously, it seldom
happens that the Governor is of such intellectuals as to give full
satisfaction both to Apollo, and to the people. Gonsaga had not past over his
first months government, when one of the chief of the Nobility chanced to
commit a very inconsiderate insolency. Don Ferrante seemed not only to be much
perplexed how to revenge, but appeared to many to be very sad for what had
happened. Domitio Corbulone a gallant Roman, and a great friend to Gonsaga,
told him that he had now another fair occasion, which required the same
resolution which he took when he was Governor of Cicily, against those Spanish
soldiers who mutinyed: that therefore he ought rather to rejoice, then to be
troubled, for what had now happened in his government; for Governors of
Provinces where there was a seditious Nobility, might think themselves
Fortunate, when at the entrance into their Government any great personage
should commit some heinous fault, by whose exemplary punishment, the unquiet
Nobility might be so terrifyed, as the government of the whole Province might
be the better for it a long time after: which he said was so true a Document,
as others who had practiced it had reaped much honor thereby. For when the
charge over t^ Roman Forces which were afterward to fight in Armenia, was giv^
^im, he finding that through the mere simplicity of those who had the care
thereof the soldiers were grown to be very Licentious, not observing any
manner of Military Discipline, by his mere resolution which he put on in the
very beginning of his charge, of condemning two soldiers to undergo the
severest punishment, the oneor that when he was working in the Trenches, he had
not any Arms at all about him; the other, because he wore a dagger without a
sword, he reduced that so licencious Army to the exact obedience of the good
ancient Military discipline; and he further said, that the world was so well
pleased with this his severity, as Tacitus himself having authenticated it in
his Annals as an undoubted maxim in Policy, fit to be imitated by all Officers,
had transmitted it to Posterity in these words; Intentumque and magnis delictis
inexo^abilem scias, cui tantum asperitatis etiam adversus levia credebatur.
Ferrante answered Corbulone, that one sort of government was to be used with
soldiers in Armies, and an other sort with Citizens in the Government of
Provinces. That Commanders in war judged according to their humors and with
free authority, but Governors of Cities were bound to observe Laws, and having
their hands thereby bound, they must be thereby regulated. That he very well
knew that many Officers, to the end that they might humble the insolent, quiet
the seditious, and pacify the tumultuous, used unheard of severities at their
very entrance into command upon such Delinquents as fell first into their
hands; but that he had likewise observed that those that did so, ran danger at
last, by their brutish way of proceeding. For he strayed very far from the
right way, who thought to attain good ends by unjust means. For God who did
abhor that faults should be punished by greater faults, could not any ways
tolerate without exemplary punishment upon the Judges, that injustice should be
done to any one, though it tended to the universal quiet. That he loved only
such understanding Officers who could conscienciously apply fitting punishments
to faults; that he desired rather that men might err on the charitable side,
then exceed in rigor; and that he had observed that those who begin their
government with too much severity, must either continue it with too barbarous
cruelty, or lose their credit by altering their manner of government: that he
had rather leave Corinth with the reputation of being a too indulgent, then too
severe an Officer, That all times, places, and persons not being alike, that
Officer was very unwise who would put himself upon a necessity to proceed
always after one and the same manner; and him wise, who being sometimes
indulgent, sometimes severe, and sometimes cruel, who knew how to keep himself
free in all his ways of proceeding, could upon any excess suddenly committed,
or by too powerful a personage, or in times of trouble, or when to punish
insolency with usual severity, would rather aggravate then amend the malady,
make men believe that he had past over such a fault merely out of his own
clemency, which he could not possibly punish according to the rigor of the
Laws, out of important respects. That he confessed he might infuse the same
terror into the Nobility of his government, by using extraordinary rigor toward
that powerful Delinquent, which Corbulone had infused into his whole Army, by
his severe proceeding with those two soldiers; but that then Corbulone must
likewise confess, that upon another occasion, at another time, or in another
place, that same noble man, or any other m^ ^ommit a greater insolency, which
was for the good of the Coun^ (...) be winkt at; nay, sometimes praised and
rewarded; that this was a great advantage, which was gotten by the advised
Officer, only by a judicious variety in his proceedings: and that too much
rigor in a government to frighten delinquents, was only then good when it was
used toward the meaner sort of people, who through their innate timerousness
do more dread punishment then love reputation. But that the nobly born (who
usually erred more in revenging the injuries done unto his honor, then through
any malignity of mind) thought himself injured by the too great severity of
the Law, and together with his kindred and friends who account that shame,
whotever it be, as done to their whole generation, grevv so incenc'd, and
enraged, as to aff^ont the too humerous Officer in his reputation, and study
revenge. By all which he clearly savv that the Officer was ill advised, who
whilst he might carry himself freely in all his actions, should by his cruel
usage of the Nobiliy exceed the terms of that equal Justice which ought to be
so adequate to the crime committed. That to proceed otherwise, was foolishly to
put fetters upon a man's own feet, by obliging him to be equally severe to all
sorts and conditions of men, and make himself slave to shameful and dangerous
cruelty. To this Corbulone replied, that he was not wise enough to weigh
businesses with the distinctions of time, place and persons; but that practice
being the rule that he went by, he knew that the punishment of those two foot
soldiers, had kept him from being trou^led with using many the like
severities. But, said Gonsaga, it would have proved otherwise if you had used
the same cruelty to any of the chief Officers of the Army: and that the custom
used by Gardners was excellently good, and very fit to be imitated by all wise
Governors of Provinces, who make scare-crows of the filthiest rags and ^outs
about the house, to frighten birds from eating their fruit, and not of rich
silks and velvets.

The LXIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Prince of Macedon accuses the Nobility of Athens of Treason before
Apollo, who are freed from that imputatoon, by his Majesty's Council of war.

THe Duke of Athens dyed about the last of September, and difference arose
between the Prince of Macedon, and the Lord of Epire touching the succession of
that State. The Prince of Macedon, being called in by the people, took
possession of Athens, against whom the Lord of Epire came with a numerous Army,
and besieged his enemy in the City of Epire, and according to the modern way of
warfare, begirt it with Trenches and Forts; and that he might bring the
defendants the sooner to yield, he assaulted Macedonia with an other
flourishing Army, making great progress there, and doing much harm. The Prince
of Macedon, who knew he could not long maintain himself in the besieged City,
and defend his own Patrimony, to keep from loosing both, resolved to yield, and
was contented to deliver up possession of whole Athens, to the enemy, upon
condition he should restore such place unto him as he had taken in Macedon. As
soon as the Nobility of the ^esieged City heard of this resolution, the chief
of them came un^ Prince and told him, that as they had called him in to be
their Lord and Master, so would they never acknowledge any other Prince but he;
and that if he would but be of good courage, he should find them ready to
defend that State even to the last drop of their bloods. To this the Panswered,
that the danger of his becoming a private foot soldier, was too great, that
therefore for the better security of his fortune, he was resolved to deliver up
Athens to the Lord of Epire. Those Lords did then again beseech their Prince to
confide in his subjects, who did not only assure him that they would defend
Attica, but that they would likewise recover Macedon; and lastly conjured him
to remember, that they who with such readiness, and singular affection, had
chosen him to be their Prince, did not deserve in this their urgent necessity,
to be so ungratefully abandoned, and given up in prey to the Prince of Epire;
who was much enraged against them for being rejected by them in that Election*
The offers and intercedings of these noble men, did not only not at all
encourage this Prince, but at the very self same time he dispatched away a
Herald to the enemies Camp to conclude the agreed on Capitulation* Then the
people of Athens, that they might not be sold as slaves to that their enemy,
whom they knew they had so hainously offended, seized on their Prince and made
him prisoner, and secured his person in the Palace putting a numerous and
faithful guard upon him of the best men of the City. This mean while the
deputies of the Prince of Epire came to conclude the agreement, to whom the
Nobility of Athens answered, that it was they that must be treated with in the
point of surrender, who were so far from making any agreement with the Prince
of Epire, as they willed him to know, that they were resolved to defend their
Country, and sent away the Deputie^ with this resolute and stout answer. The
next day the young men of Athens sallyed forth armed, and in a courageous
assault slew many of the enemy; and soon after making many other sallies, put
the enemies Camp into such confusion, as the Prince of Epire, who thought
himself before to be very sure of the business, began much to doubt the
victory, and after many months siedge, in all which time the Citizens of Athens
appeared to have no less resolute hearts, then ready hands, came to parley with
the enemy, who had already enough of the business; and on the 11 of this
present month such advantageous conditions were agreed upon for the people of
Athen^ as became free men, which being done, they sent the Prince of Macedonia
home to his own State; who three days since came to Apollo, and did not only
complain bitterly of the hard proceedings used ^to him by the Nobility of
Athens, but pressed very hard that they should be hung up in effigies as
Traitors, in the great Pegasean Tower, for this their execrable rebellion. His
Majesty thought this a very weighty business, wherefore he referred it to his
Counsel of War: The reasons of both sides were diverse times heard, and discust
by the Counsel, which at last gave sentence, That the offers of the A^tick
Nobility being made so cheerfully to the Prince of Macedon, and they being by
him refused, it being apparent that he was resolved for other particular ends
of his own, to give over the defense of the City, it was lawful for those Noble
men, when their Prince had abandoned that protection of the people, to which
all Princes stand deeply bound, to use that expedient though it were very
severe. A thing done by il Signor Lodovico Oriosto, caused much wonder in all
those who were present at this so signal sentence; who when he had heard the
judgment given, took his hat from off his head, and like a mad man, threw it
on the ground; then lifting up his eyes to heaven, and fetching a deep sigh,
uttered these words in a sorrowful tone, Dii immortale, homo homini quid
praestat? stulte Intelligens quid interest?

The LXV. ADVERTISEMENT.
A Shopkeeper is condemned to the Galleys at the very instant that he was
seized on by the Sergeants, not being so much as examined.

THe Shopkeeper who dwelt at the sign of the two Crowns in Mercers Street,
was four days since taken prisoner by the Sergeants; and being immediately
upon his being taken, carried to the Haven, and put into the Galleys; whole
Pernassus wondered very much hereat, to see that the execution of the Judgment
should precede process. It Is said that this was done at the instance of the
chief Monarchs of the world then resident in this State, who held themselves
mightily offended with that Shopkeeper, because he sold publicly mere smoke*
a commodity which Princes pretend is not to be sold by private men; and
therefore it is thought, that by his example they would affright others from
not troubling them in things which concern their Jurisdiction; and although the
less solid sort of men thought that the Shop-keeper's fault deserved not so
great a resentment, yet those who see further into the interest of great
Princes, say that they dealt very gently with him; for mere smoke serving
Princes upon many occasions instead of ready money, all their richest Treasure
would soon be exhausted, when the so current money of mere smoke becoming of no
reputation amongst people, Princes should be forced, like to common people, to
pay their debts in ready coin.

The LXVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Bernardino Rota, a famous Neapolitan Poet, being greatly beloved by the
Vertuosi of all Professions in Pernassus, is accused before Apollo, for having
purchased so general a good liking by some ill means.

BErnardino Rota, a Noble Neapolitan Poet, to the great wonder of all the
Literati of th^s Court, is so strangely beloved by the whole College of the
Vertuosi; as he is styled by every one, the delight of Pernassus. And truly it
appears a great miracle to every one, that since there are more then capital
jars, divisions, and enmities between the Greeks and Latins, between the Latins
and Italians, between Physicians and Doctors of Law, between the Peripatetick
and Platonic Philosophers between the Grammarians, and all other professions
of the Vertuosi, only La Rota is rather adored then beloved, by all, and by
each of them. And because it appears very strange to every one, that if so
amiable a nature proceed only from the virtue of the soul, it be not found to
be in any other of the Vertuosi of this State, its being only seen to be in La
Rota, has made every one suspect, that this man who appears to have a candid
and liberal soul, is in effect otherwise; and that he has won this universal
good will by the vice of playing Jack of both sides, a vice which his Majesty
does so much detest; and therefore being questioned by Marioulo in the Tribunal
Della Vicaria, he was made prisoner two days since; and it happened, that whilst
the Tipstafs of the Court, searched him to see whether he had any weapons about
him or no, they found a great deal of Storax and Incense bound up in a paper in
his pocket. Severe process was made by the Judges against La Rota. But Apollo,
the better to inform himself of what was proved against this his Vertuoso,
commanded that he should be brought into the Quarantia Criminale; where his
Majesty asked him, whether he did inchant men's minds by the Magic of flattery,
by the sacriledg of assisting others in their fowl vices, or whether it was
only by the chains of virtue, that he did so straightly fasten unto him his
Literati, and chiefly that he should tell him what use he made of that Storax
and Incense which was found about him. To which La Rota answered; that he had
purchased the love of all the Vertuosi in Pernassus, only by detesting to
imitate others in their contentions, and that he won upon the affections of all
men, and made them love him, by the sincerity of his soul, and candidness of
heart, by not desiring to know, much less to busy himself in other men's
affairs, and by practicing the excellent virtue with all men, in all places,
and at all times, of seeing, hearing, and concealing the actions of his loving
friends and companions, and by divulging only such as might purchase others
glory and reputation, and chiefly by applying himself to every ones humor, and
that to the purpose, that he might rather make himself be idolatrized then
beloved by all men, he used to perfume every one with the Storax of praise, and
with the Incense of commendations, which was found about him.

Apollo then spoke alowd, and said, O you that are overswaid with passion, who
are so obstinate in your opinions; learn from this my most wise Poet, the Art
so necessary for men, of applying your selves to the humor of those with whom
you converse. This is the way to live in the world, this is the true means to
make men flock after you, by making your selves slaves to all men, so to arrive
afterward at the happy condition of commanding all men.

The LXVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
A Carpenter being cudgeled somewhat severely, for having uttered certain
insolent words against the most noble Scaliger, to his greater calamity,
complains first of him to the Lord chief Justice, and afterward appeals to
Apollo.

Julius Caesar Scaliger, that famous Literato of Verona, caused some curious
shelves to be made some few days ago in his Library, by a Carpenter, which
being finished, a dispute arose between them, not so much concerning the price,
as the ill workmanship; and whilst they were at variance, the Carpenter being
more bold then became him (as is the fashion of Plebeians, who negotiating for
the most part with the common sort of people, weigh not their words, when they
have to do with people of quality) said, that Scaliger was subject to the fault
of other Noble men, to stand upon hard terms with poor Artificers. Scaliger
was so touched to the quick with this injury, as appearing presently to be very
well satisfied with the shelves; and with their price, he caused the money to
be forthwith paid unto the Carpenter, which he demanded. The Carpenter
answering, that he was fully satisfied, Scaliger replied, that it now rested
that he must likewise have his satisfaction, which lay in teaching such
arrogant fellows as he, how to govern their tongues; which being said, he
commanded a servant of his, to take a Cudgel, and therewithal conjure out the
fowl fiend of insolence that was in him; wherein he was instantly obeyed. The
miserable Carpenter being soundly beaten, presented himself all bleeding before
the chief Justice, and complained grievously of Scaliger for having treated him
so ill. The Justice, before he would resolve on any thing, would (as it became
him) inform himself fully of the fact; and when he heard the insolent words
wherewith the Carpenter had provoked Scaliger, he commanded the Jailer
forthwith to give that insolent fellow three sound lashes with a rope; which
was done. Whereupon the cudgel'd Carpenter went about Pernassus crying, and
exclaiming more against the Justice, then against Scaliger. The Literati of
this Court differed in their opinions touching the chief Justice his Act; some
of them blamed him extremely, for that by that action he did too much encourage
the Nobility, who were naturally given to deal too injuriously with the common
sort of people; and some of these, who bore ill will to the chief Justice,
egged on the Carpenter to complain to Apollo, both of Scaliger, and of the
chief Justice. His Majesty, who had a little before been very particularly
informed of all that had passed in this business, speaking to the Carpenter,
and those who were back-friends to the chief Justice, who had egged him on to
make his appeal, said, That he as much hated the insolent proceedings of his
Nobility with the common sort of people, as he was very much distasted that
Shopkeepers, and others of the meaner sort of men, should by bold speeches
injure the reputation of those who live only to purchase honor and renown; and
that the common sort of people were much deceived, if they did believe that
such Justice was practiced in Pernassus, as wrought no other effect then what
would make the rabble-rout insolent, and that it was great folly to trouble a
Noble man, who having moderately revenged himself for an injury done unto him
by a Plebeian, had only deserved punishment if he should have basely put it up,
and so much the more, for that it did much misbecome such a personage as
Scaliger, to apply himself to Courts of Justice for injuries done unto him by
such people, and thereby become the tabletalk of Justices and Notaries. That he
much commended the discretion of the Emperor Charles the fifth, who as he was
returning with his Emperess from a Turney which was made about Toledo, did not
only not resent an action done by the D. of Infantaga, who cut a Provost
Marshal soundly over the head, that whipped on his horse, bidding him ride
faster, though the action was done against a public Officer, and in his
presence, but with like Justice as ought to be used to a Noble man injured by a
Plebeian, gave the Duke to understand, that if he pleased, he might hang that
saucy fellow; which the Duke would not only not suffer to be done, but with a
Castilian magnanimity, beseeched the Emperor to pardon the Provost Marshal, and
accompanied the wound with 500 crowns which he sent the wretch, that he might
be the better cured. Then Apollo added, that there being three chief felicities
which made humane men happy, Peace, Justice, and Plenty, unless Princes who
govern the world, were the more circumspect, severe Justice served only to make
the rabble-rout proud; universal peace, to make men cowards; and perpetual
plenty, to make people who living formerly by the sweat of their brows, were
industrious, idle, of no use, and vagabonds: And that it being very true, that
Princes were the Shepherds of mankind, the common people the Sheep, and the
Nobility the Dogs which guard the flocks, and keep them from the Wolves; it was
likewise as true, that by all right of good Government, the Nobility ought to
be maintained bold, and to be rather armed with Iron Collars of Generosity, to
defend them from the Wolves, then through the fear of equal Justice (so
peculiar to ignorant men) be cowed in such manner, as that the very Sheep with
the horns of unsupportable insolence, durst dare to butt at them.

The LXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The great Emperor Maximilian the first, having said in a great Assembly of the
chiefest Princes of this State, that the Mohammedan Religion was nothing but
Policy, proves by ^^cellent reasons to the very teeth of the Ottoman Monarchy,
who complained hainously thereof to Apollo, that he had said nothing but truth.

Whilst some days ago the Emperor Maximilian the first, Lodovick the eleventh
King of France, Matthias Corvino King of Hungary, Stephano Battori King of
Poland, and the famous Andrea Gretti, Prince of the Venetian Republic, were
reasoning together (as it is the custom of great Princes to do) touching the
affairs of the world, they spent much time in considering the greatness of the
Ottoman Empire; and whilst every one spoke their opinion of that Government,
The Emperor Maximilian did freely confess that there were many Military
Disciplines practiced in the Ottoman Empire, which were worthy of admiration,
but that the Mohammedan Sect was throughout so impure and foul, as it seemed to
be altogether unworthy the practice of men; and that a desire of piety was
manifestly seen in many Institutors of Divine Laws, although the Religion which
they professed, was notoriously false; their errors being occasioned merely out
of their ignorance of Divine things; but that the infinite impieties which were
discovered in the Ottoman Sect, were wholly malicious in giving Laws to her
followers; Mahomet having proved himself to be a better Politician then Divine;
it being clearly seen, that to purchase followers who would embrace that new
Sect, he had more respect in the forming of his Alcharon to satisfy the body
then the soul, and to aggrandize an earthly Kingdom, then to make others gain
Heaven. And that in other Sects, the Institutors there of made use of Divine
Precepts, for the bettering of human affairs, very cunningly cloaking over all
their impieties, lest people when they should come to the knowledge of their
foul hypocrisy, might be scandallized. But that Mahomet alone, out of a mere
greediness of Government, did affrontedly laugh at sacred things, to raise the
value of profane ones.

These words, though they past between Princes of such eminency, were suddenly
brought to the Ottoman Monarchy, who took them so ill, as he immediately gave
the Emperor Maximilian to understand by a Bassa of his, that he would, as it
became him to do, defend with his Arms, the contrary to all that he had spoken
to the prejudice of his Laws; and at the same instant that he sent this
Ambassy, he made ready his numerous Army. Maximilian nothing affrighted at this
defiance, summoned the Diet at Ratisbon, that he might have such assistance
from Germany against so potent an enemy, as is usually given either first or
last. Apollo, who was soon acquainted with this news to the end that he might
appease those two great Monarchs, called an Assembly of all the Princes the
next day; who when they appeared, he much complained of the Ottoman Monarchy's
barbarous proceedings, since even in Pernassus, where argumentations, and
difference in opinion being only decided by the rule of truth, he had dared to
use force.

He then told them, that he had summoned that honorable Assembly, only that
they might hear from the Emperor Maximilian's own mouth, all he reasons which
had induced him to accuse the Mohammedan Sect, as being composed of nothing but
Policy. His Majesty afterward commanded the Emperor to begin his
Justification. Whereupon Maximillian, with such Majesty as became him, began
thus.

I was moved to say that the Mohammedan Sect was nothing but Policy, mere
ambition, and interest of Reigning, and that the first Institutors thereof were
more ambitious then pious, out of these clear reasons. For that Mahomet, to the
end that his Armies might be free from those encumbrances, and expense of Wine,
wherewith the Militia of Christian Princes is so much molested, did forbid the
use thereof to those of his Sect; a Precept wholly Political, as that which
frees the Turkish Soldier from that expense which does so abound in the
Christian Militia, particularly where there be Dutchmen, or Northern Soldiers,
who consume more in drinking, then in meat, clothes, or even in providing
themselves with Arms. Moreover the great advantage which their Princes receive
from their Soldiers sobriety, though it be known to all men, yet are they more
particularly known to me, who whilst I made war in the world, was much more
troubled with my Dutch Soldiers drunkenness, then with my enemies Arms. Add to
this, that whereas amongst the Turks, the fields serve either for arable
ground, or pasture, our grounds are encumbred with vines. The other more then
Political Institution of the Mohammedan Law is, That the greatness of a Prince
consisting in the multitude of his Vassals; the Mohammedan Law, to the end that
her Disciples may have so great a benefit, permits them by a rare example of
unbounded lust, to have at one and the same time, but in diverse places,
plurality of wives, and as many concubines as they please, without any sin unto
their soul, or prejudice to their honor: A thing which more resembling the
Custom of Beasts, then any Institution of Man, is altogether unfitting to be
named, much more to be practiced by any Nation: A Law, which by reason of the
unexhaustible multitude of children which the Fathers of Families have in the
Ottoman Empire, is altogether Political: For the infinite number of Turks
serves not only for abundance of food for powder in the Ottoman Wars, but to
reap the same benefit, which we Christian Princes do out of that trite
politic precept, of keeping the people low: For the custom which many of us
have of burthening the people with extraordinary Taxes and Impositions, so to
keep them low, and by the severity of our penal Laws, which are now become
matter of money, are things which breeding ill blood in our Vassals, does
oft-times make them rebel. But wise Mahomet has only known how to keep the
people low perpetually, and yet with their delight and satisfaction, which was
never yet known to any other Politic Legislator; for infinite number of
children being of necessity to be born unto the Turks, through their plurality
of wives, and abundance of concubines, Politic Mahomet, to the end that he may
bring the wealthiest Families in a short time to beggary, has not been ashamed
to command in his Alcharon, that Bastards, which are by all Laws so much
detested, should share equally in paternal inheritance with children lawfully
begotten. And if it be true which I have often read, and heard said, That a
Tailor of Constantinople showed Solomon the Emperor thirty of his sons, and
that one Giambelat, a man famous amongst the Turks for his fruitfulness, had
eight sons born in one and the same night, and left fourscore sons alive when
he died, what is the richest inheritance of whatsoever Turk alive, which being
equally divided amongst so many children, will not beco^ ^r, and their Families
be perpetually kept low, and forced to beg the pay of their Prince by following
the Wars? And if that be true, which we Princes have daily experience of, That
the Soldier that fears not death, overcomes all difficulties which he
undertakes, and happily compasses his end, whatsoever it be, and that it be
impossible to withstand the most inconsiderable man that is, who despises his
own life; what more politic and devilish precept could be infused into men by
any ambitious Legislator, thereby to get the government of the whole world,
then that of fate, which wicked Mahomet has enjoined his followers to believe?
Who being shamefully seduced by so false a Doctrine, believe firmly that all
men have the prefixed and inevitable day of their deaths written in their
forehead in Divine Characters, though not discernable by the eye of man. A Law
as wicked before God, as greatly miraculous to aggrandize an Empire, to which
infernal institution, the extent of the Ottoman Empire is solely attributed.

To these may be added the other powerful precept, That it is not lawful for
the Ottoman Emperors to restore any Kingdom to any whatsoever Prince, where
they have built a Moschey. A Rule, which (as every one may easily discern) is
only made to overcome the great difficulty which all Princes meet with, of
keeping States newly acquired, and to make the Militia so obstinate in the
defense thereof, as those Provinces which were conquered by victorious arms,
are only lost by such arms as were conquered. Nor is the Decree given to the
Ottoman Emperors, less politic then this, that they shall not be allowed,
either for the maintaining of their memory alive, or for the burial of their
bodies, or out of any pious zeal, to build any Moschey, unless they have first
acquired some Kingdom; a Law only instituted to excite the basest and most
cowardly minded Ottoman Emperors, to the ambition of glory, and propagating
Empire. But of all the Precepts that I have touched upon, or that can be
related by any other, there is none, in my opinion more political, then that of
their not admitting of any women into their Moscheys, to pray there; a most
wicked Law, and which does manifest, that the Mohammedan Sect does more
affrontedly make use of Religion as a pretense whereby to reign, then any
other Sect that was ever heard of. For what does such a Law denote, but that
Mahomet is content to oblige only the Masculine sex to sacred things, to the
end that he might from them receive the advantage of loyalty, obedience, and
meekness of spirit, and of the curb of piety, which moderating man's too great
inclination to sensuality, makes him keep the right rode of not offending any
one; and receive the other advantages which by a well-regulated Religion, men
partake of from peaceable commerce; which because he cares not to receive from
women, who are not apt to raise insurrections, to acquire nor keep States, he
is content to say, only to keep them from falling headlong into all kind of
lasciviousness, when they shall see themselves utterly excluded from all
heavenly glory; that if they live chastely, they shall, when their lives are
ended in this world, pass into a place, where if they do not enjoy the
blessings of heaven, they shall not at least suffer any evil; a shameful
Doctrine, and such a one as never any Legislator durst dream of, in making a
foolish and ignorant division, or distinction between the souls of men and
women. I shall conclude this my justification with this last and chiefest
Politic Law; That Mahomet knowing very well how much it mak^ (...) Monarchy,
that Monarchs should keep their Vassals in exact obedience, as is due to all
that reign, has not stuck to say, that those men's souls shall not share of
salvation in the world to come, who for any faults committed by them, or for
any other misdemerits, die in their Princes displeasure. As if a man how wicked
soever he be, may not reconcile himself to God, either by contrition,
repentance, or condign penance for offenses done unto man.

Though the color which appeared in the Ottoman Monarchies countenance showed
plainly how much she was confused, yet according to her accustomed
affrontedness, she would have replied, when Apollo beckning to her to be
silent, asked her, whether it were true or no, that by the Mohammedan Law, no
man might dispute touching the Articles of her Faith, but that it was to be
made good by force of Arms; and the Ottoman Monarchy answering, that it was
true, Apollo replied, that she her self had confessed those things to be true,
which the Emperor Maximilian had affirmed. For as wealth honestly come by by
good men, was maintained and defended by Justice, and plundered goods, by the
same violence by which they were taken; so truth was defended by reason, but
falsehood by violence and obstinacy.

The LXIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Anneus Seneca, after having read Moral Philosophy in the public Schools of
Pernassus, obtains a Writ of ease from Apollo; and being desirous to endow the
Philosophy-School with a rich Revenue, is not suffered by his Majesty to do so.

SEneca having for above the space of forty years read Philosophy in the
public Schools of Pernassus, to his infinite praise, and the nnspeakable good
of the Public; Apollo (as to one who had so well deserved) gave him the last
week a Writ of Ease; and the place being sued for by very many, Apollo bestowed
it upon Plutarch. And because Seneca, by reason of his rich patrimony, had
discharged his place with regal magnificency, to the end that so honorable a
place might not fall short of its ancient splendour under Plutarch, who was but
poor in respect of Seneca, he endowed it with an annual rent of 6000 crowns a
year: A piece of magnanimity whereby he has won immortal fame from all the
Vertuosi of this State. But when he came before Apollo to acquaint him with so
honorable a donation, instead of being commended for that his so glorious
action, he was, contrary to the expectation of all men, much blamed by his
Majesty, and in these very words reprehended: Seneca, to trouble the Fountains
head when a man has quenched his thirst, is an action full of malice; nor
should I ever have imagined that such a one as you would have gone about to
vituperate that School, whereby you have been honored; I must praise your
excellent intention, but greatly blame the deed, and (as pernicious) not suffer
it to be done. It is great wisdom to keep such places poor, as must of
necessity be discharged by men of worth: To the end, that answerably to the
public good, they may be provided of men; which should it be otherwise, to the
great prejudice of my Literati, men would be provided of such wealthy
employments. The School which you have given over, will always be sought for
by such Literatias your self, whilst it is but of poor means; but were it
endowed with the large revenue which you would now give it, even ignorant men,
out of avarice would so endeavor the having of it, as by means of favor which
such men by unwarrantable ways know how to win, it would be very hard, if not
impossible, to keep it from them.

The LXX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Diego Covaruvia, after having for a short space exercised the Place of his
Majesty's Chief Treasurer, betakes himself to the Stoics Sect.

DIego Covarruvia had discharged the honorable place of his Majesty's chief
Treasurer, just two months, with so general satisfaction to all men, as every
one clearly saw how well advised Princes are when they promote subjects to
places of highest dignity, from but a little inferior places of Magistracy:
This personage of exquisite judgment, after having freely imparted his several
resolutions to his domestic friends, he unexpectedly gave up the place of
Treasurer into his Majesty's hands, and betook himself to be a Stoic. Many
Literati of this State who were very great friends to this glorious Vertuoso,
when they heard so strange a novelty, went to Covarruvia, and seemed very
sorry, that by quitting a place of such dignity, he had forgone the fair
occasion which he had of making himself famous, and gratifying his friends.
Then they bad him consider his own reputation, which by this unexpected
resolution he did totally bury; since not only such as did envy and malign
him, but even his very best friends, might blame that action (and peradventure
not without reason) as proceeding rather from a melancholy humor, from
fickleness of mind, as a lover of novelties, from weakness of wit, as unfit for
such an employment, and incapable thereof, then to the lawdable desire of a
solitary life, whereby he would cloak his being unfit for such a place. It is
well known that Covarruvia answered these objections very resolutely, thus; My
friends, the resolution which you see I have taken, is not (as you believe) any
new caprichio, but an ancient resolution which I have ever had since I learnt
by Court-fallacies, by the perfidiousness of Courtiers, and by the instability
of earthly affairs, that this worlds greatness, which is gotten with so much
toil and labor, managed with such cark and care, and possessed with so much
danger, was nothing else but mere vanity; and I did not that at my first
entrance into the Court, which I have done of very late, only that I might
enter into this famous Sect, with all the reputation that becomes one like me;
for I did not desire that the world should imagine that I had embraced the
Stoic Sect, out of a meanness of spirit (which is a friend to idleness, and an
enemy to labor) for weakness of parts, as not fit to attain the most supreme
dignities, for not being able to bear with the bitter distastes of Court, or
for any dislike that my home-affairs had occasioned in me; but only that I
might attain to that happiness as is usually enjoyed in a solitary and virtuous
life, by such, who being given to Learning, desire nothing but much knowledge:
Now, that I have abandoned the happy condition that you all know I was in, only
that I might retreat to a better life, my friends, enemies, and enviers will
certainly praise my resolution; for then does a man with much honor embrace
poverty, when he forgoes riches, and when to enjoy a solitary life, he gives
over weighty and gainful Negotiations. And such men as I, do with glory spurn
at the pomp and vanity of this world, when by their honorable labor and
service in Princes Courts, they have known how to compass the prime places, and
supreme dignities.

The LXXI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Cornelius Tacitus being imprisoned at the complaint of some great Princes, for
having made some Politic Spectacles, which were very prejudicious to their
Government, is freed by Apollo.

THe whole College of the Literati were much astonished, when they heard that
Cornelius Tacitus, one so famous in Pernassus, one so well beloved by Apollo
the first Counselor of State, chief Chronicler, and Master of his Majesty's
Sentences, was seized upon the last night by express Order from the Lords
Censors. It was soon after known, that this had happened by reason of a complaint
made by diverse great Princes, that Tacitus by his seditious Annals and
Histories, had made certain Spectacles which were very pernicious to Princes;
for let the simplest person put them on his nose, they would make him so
sharp-sighted, as to see into the very hearts of other men, and discover their
most secret thoughts: And that which they said they neither could nor would any
ways endure, was, that he showed unto the people, the very essence and quality
of Princes-souls, what they were indeed inwardly, and not what through the
necessary tricks of Government they were forced to make themselves appear to be
outwardly. Yesterday morning the Counsel of the chief Monarchs of this State
came before the Censors, amongst which, for Tacitus his greater honor, who was
to be tried, Apollo would make one. This Advocate told them, that all the
understanding men of the State knew very well that Princes for the peace and
quiet of their Kingdoms, were often times necessitated to do unwarrantable
actions, which, to maintain the peoples opinion of their being good Princes (as
is fitting for all to do that will govern) they had wont to palliate with
specious pretenses of good intentions, and great zeal toward the public good,
those pieces of Policy which they would be no longer able to use, if the true
meaning of their minds were known to all men; and that if it were possible for
people to be governed without submitting themselves to their Jurisdiction,
Princes would willingly renounce their Princely ^itles, and their power of
Command, as having found at last, that Principalities are nothing but
unsupportable burdens, affairs so full of difficulty and danger, as they could
not taste any one savory bit, at those their plentiful Tables, which jealous
men do so envy, which did not stink of Arsnick; but that if experience had
made the world know, that all mankind would soon suffer under sad confusion,
were it not for wise Princes who do govern them, it was fitting that they
should be permitted to use all those just ways which were requisite for them
for the well-governing their Subjects: For, if for cultivating grounds,
Husbandmen were not denied Oxen, Ploughs, and Mattocks; if Tailors for the
cutting out and making up of clothes, were allowed needle and sheers; and
Smiths, hammers and pincers; wherefore should Monarchs be henceforward denied
to throw dust in their Subjects eyes, or cast a mist before them, which was the
best advantage, and the most necessary Instrument for the right Government of
States, which any Politician had ever yet found out in any of the most
excellent Reasons of State. All which things Princes, by reason of Tacitus his
seditious inventions, should now be no longer able to do; it being clearly seen
that the devilish spectacles invented by that always seditious Tacitus, to
boot with what has been said of their making the people sharp-sighted, had
also another pernicious effect, by sticking so close to men's noses, as Princes
were now no longer able, as formerly they had with as much ease as advantage
done, to throw dust in their Subjects Eyes, though it were most artificial, and
super-fine, but that they would be aware of their being abused.

The Complaints made by the Monarchs, seemed to be very just, both to Apollo,
and all the Censors; and they therefore thought worthy of mature consideration;
and after a long discourse had about so weighty a business, their opinion
seemed to prevail; who voted that Tacitus with his scandalous Annals, and
seditious Histories, should be banished the company of man. But his Majesty,
that he might not disgrace the Prince of Political History, and not to distaste
gallant men, by depriving them of their delights, was content that Tacitus
should be told, he might do well to make as few of those spectacles as possible
he could, which were indeed so pernicious to Princes; and that he should
chiefly be sure not to part with any but to choice personages, to the
Secretaries, and privy Council of Princes, to the end that they might know the
more easily how to Govern the people; and that above all things, as he valued
his Majesty's favor, he should keep from communicating them to such seditious
people, who in troublesome times might serve for Lanterns to the simpler sort of
people, who suffered themselves easily to be governed, when not being
enlightened by Learning, they might be said to be blind, and want a guide.

The LXXII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Many Carriers, who contrary to the Laws, brought great store of Beans into
Parnassus, are taken Prisoners by the Scouts.

THis morning, being the twentieth of this present month, the Field-Scouts met
with some Carriers, who brought store of beans into Pernassus, a sort of Pulse
which was long since banished out of all Apollo's Dominions; for his Majesty
having found in many unfortunate former occasions, that many passionate
Literati, that they might vent their mad passions which burned within their
bosoms, whilst they made use of these beans in the Senate, have utterly undone
themselves and their whole Families, to the end he might maintain peace and
concord amongst his Vertuosi, did many years since forbid the sale of any such
Pulse under pain of severe punishment; it having been used by diverse instead of
musket-bullets, only to blast the reputation of honest men. It was learned from
the same Carriers, that this Inhibited. Merchandise was sent from ignorant and
malignant Countries, to such perfidious Courtiers of this State, who study
nothing else but how to scatter beans upon other men's stairs, only to make such
simple people fall and break their necks, who firmly believe that no man can
walk safely any where, but with the feet of upright meaning, and good
conscience.

Whereupon Apollo did very much wonder to see, that through the malignity of
the times, all Princes Courts are so pestered with these malignant spirits, as
they study more how to discompose other men's affairs, then how to accommodate
their own.

The LXXIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Seneca having bought great store of Poultrey in a Countrey-house of his, which
lies in the Gnides Territories, those people come to the true reason of that
his forestalling the Market.

SOon after that (as you have heard) the most excellent Annaeus Seneca obtained
a Writ of Ease from his Majesty, from further exercising his place of Chairman
in the Moral Philosophy-School, he, that he might refresh his eminent wit,
which was much harras'd in his perpetual studies, withdrew himself to a
pleasant Countrey-house of his, seated in the Territories of Gnido, from whence
they write, That this so famous Literato, at his very first coming thither,
made so great a provision of Cocks, Hens, and Capons, as they that saw them in
the place where they were kept, judged them to amount to the number of above
five hundred; a thing which all the Inhabitants of Gnido did much wonder at;
and those speculative Wits, who spend more time in vainly prying into other
men's actions, then in the well governing of their own, were of opinion, that
Seneca had avarice joined to the other faults which were imputed to him; and
that therefore he had forestalled, and bought up all those Poultrey (which was
an action misbecoming a man of his parts) only that he might inhance the price
of them. And it was said by the same Letters, that some thought that he had
added the detestable vice of gluttony, to his infinite thirst after riches.

But it being observed in process of time, that Seneca spent three hours daily
after dinner, in looking upon those his Poultrey: it was at last known, that
this great Philosopher learned from that sort of Poultrey, the art, wherein he
did not only exceed all other Writers, but has been followed therein by an
infinite number of others, of crowing well, and scraping ill*

The LXXIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Grandchild to the Prince of the Laconicks asks counsel of Apollo, what
course he should take to live with reputation in Laconia.

THat Grandchild of the Prince of Laconia, who (as you heard by the last Post)
through the froward stubbornness of his mind, betook himself to the general
scandal of his Government, to lead a private life, being much afflicted and
troubled in mind, is this morning returned to Pernassus; and presenting himself
before his Majesty, told him, that much to his sorrow and trouble, he had at
last found that to be true, which had been often told him by his best and
dearest friends; That most men were so full of ingratitude, as they loved
Fortune only, and not the persons of their beneficent Princes; a fault which
occasioned that which good men were sorry to see, that they were as sure to
fail their friends when their fortunes failed them, as Tacitus had reason to
say, That Intuta erant adversa. Tacit. lib. 12. Annal. for much to his grief,
he found the Chain of Munificence whereby he had endeavored to fasten unto him
the affection of an infinite number of friends, in his Uncles Kingdom, from
whom he expected a return of much gratitude, to be but very weak: And that if
it were true which many Elective Princes had together with himself experienced
to be true, That a stroke of ingratitude gave the deadliest wound which could
be received by a Noble mind, and that to sow benefits, and reap neglects, was
the saddest and most sorrowful exercise which could be practiced by a Prince,
he deserved not only to be pitied by his Majesty, and by all good men, but to
be assisted by advice: And that in this his horrid change of fortune, to see
himself not only little respected by those whom he knew not, but wounded by the
speeches of those his dearest friends, whom he had endeavored to oblige, and
scorned by the actions of those which had formerly adored him, was an
affliction which did so inwardly grieve him, as he was not able to support to
strange a Metamorphosis. That therefore since he was forced to pass from
Principality to a private life, from commanding to obeying; he greatly desired
to know from his Majesty, what course he should take to live with reputation in
Laconia. To this Apollo briefly answered, That he should first inform himself
in the Court of Rome, where all the examples of the most heroic virtues did
abound, and then imitate the great splendour of Edward Cardinal Fernese, who by
a Princely generosity, and profuse liberality used toward all men, had made
the Court, and the whole Nobility of Rome so in love with him, as he was now
more honored and observed in another Popedom, then the great Alexander
Cardinal Fernese was formerly in the Popedom of his Uncle, Paul the third.

To this the Prince replied, That he knew the counsel which his Majesty gave
him, to be very true, but that the receipt being very costly, he thought it to
be too dear; That therefore he humbly beseeched him to teach him a cheaper
remedy. Apollo laughed, and freely told this Prince, that to pretend to be
beloved and honored by the people, to be attended and followed like a great
Prince, and yet to keep his purse close tied, his Cellar-dore shut, his
Granaries locked up and close barred, was a greater vanity than to pretend to
open the gates of heaven by impious blasphemy; for the face of a sordid
covetous man was much more dreadful to the people, than the face of Lucifer
himself; whereas liberality used toward friends, to keep men in perpetual
protection, and to be continually ready to patronize them, defend, help, and
assist them in their oppressions, was the true Magic, and pious enchantment by
which men were fascinated, and that they did strangely hate such avaritious
people, who being unwilling to bait their hooks with little Pilchards, dare not
venture at catching a great Sturgeon.

The LXXV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Isabella of Aragon, Duchess of Milan, being continually prosecuted by adverse
Fortune, is brought to a very unhappy condition in the City of Ephesus.

THat famous Duchess of Milan, Isabella of Aragon, who by unparalled example
of misfortune, within the space of a few months, lost her Grandfather, Father,
Brother, and her Nephew, having all of them been Kings of Naples, as also her
Paternal Kingdom of Naples, and the Dukedom of Milan, which was her Husbands
and her Sons Patrimony, when she subscribed her name to any Letter that she
writ, after her name of Isabella of Aragon, Duchess of Milan, added (as she
had good reason to do) the only Unfortunate. For, Fortune, when she once begins
to persecute any one, never leaves her malignity; till she have buried them
alive in the grave of most deplorable misery. Her unfortunate condition did
daily so impair, as to the woeful example of the vicissitude of human greatness,
she lives now in Ephesus, where from the ^st day that she entered into
Pernassus, she gets her living by the sad and woeful means of selling Tinder and
Matches, as she goes along the streets.

The LXXVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Many of the Literati who do much apprehend the severity of the Reformation,
which by Order from Apollo, is now in Treaty in Pernassus, do seditiously rise
in Rebellion against the Reformers; and his Majesty appeaseth the tumult by
applying a fitting remedy.

ALl those that submitted to the Reformation which is at this time treated of
in Pernassus with much severity, took up Arms in a seditious manner some eight
days ago, and ran to the Reformers houses, carrying Links and Firebrarnds with
them to burn those reverend Reformers in their own houses. Who, as soon as they
were aware of the uprore, fortified themselves within their house, and they
from within, and the other from without, let fly at one another, so as a very
bloody and cruel skermish was begun; and those without grew so outrageous, as
they fastened a Petar to the Gate. Apollo, who was soon advertised of this
disorder, that he might prevent any inconvenience which might arise from this
tumult, sent forthwith his Guard of Provincial Poets thither, who were
commanded in chief by the great French Ronsard, ordering him to let those men
in Arms know in his name, that they should immediately lay down those their
seditious Arms, upon pain of being from that very instant declared to be
ignorant; and that as soon as they should apply themselves to him, he would be
ready to hear their grievances.

These men immediately obeyed his Majesty's commands, before whom when they
appeared, Apollo with an angry countenance asked them, whether or no they were
those rash, those insolent people, who pretended to live in that disorderly and
abusive way of licentiousness, and not be made return to the way of
well-living, from which it was evidently known that they had very much gone
astray. Sir, said Iovanni Scopa, a Neapolitan, in name of all that were to be
reformed, We ingenuously confess that our faults are heinous in condition, in
number infinite, and very fitting to be amended; we are so far from hating (as
your Majesty may perchance believe) Reformation, and the Reformers, as we do
greatly love it and them; but the rage to see that the end of our Reformers is
far from the pretense wherewith they palliate their Reformation, has put into
our hands these weapons of despair. For if those who pretend our Reformation,
as zealously intending our welfare, should let us plainly see that they desire
nothing of us but our own good, we should as willingly submit to the pleasing
yoke of Reformation, as any man of honor ought to do; but it is long since,
that after our so many sufferings, we have at last clearly found, that this
Reformation is not introduced out of any charitable intentions toward us, not
out of a desire to remove scandals, but out of a wilely end, to keep those
grand Literati, who do so much hate a private life, and covet nothing but food
for their ambition, in the power which they have of dominiering over their
inferiors. Hence it is, Sir, that this our Reformation meets with so many
complaints, and such venim against our Reformers; who foolishly persuading
themselves, to be able to correct men's vices, and to purge the world of that
ignorance which does so much deform it, by their only outward appearing good
intention to Reformation, are pleased with our complaints, their main ends
being, that the world may believe, that our complaint, which is occasioned by
their fowl proceedings with us, springs from our being nauseated with our
correction; and yet the clean contrary to this is true: For finding our selves
grieved by the evil opinion which men have, more then they ought to have, and
daily more and more oppressed by those whose power is greatest in Pernassus,
there is not any one that does listen unto us, nor mind what we say, though we
cry never so loud for Justice. For men of power are always honored and
exalted, though they deserve the contrary; and such wretched people as we, are
oppressed and afflicted, let our deserts be never so good. And hence it is that
we who are ill at ease, do continually complain more of the Physic not
proportionate to our disease, then of our malady it self; and of our
Physicians, whose end in curing us, is not (as it ought to be) our health, but
their daily gain in exercising their Authority, and in feeding their ambition
by the food of other men's injuries. But that which afflicts us most, Sir, is,
That in this our corrupt and depraved age, the important business of
Reformation should be begun by the most threadbare and ruined people that are
in Pernassus. We (as your Majesty may see) are for the most part hunger-starved
Grammarians, broken Correctors of the Press, woeful Ushers of Schools, and poor
vulgar Poets, of so miserable a condition, as we live by conceits, which we
daily borrow from the fruitful wits of Latin Poets and Orators, so as if our
daily necessities were not abundantly supplied by the bounty of our always
most reverend Callepine, if we were not fed by the free defrayment of our
Cornucopia, and clothed out of the Wardrobe of Mario Nizzolio, what sort of
people, how poor so ever, could be compared to us? But to speak unto your
Majesty with that freedom which becomes such as are overwhelmed with despair,
the thefts of Ausonius Gallo, the execrable avarice and immense ambition of
Seneca, Martials unpolished language, Aristotle's perfidiousness, Catullus,
Tibullus, and Propertius their unbridled lusts, the bac bitings of Iuvenal and
Perseus, Lucians impiety, Ovids obsceneness, and those libidinous Treaties of
Virgil, which it is not fit for me to name in this place, for fear of offending
your Majesty's chaste ears, are those who through their dissolute vices have
brought the State of Pernassus into the miserable condition that now it is in:
And yet these whom I may freely say are the true Authors of so many scandals,
are all of them great personages, the chief Lords of Learning, and are so
powerful in this Court, as their vices are reputed virtues: And that which
makes us rage the more in our despair, is, that these our Reformers do rather
stand in fear of such men as these, then that they have courage to correct
their enormities: and yet your Majesty greatly desires that the Justice which
is exercised in this your State, should be like the generosity of the Falcon,
whose proper instinct it is to prey upon that Pigeon, which of many others that
fly before her, has the rankest wing. And certainly it does not only appear to
be foolish, but is a very sad thing, that when a body has received mortal
wounds in its most principal parts; these our Reformers, for the cure thereof,
do apply medicines only to the ball of the foot, or wash the heels with
rosewater; by which shameful way of proceeding, they rather seem to mock the
world, then to mind the mending of men. And what a hellish piece of charity is
this which our Reformers use toward us, in being so curious in discovering our
defects, and in making us lose our reputation, and the good opinion which
hitherto men have had of us, without induing us with that amendment and virtue,
wherein these our Reformers profess themselves to be so great Masters? And,
Sir, if these men do so compassionate a straw which they see in our eyes, why
take they not the beam away which is in their own? A hellish charity, I must
say again, to seem as if they did bewail other men's evils, and indeed make
merry with their own miseries. Is it not a great piece of cruelty to put a
probe of Iron into a wound which a man minds not to amend, or else knows he
cannot cure? Who knows not that men's vices have so long corrupted their
manners, as a man may say this world was born lame, or maimed? Which being most
true, is it not gross ignorance in our Reformers to believe that in three or
four days they will be able to make him walk upright, who was born with a lame
leg? Evils, which by reason of long continuation, are incureable, ought rather
to be winked at by wise men, then exasperated by corroding medicines; it being
of ill example, and of very bad consequence to make him known to be lame, who
for ought any man knows, has no defect in his legs: For men who are in perfect
charity with their neighbors, do first secretly cure their defects, before
they discover them to the world; for no man ever won renown by robbing another
man of his honor. But that which troubles us most, is, to see that for the
cure of our poverty, we have Seneca proposed unto us, who was Master of so
immense riches, which God knows how he came by; to the humble and abject,
insolent Aristotle, and gluttonous Martial, to those that die for hunger. And
if it be true, which any man who is in his right wits cannot deny, that a
gluttonous Physician is not likely to do any good by persuading another to keep
a strict diet; what good is there to be expected from his Reformation, whilst
Martial, who is so obscene in his Verses, wills us to speak modestly? Aristotle
(who to revenge injurious words, made use of poison even to his Prince) to
pardon injuries received; when Chastity is recommended unto us by Ovid, the
Father of all Lasciviousness; Piety by Lucian, who so openly played upon God;
Ausonius Gallo, who so shamefully sacked ^gypt, which was given to him to
Govern, admonishing us to abstain from other men's goods: And when chaste love
is prescribed unto us by Virgil, who has made himself so infamous by so highly
celebrating his Alexis? Nothing, Sir, has greater operation or fruit in matter
of Reformation, then when those that are to be reformed, think well of their
Reformers, and then the good example of great men. For he who cures an a king
head, enlivens all the rest of the body; but he who to cure the Megrim, anoints
the feet only, does both Oleum and operam perdere. Therefore that such fruit
may be gathered from this Reformation, as is wished for by honest men, we beg
that as a special favor from your Majesty, which in all Justice ought not to
be denied us, that we may be permitted to put the Reformers in mind of such
things as shall be thought fit for the increase of their honor, and for the
universal good, and that they may have plenary power to correct our
misdemeanors, that so we proceeding with them in terms of love, and they with
us in terms of charity, the Reformation proving essential, and not only in
appearance, may abundantly produce amendment both in life and manners.

Although the standers by thought that La Scopa had spoke too freely in
Apollo's presence; yet his Majesty commended the Proposition as very just, and
calling for a particular of such things as they desired should be reformed, did
first dismiss the Auditory, which was very great, and afterward did by writing
commend a business of that importance, to his Regio Collaterale, induing them
with ample Authority to decide it actually as they should in reason, Sola
Veritate facti, inspecta, omni, and quacun ue Appellatione remota.

The Negative to this was often broacht, and disputed: and though the greatest
part of the Collaterale, thought the desire of those that were to be reformed,
very just; yet after a long argumentation had thereupon, Giacomo Menocchio, one
of the chiefest of those Counselors being brought into the Collaterale, said,
with an incensed countenance, and in an angry tone; You through your
hair-braind rashness, make your selves appear to be a rabble of insolent
people, since you have presumed to go about to reform Poets, Philosophers, and
others of the chiefest Literati of this Court, whose names you are not worthy
to take within your mouths, and by your boldfaced behavior, have committed
high Treason, having so highly offended your superiors; Who time out of mind,
find themselves in peaceful possession, and enjoy the Ius Quaesitum of
reforming others, without being ever to be reformed by any one. Nor must you by
playing the good Companions, live according to your own humors, but in spite
of your hearts submit your jobernols to the sacred precepts of Nature; which
not without a great Mystery, is contented, that greater Fishes devour the
lesser; nor is it possible to take from small flies, special privilege which
they have over lean Cattle, without overthrowing the whole body of the Civil
Law.

The LXXVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Many Princes believing that the disorder of their Courts, which were abandoned
by Courtiers, proceeded from the injurious speeches used by Caesar Caparoli, in
his Chapter Della Corte, desire Apollo that it may be remedied, and obtain
their desire.

Diverse Princes complained bitterly to Apollo on Wednesday morning, that their
Courts which were formerly in such high esteem with all men, as every one
believed that all consolation, and cheerful passing away time, all sorts of
Learning to enrich the mind with noble virtues, all means to come by wealth and
honorable preferments, were only to be found in them, were now become so
abhorred, as being accounted by all men to be but mere snares, and public
Hospitals for unfortunate people, they were very much troubled to find out men
to serve them; and that those few who came to Court, were none but
shallow-pated people, driven from their own houses by despair, hunger, and
poverty: who if they were not immediately enricht at their very first coming to
the Court, and did not suddenly obtain such degrees of honor and supreme
dignities, as they had first propounded unto themselves in their vast desires,
grew forthwith so foolishly impatient, as like unbroken Colts, and
tender-mouthed horses, if they were but lightly touched with the spur, or had
but never so little a check with the bridle given them in the Court, after
having first insolently kicked at their Masters with their heels, they would
discourteously forsake their service. And that whereas formerly the noblest and
wealthiest personages thought it a great favor to be received into Court,
though they had but lodging, bread and beer, and six pence a day for other
expenses besides allowed them: they did not only complain now of the scarcity
of all these, but even the most inconsiderable people did not stick to demand
great sallaries. Which disorder, if it were not the sooner prevented, one of
two inconveniences must necessarily follow: either Princes must shortly live
desolate in their Courts without attendance; or they must afford matter of
murmur to their people, by altering their public expenses to supply the new
charge of their Courtiers Sallaries. And that they had at last found that Caesar
Caporali was the only occasioner of so many disorders; who not content to have
shamed them to all Nations by that his seditious Chapter written in defamation
of the Court, but was ever seen to whisper the sad miseries which Courtiers
were to undergo, into the ears of such as had a mind to apply themselves to
Court service.

Apollo thought the complaint of these Princes to be very just; wherefore he
forthwith forbad that famous Poets Chapter of the Court. The chief Literati of
Pernassus, when they first heard this so rigorous Edict published, very much
pressed his Majesty that he would be pleased to alter that his resolution, which
would so much afflict the very souls of his beloved Vertuosi; but all was in
vain, for Apollo was resolute in his answer, bidding them be quiet, for he
would by no means desert the Courts of Princes; which were the only whetstones
to sharpen men's wits, the true Schools wherein men learnt that virtuous
dissimulation, which is so necessary for such as sail upon the vast Ocean of
this world, that patience, that sagacity which all men wanted who were not
trained up there; and that to make Princes imbase that their so current money
of hope, which served Courtiers for rich Sallary, would be to turn the world
up-side-down.

The LXXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Learned Seneca, seeing that his late Reformation of his former too splendid
way of living, was ill taken by the Universality of Pernassus, distributes his
immense riches in a work which was greatly commended by all men.

IT is certainly a thing worthy much consideration, that the Works of the
Learned Anneus Seneca, so full of holy Precepts, and of so excellent
instructions for the life of man, as they make their Author to appear a man of
singular goodness, yet he daily grows so much less in esteem in Pernassus, as
he is not much valued by the greatest part of the Vertuosi of this Court: Which
Seneca perceiving, and fearing lest the abundance of his Servants, his rich
apparel, store of Plate, and the greatness of his Wardrobe might lessen his
reputation, not only with those that were his rivals, and did envy him, but
even with his loving and learned friends, shut up his doors not long since;
sold all his Apparel, Plate, and Wardrobe, and dismissed at once three parts of
his Family; a resolution which was infinitely commended by all the Literati of
this Court, and which renewed Seneca's reputation which was almost lost; but it
soon began to decrease again; for those quick-ey'd Cou^tiers, who being
careless of their own behaviors, busy themselves wholly in prying into other
men's carriages, quickly learnt, that Seneca had bettered his Estate by the sale
of his personal Estate; so as what he thought should have bettered his
reputation in the world, did much impair it.

Wherefore it being by this accident clearly made known that the mystery of
hypocrisy, which is so easily practiced amongst shallow-pated people, is
impossible to be made use of with safety to reputation in Courts which are full
of men, who erring more in knowing too much, then in not knowing how men are
naturally given, judge not by men's words, but by their deeds. Which made Seneca
perceive at last it was not harder to make an Iron Clock without a File, then
to be able to use Hypocrite amongst great Wits, without danger of being
discovered to be a Pillary bird. And perceiving likewise that the profession of
affected goodness won but little credit in a man who was very rich, and
avaritious withal; that he might not see the death of those his writings, which
had given him so long and so honorable a life, he put on an honorable
resolution, which was totally to give over the way of appearance, which he had
been long accustomed to, and to betake himself to realities, which only
occasion the reputation of true goodness. It is whispered in Court that this
alteration was occasioned, for that Apollo being told by Seneca's rivals, that
though this Philosopher did no longer use Plate at his Table, yet he fed more
deliciously then ever; his Majesty said, that the true Reformation of good men,
consisted not in the not using of Silver Vesse's at their Tables, and in the
eating of fat Capons notwithstanding in earthen dishes; wherefore Seneca much
moved with this sharp repremand, resolved he would be no longer scorned for
spending so immense a wealth only upon his belly and his back, divided his
whole Estate, consisting of three millions and a half, into four equal parts,
wherewith he founded as many public Hospitals, and endowed them with rich
Revenues, and ordered that the four sorts of fools wherewith the world did
abound, should be therein commodiously cured.

The first was to be for those foolish people who throw away their Estates,
waste their wits, and lose their reputations in seeking for the Philosophers
Stone; fools that are indeed to be pitied, for whom all good people ought to
pray:

The second for those ignorant hiddy giddy people, who Data opera seek for
riches by Exorcisms and Enchantments.

The third was for the cure of such idle fools, worthy of punishment: who not
caring to know things past, by the reading of History, foolishly imagine they
may arrive at the knowledge of foretelling things to come, by Astrology.

The fourth was for the advantage of such simple folks, who having wasted all
their Estates, and not having one farthing left, do notwithstanding still
proudly boast of their Noble Families.

The LXXIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Some Princes of Pernassus, having spent a great mass of wealth in a stinking
sort of Merchandise, and having thereby incurred great debts, are forced to
profess themselves Bankrupts, and to leave Pernassus.

IN the Exchange of Pernassus, the most important Bankruptship is discovered
that ever happened in the memory of man; for it fell not out (as usualy) between
private Merchants, but between the most Potent Princes of this State, in so
much as no payments of moneys are made any where, and Merchants refuse to pay
Letters of Exchange, every one standing at a gaze till they see where this
business will end, which has drawn along with it the breaking of diverse other
Merchants who were considerable. The rich Indian Fleet, almost wholly fraught
with Sugars, which entered some days ago into the Gulf of Lepanto, was the
cause of these so many disorders. Some of the chief Princes of Pernassus bought
all the Sugar, which brought in great store of money; and then they provided
many Magazines and Warehouses, and made great provisions of Cauldrons, and
other brass Vessels, and were at such an expense with all this, as they took up
moneys at huge high Interest from Merchants at all Marts by exchange and
bartering. The true end of these Princes was to know for certain, whether they
could happily compass the difficult business of preserving Turds, a business
which had been formerly endeavored by many great men, but still unfortunately:
Many rich Lords were so resolved upon the undertaking of this stinking
occupation, as they neither spared for cost nor labor to bring this their
stinking designto their desired end, for they put all their minnions,
Hephestion, idols, flatterers, and bawds into the great Caldrons which they had
prepared, to whom they were not ashamed to pay all the most abject and base
slavery and obedience. These unfortunate Confectioners cover over this scum of
people which are so fatal to men of power, with the sugar of honorable
employments, and highest dignities: and though it was clearly seen, that by
reason of their stinking lewd conditions, they did not only not become ever a
whit the sweeter in merit and virtue, but the more sugar was heaped upon them
by those unfortunate Princes, the more they stunk in the nostrils of men of
honor, yet did they daily persist the more in that their woeful occupation, and
the obstinacy of those ill advised Princes was so fatal, as the worser they
found their business to proceed, the more did their diligence and expenses
increase, together with the impossibility and shame of the foul undertaking;
those foolish Merchants did still believe, that the infinite quantity of Sugar
and fragrant Musk had power to make the stink of those their shameful favorites
sweet and odoriferous. But at last, though late, they found their business
impossible to be effected: and having consumed all their Sugar they were aware
that those their Idols had not only shamefully infected theirCourts by their
insufferable stench, but had infinitely defamed them, who for want of caution
had doated upon so unsavory carrion; wherefore they quit the enterprise; and
because the moneys which they had taken up at use, were already grown due, for
fear of their Creditors, they have all played least in sight; and the more to
aggravate so great a disorder, we hear that a great King, who that he might
confectionate a base minnion of his was for certain the first who advised to
this miserable Merchandise, fell unfortunately off horseback as he fled away,
and is since dead. His Majesty was very much troubled at these disorders, and
to hinder the like inconveniences for the future, has commanded, that on the
first day of August (a remarkable day, since not only the universal Banckrupt,
but the death of that great King happened on that day) so sad a misfortune should
be publicly commemorated, and if the example of so great a Monarch could not
deter powerful men from the like undertaking, it must be granted that this
calamity was occasioned through the same weakness of brain, by which private men
are blinded, and for avarice undo themselves in pursuit of the Philosophers
Stone.

The LXXX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Certain prime Politicians of Pernassus pray the Ottoman Monarchy to tell them
the true reason why she makes short war with her enemies, and are by her
satisfied.

MEnante, who for the better satisfaction of his customers to whom he sends his
weekly Gasetta's, is very diligent in prying into the very secretest passages
of Pernassus, having discovered the other day that some Politicians of this
Court desired Audience of the Ottoman Monarchy, was so watchful, as when they
went to that mighty Queen, he went along with them in company; and heard Scipio
deCastro, whom those Politicians call their File-leader, beseech her Majesty
that she would vouchsafe to acquaint those Politicians, that were with him,
with the true reason wherefore she makes but short war with the Princes who are
her enemies, even when she was victorious, and certain to make greater
acquisitions, and did prosecute others even to their uttermost ruin. I have
heard that the Ottoman Monarchy did after no barbarous manner answer them; you
must know Gentlemen, that I never use to lay down Arms, when I make war against
Nations, which though never so great, are divided into several Principalities,
wherein I find discord and faction to reign, till I have totally conquered
them: as I did in the Grecian Empire, whose division into several despoters,
and the intestine discord which reigned amongst them, did I confess, throw open
the gates unto me, and made way for my acquisition of that famous Empire.
Likewise when I go against a Prince who is abandoned by his friends, I never
make peace with him till I have fully conquered him; as was clearly seen in the
expedition which I made against the Sultan of Chair. But when I fall upon
aPrince whom either through his own power, or the adherence of his friends, I
know I cannot utterly ruin in a short time, I use to make but short war with
him, and that out of many important reasons. For knowing that it is a great
piece of folly to desert ones own Country, out of hopes to conquer what belongs
to another man, and infinitely detesting the opinion, that lesser Armies,
provided they be well disciplined, are fitter for war, then huge vast hosts of
men, (an opinion which I hold to be wholly erroneous, as that which has
brought many Princes to utter desolation) and loving only the secure though
costly way of overcoming by an unexhaustible multitude of soldiers, if I
should make war long in a Province, I must so sack the Cities and people
thereof, as I must lay it wholly waste; so as to the end that the subjugated
people may in time of Peace recover the losses which they have suffered by war,
I use to grant Peace unto them, upon any little acquisition of state that I
have made.

Moreover, I make short war with my enemies, to the end that I may enjoy that
great benefit which ascertains all enterprises, of assayling weak people with
my veteran soldiers, and such as are ignorant in matter of Militia, I content
my self with having made my self Master of some little part of their Country,
for that when they shall be by their long training up in wars accustomed to
war-faring, and become fit not only to defend that part of their Country which
yet remains unto them, but to recover what they have lost, I endeavor to make
peace with them (which is usually desired by those who fight against a more
powerful enemy) upon the best conditions that I can. And know, that this my
advisedness is of such importance, as I may boldly say, it is from thence that
I acknowledge the best part of my greatness; for no purchase, how great soever
it be, can justly be compared to the great loss which a Prince undergoes, when
by many years obstinate war, he inures his enemy to be a warrior. And in the
wars which I have had of late with the Emperors of the house of Austria, I have
been contented to gaul them a little, and have not utterly subdued them, not
only out of the aforesaid reason, of not inuring the Germans, and Hungarians
to war, who are valiant people, bred up in wars, and naturally given to thirst
after the hazard thereof, but for that I have by long experience found at last,
that the dilating of Empires lies not, (as many foolishly believe) in
overrunning many Provinces in one year, but in taking some few, and in making
those sure. For as much as eating is not requisite for making a man fat, so the
aggrandising of States depends not upon making of infinite acquisitions, but
the making of a man fat, and the dilating of Empires consist wholly in little
eating, and in good digestion, and this not without good reason. For to
maintain States whichare newly gotten, by power and Arms, is a very laborious
business, and even then very hard when the conquered Nation is weak. For the
change of a natural Prince for a forraigner* chiefly when he is of a differing
Religion and Nation, is so hateful a burden to people, as they cannot accustom
themselves to bear it without much difficulty. But it is exceeding difficult to
keep a State newly won, which is inhabited by stout and warlike m^n, nay even
then when being utterly vanquished, and their Prince lost, they know not to
what or to whom to betake themselves. But when one has possessed himself of a
Province belonging to a powerful Prince, who wants not only forces to defend
what he is yet master of, but to regain what he has lost, all that is gotten
is of hard digestion, and almost impossible to be kept. But as all sorts of
meat, though never so hard of digestion, concoct well when they are moderately
eaten; so acquisitions made of warlike people, and whose ancient Prince lives
still in power and greatness, ought to be small ones, to the end that they may
be easily digested, and that people that are subjugated may of enemies be made
friends, and of strangers, natural subjects. Moreover I use to make but short
war with a Prince, whose ruin tending to the depression of other powerful
Princes, may occasion too much State-jealousie, and for this only reason I did
not continue the war which I made last against the house of Austria in Hungary;
for the jealousy of losing Vienna, which is accounted theout-Bulwark of
Germany and Italy, might certainly have drawn upon me the joint forces of the
Empire of Germany, and of the Princes of Italy: and the great error which I
committed in my unfortunate taking of the Island of Cyprus, made me know the
danger that I may undergo by the Christian leagues; for for one Island which I
may call a Desert, I lost by the Naval rout which was given me at the battle of
Lepanto my reputation at Sea, which God knows when I shall recover; a loss
which has done me more harm then seven kingdoms of Cyprus can do me good.
These Gentlemen thanked the Ottoman Monarchy, who wished them upon any
occurrency, that they would freely demand of her whatsoever they desired, for
she would willingly give them all satisfaction; saying that they understood the
Theory of Policy which was learnt by books, and that she, though ignorant of
Letters, might boast she was able to read in the schools that good and sound
practical Policy, which was learnt by the governing of States, and managing of
Arms.

The LXXXI. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Vertuosi of Pernassus, after having paid in the accustomed Donative of a
Milli^n of Conceits to his Majesty's Treasurer, according to their wont, ask a
favor of him.

THose who exactly understand the affairs of this State, know that the Vertuosi
of Pernassus do not only pay into the Exchequer, the Tithe of all the fruits
of their wits, but a Tax which is laid upon every one according to his Talent.
Whence it is that Ovid pays in to the public receivers, yearly eight Elegies,
Virgil fourscore Heroic Verses, Horace five Odes, Martial eleven Epigrams, and
others according as they are taxed. Moreover the Vertuosi do every year by name
of a Donative (yet such a Donative as if it be not willingly given, may without
the loss of its modest Title, be levied out of their goods by the Sergeants,
and sold by the Candle) pay in into the Delphick Treasury a Million of
Conceits, which are after liberally distributed by the Muses to the meaner sort
of the Literati, who wanting invention, deserve assisting for the mere love
which they bear to learning; and upon this so large a Donative, his Majesty is
pleased to grant his Vertuosi some such gracious favors as they are permitted
to demand. So as the last week after the Donative was prepared, the Vertuosi
resolved in a general Assembly to beg seven boons of Apollo, which were all put
in a Scedule which was to be presented unto him. But the polisht Class^s of
Politicians told them, that upon occasion of demanding Graces from a Prince out
of merit, they must shun the error of demanding many things; not only for that
Princes, who do quickly take distaste when they are to acquit themselves of an
obligation, era annoyed at the demand of many favors, but for that it always
falls out that he who asks many things, is rewarded with the slightest. That
therefore in such a case it were wisely done to beg but one only boon,
provided it were of moment, which upon such an occasion could not be denied by
the Prince without a mark of much ingratitude. The Politicians Advice was much
commended by the whole College of Vertuosi, and was followed by them.
Wherefore the next day Bernardino Biscia, and Tiberio Cerasi, the Vertuosi's
Aadvocates, were sent unto his Majesty, who when they had presented Apollo with
the Donative, did humbly beseech him, that in choosing Judges for his Courts of
Justice, and other Officers for public Magistracy, he would be pleased to
choose men of a benign Nature, of a courteous Genius, humble spirit, and patient
Mind; and that he would send certain Hyteroclical, Bankrupts, fantastical,
proud, insolent men, who were so arrant beasts, as did more vex and grieve
those miserable men who had suits at Law, by their discomposed fantastical
brains, then the suits themselves did; to be Boatsons and Auditors in the
Galleys, where they might ercise their vexatious Talents of wit amongst slaves,
which were so unsupportable to freeborn men.

The LXXXII. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Arcadians being up in Arms against their Prince for certain new Taxes
imposed upon them, he wisely appeaseth them by delivering up unto them, him who
had persuaded him thereunto.

THe Prince of Arcadia, a Prince who was much beloved and reverenced by his
people, was persuaded some months ago by a wicked Projecter to impose some new
Gabels upon his people, who after having complained bitterly to their Prince
against this Projector, and desired that he might be banished the State as a
most pernicious person, and that the Gabels imposed by his advice might be
taken away, finding that their Petitions were without any fruit, and that
whilst they bore respect unto their Prince, their grievances were increased by
the greedy Tax-takers, their patience being overcome, turned into such fury (as
it always falls out when superiors seem not to value or care for the peoples
complaints) as taking up Arms, and all of them publicly rebelling, they
resolved to remedy their inconveniences by disorders. They fell furiously
first upon the Collectors of these new Gabels, and then their sedition
increasing, they besieged the Prince in his Castle, whither for his greater
safety he had withdrawn himself; nor satisfied with all this insolency, they
threatened worser mischief if they did not quickly receive the satisfaction
which they desired. In the midst of these troubles the Prince consulted with
those whose judgments he most relied upon, whether it were less shameful for
him to seek his safety by flight, or to appease the people by anulling the new
Gabels. When the news of this insurrection, and the Princes intention of
quieting those tumults with so much infamy to himself, was known by some of his
neighboring Princes, who very well knew that their interest were concerned in
this Arcadian insurrection, they suddenly with their whole Courts betook
themselves to Arms, and getting on horseback, entered the Castle, where they
found the Prince of Arcadia, who just then made the Edict for revocation of
these Gabels be published. These Princes earnestly desired him that he would
neither injure nor shame himself nor his neighbors so much as to be
discouraged at this the peoples insurrection, for it would be too scandalous an
example to the subjects of his other neighbor Princes, when it should be known
that the people of Arcadia having rebelled against their Prince by reason of
Taxes, they had through fear and force of Arms caused him to revoke them. That
therefore to the loss of his last drop of blood he should defend that his
Authority which other Princes had kept unviolated among a much greater and more
dreadful people; and amidst a thousand dangers had so long continued their
subjects grievances, Taxes, and Gabels, as there not being any man alive that
can truly say he ever knew any of them taken off, even those which were at
first sessed but for a limited time, were by all Nations thought to be
immortal. They told him likewise, that he was to consider that the common
people which are ensatiable in all their desires, by the bad example of taking
away these new Gabels might grow so bold as to demand the abolishment of the
old ones. All which things did upon this urgent occasion admonish him to
appease the incensed people by the usual remedy which had been with good
success practiced by great Princes, of d^livering up the first inventer of
those Gabels into the peoples power, to the end that by his ruin who had
advised the mischief, the tumult might be quieted; a remedy which they said was
so much the more certain, for that the common people who take up Arms upon like
occasions resemble dogs, which when they bark violently at any one, were
appeased by the satisfaction of biting a stone which had been thrown at them,
and had hurt them. The Prince of Arcadia answered these Princes, that he very
well knew the Counsel which they gave him was good, but that he thought it too
unjust. To which one of them replied, that in extremities a man must have
courage enough to know how to use corrosives for Cankers. The Prince of Arcadia
did then embrace the propounded proposition, and immediately caused public
Proclamation to be made throughout all his Country, that he being seduced by
this wicked Projector, was pleased that his beloved people who thought
themselves so highly injured by him, should take what revenge they pleased of
that sedicious fellow. And soon after the inventer of those grievances was
delivered into the power of those enraged people, who first with their teeth,
then with their hands, and lastly with all sort of Arms did so deal with him,
as having made more pieces then one of him, they dragged him in triumphant
manner through all the streets of the City. The which being done, the Prince
opened the Castle gates, and was thanked by all the people, who ran joyfully to
kiss his hands for the satisfaction, which he had given them; and he taking
them all into his favor, continued in the peaceful receiving of those his new
Taxes, which were willingly paid by the people, they being satisfied with that
revenge: so proper is it to the common people inragedly to bite the dart which
has wounded them, and affectionately to kiss the hand that threw it.

The LXXXIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Marcus Portius Cato whilst he reprehends Salustius Crispus for flattering the
Emperor Tiberius, is severely taxt by him for being too obstinate.

ALL that come to this Court do infinitely wonder, why Marcus Portius Cato, a
personage so famous as he is celebrated and exalted even to the skies by all
writers for his austere manners, integrity of life, wisdom, and for his
excessive love, which he has always showed to his Country, is not held in so
high esteem by his Majesty, as so cried up a subject seems to deserve: for
though from the first day that he entered Pernassus he has ever aimed at
honorable employments, yet could he never obtain any: nay the best Literati of
this Court, who do exceedingly favor him, have clearly found a resolution in
his Majesty, by no means to make use of such a man. The reason of this Apollo's
aversion, forasmuch as is said by them who are quickest sighted, is, for that
Apollo having well examined Cato's mind and Genius, his Majesty holds him to
be but an impetuous, proud, impertinent fellow, a capricious wit of the first
head, one that means well, but judges ill, and one who is all zeal, crusted up
in imprudency; which qualities are very hateful to Apollo, who thinks it very
ill done to bestow public employments upon such companions, as ought only to
be conferred upon men civilly behaved, and upon such as are so far from giving
distaste to any who have business, as they know it chiefly becomes them to give
at least satisfactory words to all men. This Cato happened to be present two days
ago, when Salustius Crispus, one of Tiberius his intimate servants, did not
only openly flatter his master, but to the end that he might obtain some very
chief place, had humbled himself to some of the most abject Courtiers, but such
as were well esteemed by the Emperor: at which base action Cato seemed to be so
scandallized, as mightily reprehending Salust; he told him, that men ought to
obtain places from their Princes by deserts; and that preferments obtained by
the means of unworthy people, did not become men of worth; and that his
praising of Tiberius, a man who was known to all the world to be so vicious,
had purchased him as much blame, as he might have won praise by putting him in
mind of his faults. To this reprehension Salust without any the least
alteration of mind, answered; To be free spoken does not always help, nor do
men always win reputation thereby, as you believe; and as it is folly to sow
good seed in the sands, so all counsel is cast away when it is given to
obstinate people, and where there is no hope of doing any good thereby. For
Suadere principi quod oporteat, multi Laboris. Assentatio ergo Principem
quemcumque sine affectu etc. Tacit. lib. 1. Hist.

But upon such occasions as these, goodness, or honesty must be accompanied
with wisdom; and who has not wit enough to fit the Sails of his interest to
every favorable wind that blows, is a fool if he sail in the tempestuous Sea
of the Court, wherein those obstinate men who cannot accommodate their wits to
place, time, and persons, do either perish in their first voyage, or run hazard
of dangerous tempests all their life time, without ever gaining the Haven of
their coveted desires. Know Cato, that they are pointed at by all men as great
fools, who standing in need of other men's assistance, mar their business, only
because they will stand upon the punctilio of what is meet, and on the scruples
of reputation. The greatest wisdom of a perfect Courtier, consists in knowing
how to fit himself to all humors; without which it is impossible to come to any
good in Court: and he who attains to his desired greatness of obtaining a
principal dignity or a great Office, is much more admired by every one for the
dignity which he possesses, then undervalued for the means he used to come by
it. Every stain of honor which is committed for the bettering of a man's
condition, is excellently well washed away, if he can make virtuous use of his
new obtained Honor. And to preach chastity (as you do) in Bawdy-houses, or
fasting in time of Carnevale, is no better then to make music to them that are
deaf, or to light the blind with Torches. And of this which I say, I will
crave no other Testimony then your own, when in the Roman Commonwealth where
you made public profession of being chief Corrector of the Press, you did but
badly govern your own private condition, without ever being able to better the
public affairs.

The LXXXIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo having by a new Edict inhibited Poets to make use of any fabulous
Creature in their verses, at the fervent entreaties of the Poets, his Majesty
revokes the said Edict.

FOur days since, the Urban Praetor of Pernassus, published an Edict in the usual
places by sound of Trumpet, and by order from Apollo, that his Majesty being
resolved by no means to tolerate that men who should speak nothing but Truths,
should invent falsehoods, and having heard that Poets in their writings had
mentioned Tritons, Basilisks, Unicorns, Sirens, Hypogriffiks, Phenixes,
Sphinxces, Centaurs, and other Animals, as realities, being creatures which
mother Nature did never create, and that many mischiefs arose from the
publishing of such things; understanding particularly that many notorious
cheaters sold the Unicorns horn at great rates to simple people, and the other
aforesaid things, did by that his Decree declare the aforesaid creatures and
other things to be express lies, mere fables, and Poetical fictions. That
therefore his pleasure was that Poets should for the future forbear committing
any such disorders, and that they should make use of nothing in their verses,
save what was really produced by nature, upon pain of being banished Pernassus.
The capricious Poets were scandalized at this news, wherefore they assembled
themselves suddenly together in their Academy, where by common consent they
chose Sannezzarro for their spokesman to request the revocation of that Edict
which was so prejudicial to their Poetry. Sanezzarro presented himself
forthwith before the Praetor, complaining bitterly, that in an Age which did so
abound in lies the virtuous inventions of Poets should only be forbidden, a
thing the more worthy consideration, for that by exempting the invention of all
fabulous things from their Poems, the very soul thereof was taken away. And
that the Poets, who had always been obedient to all his Majesty's commands,
would willingly submit to the rigor of this Edict, if it were made universal.
That it was very well known that infinite things, yea which much commendeed
Encomiums, were named for truths by both the meanest, and best Literati of
Pernassus, which were no where to be found; and that it would be as acceptable
as useful to declare them to be false. The Praetor wished Sanezzarro freely to
name those things, which were with admiration named for truths in Pernassus,
and yet were false; for Apollo who was no respecter of persons, would assuredly
make them be put into the same Edict. Then said Sanezzarro, uninteressed men,
people who love the public good better then their own private affairs,
Officers who are not slaves to their passions, Princes who are not ambitious of
coveting what belongs to other men, are publicly said to live by thousands and
thousands in the world, and yet it is better known to Apollo then to any other,
whether any such Phenixes be to be found in Egypt, Arabia, or in any other part
of the Earth; that therefore if his Majesty would insert these Chimera's into
his Edict, and make the Law general, Poets would have no just cause of
complaint. This being said, the Praetor went presently to Apollo, and acquainted
him with Sanezzarro's desire; who did so much wonder at the request made by
Sanezzarro, as he said these very words to the Praetor. Now I perceive the Poets
have reason for their complaint, and that my Edict is not universal, therefore
revoke it without more ado: for I will rather take the shame upon my self, to
let my Literati know, that I was inconsiderate in the publication of this
Edict, then shame all mankind by making it know that men absolutely
uninteressed are merely fabulous.

The LXXXV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Giovangirolimo Aquaviva, haveng overcome a very great difficulty, is with much
Honor admitted into Pernassus.

IN the Assembly of the Vertuosi which was held for that purpose on Thursday
last, the credential Letters brought by a Gentleman who was sent to this Court
from Signior Givangirolimo Aquaviva Duke of Atri, were read; who afterward
delivering his Embassy, did in very handsome language desire that the Duke his
Master might be admitted into Pernassus; and in the same assembly the good
deserts of the said Duke were diligently examined, and maturely discust, and
this noble Duke being found to be very well verst in all the Liberal Sciences
and arrived at the height of excellency in the Mathematics; by his Majesty's
express order who was ever very partial to this noble Family, wherein learning
seems rather to be hereditary, then purchased by long study, was created
superintendent of the Triangles and lineatore Maggiore di euclide: after this
the wonted Cavalcata was decreed unto him, and being accompanied by the Lord
Poets, and the other learned Princes of fruitful Parthenope, with many of their
servants in rich liveries, the show was very noble, and worthy so deserving a
Prince; but the greatest wonder was, to see the Duke discourse a long time with
Homer, and Pindarus not making use of Valla, or any other interpreter,
certainly a very glorious action in these Times, and which purchased the Duke
the more glory, for that the Vertuosi of Pernassus did consisider that this
Princes learning was of the very finest sort which makes them so much respected
who are therewith endued. Nor did he this out of necessity to eat bread, nor to
make use of it (as many do) for a Patrimony, but only that, though he was born
of noble blood, and very rich, he might not be thought an ignorant Plebeian,
and an unlearned beggar: for this Prince always held that perfect Nobility, and
true riches did only consist in virtue. The Duke was already come with his
noble Cavalcata into the Via Sacra, when it was made known unto him in his
Majesty's name, by a public messenger, that he must return back, for there was
so great an impediment found in him, as by virtue of the Pegasean Pragmatical
Law he could not be admitted into Pernassus. Upon this unfortunate news il
Rota, il Tansillo, and many other Neapolitan Poets of the first Classis, hasted
to Apollo, and understood that the impediment arose, for that the illustrious
Octavius Cardinal Aquaviva, when he was Prelate in the Court of Rome, had
exercised the place of Maistre d'Hostelle under Pope Gregory the fourteenth,
and that since it was known in Pernassus, that the formerly stately Courts of
Princes, through the tricks and inventions of beggarly Mastre d'Hostels were
infected with the sordid contagion of foul avarice, it was enacted by a very
severe Edict, that for the future, not only such as had exercised the hateful
Office of Maistre d'Hostelle in Princes Courts should never be admitted into
Pernassus, but that all that descended from them, or were any ways allied unto
them, even to the fortieth degree, should be for ever excluded. The Duke was
very much troubled at this unfortunate rub; but having known that Edict long
before, he had foreseen the difficulties, which he might meet withal in
Pernassus, so as to remove away all obstacles, he took a letter out of his
bosom written with his own hand unto his son, wherein he did expressly forbid
him to accept of that place; but the business of Maistre d'Hostel is so odious
in this Court, as the Letter in justification of the Duke, was not read, nor
any ways taken into consideration; and now the business grew desperate, and the
Cavalcata began to return backwards, when Cesare Caporale a Poet, who having
been greatly obliged to the house of Aquaviva, hasted to Apollo, to whom he
largely attested, that Signior Octavio, as he was nobly minded, so had he
always lived in a liberal manner, and that he was not made Maistre d'Hostelle
by that free handed Pope for having a narrow soul, and given to getting, but
only that by the dignity of that so honorable a degree, he might show him to
be a person fit to be made a Cardinal, as it soon after fell out; and that
whilst he did discharge that place, he studied nothing more then how to feed
the Vertuosi plentifully, to protect the Literati, and to reward those that
deserved well; a piece of generosity, wherein he did always show such liberality
and greatness, as finding that certain roguish Butlers, mingled water with wine
in the Popes Cellar, he commanded by a severe and noble Edict, which even to
this day is punctually observed, that it should not be lawful for any one for
the future to have any water in those Cellars. Apollo was so well pleased with
this decree, as he commanded that it should be written in large letters of gold
by Croessis that famous Millanese Scribe and chief writer of Text-hand, in the
Delphick Library, and that for the honor and glory of the famous Family of the
Aquavive, and for the Dukes reputation who had enriched the present age with so
deserving a son, it should be carried before him in the Cavalcata, which was
the noblest and most admired thing that was seen therein: and to complete the
Dukes contentment, and the splendour of his house, his Majesty decreed the Title
of Mecenas to Signior Octavio Cardinal Aquaviva, and sent it him by an express
Messenger yesterday in forma dignum.

The LXXXVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Duke of Laconia to revenge himself by way of Law upon a chief Senator of
State for some private distastes that he had taken at him, commanded Fleminio
Cartaro, his Judge of Assize, to proceed severely against him upon some heads
which he would give him, and he denies to obey him.

THe Duke of Laconia to take revenge for some distastes which he pretended to
have received from a chief Senator of his State, began under other pretenses to
trouble him at Law; and having made him be imprisoned, he commanded Flaminio
Cartaro one of his Judges of Assize, to make severe process against him, and
gave him some heads in writing, whereupon to examine him. Cartaro when he had
considered the quality of the person against whom he was to proceed, and the
faults which were pretended to be laid to his charge, easily perceived that the
Duke would vent his private rage of hatred against that so signal personage, by
color of justice. And thinking it misbecame a man of his place to serve as a
Minister to other men's passions, and knowing that the purchase of unjust
Princes favors by the shedding of innocent blood would soon be severely
vindicated both by God and man; rather then to stain his reputation by so foul
an action, put on that generous resolution, which ought to be imitated by all
Judges in the like case; he escaped by night out of Laconia, and some six days
ago came to this Court. The Duke of Laconia as soon as he heard Cartaro was
fled, and knew what way he took, sent forthwith two Ambassadors to Apollo, who
earnestly desired his Majesty that for weighty state-Interest Cartaro might be
kept forthcoming, and sent back to their Prince. Apollo who before he would
take any resolution, would know the truth of the business from Cartaro's self,
caused him to be immediately sent for, and before the Ambassadors asked him the
reason of his so sudden and secret flight from Laconia. Who plainly and very
particularly acquainted Apollo with the truth of what had happened between him
and the Duke of Laconia, and then added, that had it been in an hereditary
state, he would in giving judgment have obeyed his Princes will; but that in
an elective Principality, as was that of Laconia, where Brevi Momento summa
verti possunt, Tacit. lib. 5. Annal. and where in the twinkling of an eye, he
might command in chief, who did formerly obey, and where new Princes are
usually either of a differing Genius, or contrary factions to the former, when
a Prince, say it be not out of private hatred, but justly does vex any great
Officer, he should not find either Judges, Advocates, or Sergeants ready to
serve him. For new Princes, who commonly do not approve of their Predecessors
Actions, when they cannot cudgel the Ass (the dead Prince) vent all their rage
and fury upon the pack-saddle (the Judge whom they have in their power) and
that in faults committed by great men, and executed by those that are meaner,
the known proverb was very true, that the weakest went to the wall; for it was
not only the custom of angry dogs, but even of judicious men, to revenge
themselves upon the stone, when they cannot come by the Arm that threw it: and
that this his doctrine was so true, as he could give them the example of a
famous Doctor of Castle Bolognese, who was forced to feel the Tempest of that
Rage, which was not possible to shower down upon those great dogs, which had
good teeth to bite withal.

The LXXXVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Some Princes of this State having presented Apollo with a Book of the Reason
of State, the Vertuosi of Pernassus not approving of the definition of State
therein given, publish a new one, which was very much displeasing to those
Princes.

THe greatest Princes of this Court, did with general applause present Apollo
two days ago with a book which treated of the Reason of State: and pressed very
much, that as being a very meritorious work it might be put into the Delphick
Library. Apollo who knew very well how much Princes abhor those writings, which
treating of Stateaffairs, discover their souls, fashions, and inward intentions
to the meaner sort of men, wondered very much when he saw it was greatly
desired by them that the book might be published to the world; and as it
commonly falls out in such like cases, he sorely suspected, lest these Princes
might in such a business hide some private ends of their own; whereupon
according to the practice of this Court, the book was assigned over to the
Library Censors, who did the more diligently consider it, for that they
likewise did apprehend some cheat, which they soon found out. They therefore
told his Majesty the next day, that those Princes did so highly celebrate the
book of the Reason of State which they had presented unto him out of
self-interest; for nothing being treated of therein but the Politics In
genere, there was no mention made therein of that reason of State which the
Title promised; and that Reason of State being of the Politics, the Author of
the book had craftily, (and peradventure bribed so to do by the Princes) given
it the specious definition which belongs to the whole body of the Politics;
saying, That the reason of State was the knowledge of fitting means to ground,
maintain, and enlarge a State; by which gilded definition they endeavored to
make the Reason of state appear to be a good thing, which Learned men, and such
as did more fear God, then flatter Princes, freely termed the Devils Law.
Apollo did infinitely dislike the falsehood used by that Author, and immediately
gave order, That the Title of Reason of State should be taken from that Book
(which otherwise was very elegantly written,) and that of the Politics, put in
the place of it: At which, the Princes were infinitely displeased; when not long
after, one mightily cried up for his skill in the Politics, did with excellent
Reasons refute the former Erroneous definition of the Reason of State, and gave
it publicly another definition; which was, That the Reason of State was a Law
useful for Commonwealths, but absolutely contrary to the Laws, both of God and
Man. A Definition which being written in Letters of Gold, and afterward
affixed upon the Columns of the Peripatetick Porch, was approved of by all the
Literati for as absolutely true, as the other was in extremity false.

The Princes, who thought that this new Definition was published only to put a
scorn upon them, were so highly incensed, as some of them moved to take up Arms
against the Literati, and to end that important business with Sword in hand;
but the wiser sort did mollify the rage of the more capricious, and did
jointly present themselves before Apollo, where Lewis the Twelfth, that famous
King of France, speaking to His Majesty in the name of all the other Princes,
complained, That a Definition was given to the Reason of State, by the
Literati, which was very wicked; which if His Majesty should not soon recall,
their States should be put into confusion. Apollo answered King Lewis, That he
did from that time forward declare the Definition given lately by his Vertuosi
to the Reason of State, to be utterly scandalous, and wicked; but that to
provide against the evil which so free a Definition might occasion amongst
their Subjects, it was not a good remedy to cloak it over with fair words, as
the Author of the Book had done; for mischiefs were not cured by concealing;
and that he and all the rest of the Princes would confess the Definition to be
true, which they seemed so much to dread, if they would call to mind, that when
they did any thing, which for the impiety thereof, did neither agree with the
Laws of God, nor man, if they were afterward asked by any one why they had
done so impious a thing; they were ready to allege the Reason of State for
the occasion thereof.

Then turning to Lewis the twelfth, Apollo said; The better to manifest the
truth of what I say, to your self, and to all these Princes which are here
present, I will make use of one of your Actions, which will make it appear
clearly, that the Definition of State, published by my Literati, and which you
do now so much oppugn, is very true.

You know, your first Wife was Sister to Charles the eighth, your Predecessor
in the Kingdom of France; and I know, you likewise remember that you did
adhere to the Conspiracy made by Francis Duke of Burgundy, by Charles Duke of
Burgundy, and by many other great Lords, against the Kingdom of France, and
that you were taken prisoner by King Charles your Sisters husband; and that
whilst the putting of you to death as a Rebel was in agitation, your Wives
efficacious Prayers was that which saved your life.

You know likewise, that Charles being dead a little while after, you succeeded
him in his Kingdom, and that you might marry the Queen Dowager, Wife to the
late Charles, you got to be Divorced from your former Wife, which you excused
by pretending that your Marriage with so great a Princess was done by
compulsion; as if there needed violence to marry the Sister of so great a
Prince to any one; you your self know Lewis, that this Divorce was neither
answerable to the Laws of God nor Man: tell me then what was the reason that
moved you to banish that wife your bed, to whom you confess you owe your life.

King Lewis freely answered Apollo, that doubtless it was the Reason of State
that had compelled him so to do; for the Queen Dowager of France having in her,
the noble Dowry of the Dukedom of Britany, he had married her, to the end that
that Province which was of so great importance, and from which France had
formerly received so much mischief, should not again be disunited from his
Kingdom.

See then said Apollo, how you made that marriage which you knew did neither
agree with the Laws of God nor man, being forced to do so by Reason of State;
by which example, you and all these Princes may clearly see that the Definition
made by my Literati of the Reason of State is most true; now then since you are
convinced of the foul impiety thereof, know that the best means that you can
and ought to use to keep your self and your State from being damnifyed thereby,
is, not to use it, for it is too barefaced Hypocrisy to seem more to abhor
fould words, then foul deeds.

The LXXXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Marcantonio Moreto desires Apollo that he may have leave to make an Oration in
the public Schools of Pernassus in the praise of the Clemency of the most
glorious King of France, Henry the Fourth, but is denied it.

MErcantonio Moreto a famous French Orator, told Apollo some few days since,
that having exactly examined all the virtues of all the French Kings, and
compared them with the valor and glory of King Henry the Fourth, he found that
there was not any of them that might be compared to him; and that to make the
French adore so gallant a King, and to incite all Christian Princes to heroic
virtue, he desired his Majesty to give him leave to declame in the praise of so
glorious a King publicly in the Rhetoric school: and because to speak of all
the virtues which did abound in so great a King, would require more then a
months space to do it; to the end that his Oration might not exceed the usual
time of one hour, he would only celebrate that admirable virtue of Clemency,
which was so peculiar to his Henry, as that he clearly found, by the use
thereof he had so far exceeded all humane mansuetude, as that he bordered upon
heavenly mercy: for he had pardoned such injuries in his most implacable
enemies, as would never have been forgotten by any one save by a King of
France; a virtue which appeared to be so much the more eminent in that great
Monarch, for that in these so corrupt present times, to pardon injuries was
not thought to be an heroic and virtuous action, but base and abject
covvardise. The same Moreto told every one, that contrary to what he could
ever have believed, Apollo was highly incensed at that his request, and that
with an angry countenance he said, he was grossly ignorant in going about to
celebrate the most revengeful and implacable K. that did ever live for his
mercifulness: and that if he would praise the infinite valor of Henry the
fourth his invincible constancy in adverse fortune, moderation in prosperity,
his excellent knowledge in military affairs (wherein he had far exceeded all
Kings and Commanders who had ever purchased the glorious name of warlike) the
more then humane vivacity of his spirit, the vigilance of his indefatigable
mind, or his dexterous government of that great Kingdom, he nor his Literati,
who were partially addicted to so puissant a King, could not hear any more
melodious Harmony: but that since that noble acquisition which he made of
France, he had revenged himself much more cruelly upon his enemies, then
merciless Augustus had done by his execrable Proscription; and that Pernassus
was no place to exaggerate falsehoods in: Notwithstanding this so resolute
answer, Moreto was not discouraged, but with great observancy replied; that
having exactly considered all the virtues of his King, he did again affirm unto
his Majesty that he found not that any one of them did shine more brightly in
him then his clemency. Then Apollo looking with a very pleasant countenance
upon Moreto, said, it is plainly seen thou honest French man, that thou art only
a mere Grammarian, for thou seem not to know that that King only ought not
to be vindicative, who (as did Augustus) kills his enemies when he has
conquered them; for to take an evil wishers life away, to the end that he may
not see his enemies Triumphs and prosperity; to the end that he may not suffer
a thousand torments and deaths hourly, is a kind of pity. He is to be
accounted revengeful, and infinitely cruel, who suffers him to live, who
confounds him with pardon, and who does continually martyrise and torment him
by his worthy actions and perpetual prosperity, as yours and my beloved Henry
has been observed to do more then all the Kings that ever were on earth; who
still growing more and more cruel, by his perpetual felicity, by showing to the
world his Justice, liberality, advisedness, and great piety; did still the more
afflict those his enemies, who that they might render him odious to his people
of France, did openly affirm, that if ever he should come to be King of that
powerful Monarchy, he would surely prove the utter and final ruin thereof. And
how much did it grieve the enemies of so great a King think thou Moreto,
when they saw his victory completed, and his fortune confirmed by his own
worth, and valor? and with what an eye think thou they did behold him
conqueror, triumphing, and not only adored, but reverenced by his people,
according to the ancient custom of France? so glorious, as the very first day
that he mounted the Throne, he became the absolute Arbitrator of the world.
Do not thou believe it did much more grieve these men's hearts to see the King
of Navar, whose suppression they had so much endeavored, become the most
glorious King of France, then when they thought themselves surest of his
downfall? and then confirmed in his Kingdom by so plentiful an issue, as they
are forced to confess they were sent him by Heaven? Do not thou believe
Moreto, that these his malevolents esteem so great happiness, such prosperity
given by God to this our King, to be their shame and misery? They are
perpetually tortured, who for their greater confusion are suffered to live,
being forced to see the Halcyon days of this powerful Kingdom of France.

The LXXXIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
A Literato presents Apollo with an Oration made by him in praise of the
present Age: Which is laid aside byish Majesty, as not grounded upon any truth.

SOme few days since a famous Literato presented Apollo with an eloquent
Oration composed by him in praise of the present age, wherein he clearly showed
how much of latter times goodness, godliness, and all sorts of virtue are
increased in the world, and concluded, that from such excellent beginnings,
mankind might securely hope, that that happy. Golden Age so cried up by the
Poets, was now very nigh at hand. This Literato and his Oration found but cold
acceptance at Apollo's hands; and being asked whether he had so well considered
the Age which he had so highly praised, as he ought to have done, and with what
spectacles he had viewed and contemplated it, he answered, that he had not only
viewed the Courts of a great many famous Princes, the most accurately that he
could, but had travailed over the greatest part of Europe, in all which Courts
and Countries he had diligently observed the lives of those who commanded in
chief, and their fashions who obeyed, and that he had observed nothing in them
which was not highly to be praised; and that then in passing his judgment upon
all the particulars of the present Age, which appeared to him to deserve
praise, he, not aiding himself by any spectacles, made only use of the eyes of
his judgment, which he thought were not dim sighted.

Apollo replied, That surely he had written that his Oration in the dark, for
that the true state of the present age, the true intimate intentions of those
that govern in it, and the real meanings of those that live in it, could not be
seen, no not by Linceus's eyes, unless a man did put the purest Politic
Spectacles upon his nose, whereby he might see the truth of passions, which lay
deeply hid in the breasts of modern men; who were so mysterious in all their
proceedings, as their inward meanings appeared least outwardly. Which being
said, Apollo caused a pair of excellent spectacles to be given to that
Literato, which were lately made in Tacitus his Forge, and bad him view the
present age through them, and then tell him whether it appeared to be the same
which he had so exalted in his Oration. The other obeyed, and after having well
contemplated and considered the Age through those spectacles; Sir, said he,
That which I now see wi^h these spectacles, is not the age wherein we now live,
but a world full of ostentation, and outward appearance, with very little
substance of true virtue, where an infinite number of men are lined with
feigned simplicity, clad with the false Alchumy of appearing goodness; but full
fraught with cosenage, tricks, and plots, where nothing is more studied, then
how to overreach ones companion, and to hurl his neighbor into the hell of
wicked enterprises, by false pretense of sanctified meanings. I see a world
full of Interest, in which I cannot discern charity, and candid love between
the Father and the Son; and by these miraculous spectacles I plainly see, that
the World is nothing but a large Shop, where all things under the Moon are
bought and sold; so as the true meaning of men that live therein, is mere gain,
and how to heap up moneys; and in fine, the world is so ugly, as it is hateful
to me to keep these spectacles on my nose; for certainly mankind might be
truly termed miserable, if our present age, which I have deservedly praised in
my Oration, were in any the least degree like this which I behold. Truly, said
Apollo, the world which you now have seen with these politickspectacles, is the
very same which you glory so much in having praised, where those who will pass
their judgment without making use of these penetrating spectacles, are like
those unfortunate wretches, who putting their hands into a hole to find a
Creafish, pluck out a Toad.

The XC. ADVERTISEMENT.
Christopher Columbus, and other famous discoverers of the new world, desire
Apollo that Immortality may be decreed them for their noble daring, but are
denied it.

CHristophano Colombo, Ferrante Cortese, Magelin Pizzaro, Gama, Americo
Vespuchi, and many other famous discoverers of the new World, appeared two
days since in this Court: Never was there seen a more signal pleasing
spectacle in Pernassus, nor fuller of curiosity, then the entrata made by these
Gentlemen, who were met, accompanied, visited, welcomed, and lodged by the
Princely Poets, with as much affection and honor as men deserve, who by their
incessant labor, and numberless hazards, have enriched the Universe with a new
World. Nor is it to be believed what consolation the Vertuosi received, for
having at last come to the clear and distinct knowledge of the quantity and
quality of that great Machine of the earth, which immortal God has created to
be an habitation for men: In so much as Ptolomy, Varro, and other Cosmographers
did very often visit these Gentlemen's houses; not being able to satisfy their
curiosity of seeing those parts of Asia, Africa, and whole America together
with the Cape of good Hope, and the Straits of Magelen, which for so many
thousand years were unknown to Antiquity. Astrologers have hardly satisfied
their desires by the purchased knowledge which they had of the Stars of the other
Pole. Aristotle was greatly amazed when these Gentlemen told him, that the
Torrid Zone did not only not burn through the heat of the Sun, as all
Philosophy-Schools did hold affirmatively, but that it is rather too humid, and
that it is inhabited by an infinite number of people: and it was a novelty
which appeared to surpass all human miracles, to hear that the Winters were
there too cold and rainy, when the Sun was perpendicular over the peoples
heads: By which he clearly found how many falsehoods he and other Philosophers
had published of the Torrid Zone, and how fallacious it was to give positive
judgment, out of mere conjectures upon the wonders of the all powerful God
miraculously fabricated; and he was very much pleased to arrive at last at the
knowledge of the true cause of the flowing of the River Nile, whereof, together
with many other Philosophers, he remembered he had said many foolish things.
Seneca the Tragedian made use of so great a novelty, arrived in Pernassus to
his immortal glory, boasting every where, that being inspired by Divine
Poetical fury, he had by his famous Verses foretold for above 1400 years ago so
great a discovery: And some Literati, who laughing at him, said that Seneca in
that his Tragedy spoke but by guess, tasted of his Majesty's displeasure; who
thinking that the honor of the Muses was much concerned by that incredulity,
made them inhabit for many days amongst the ignorant. Dantz Aligieri won more
glory, who had affirmatively held in his Verses, that the Antartick Pole, which
had never been seen by any in his days, was un Grand Crosiero.

These famous Hero's had audience on Tuesday last in the Royal Hall, where
Apollo was assisted by the Muses, who were come thither out of a curiosity to
see the faces of those men who had courage enough not to dread the incensed
Seas, and to plough them up (though they were unknown unto them, and full of
shelves and rocks) even in the darkest and most tempestuous night. Columbus,
after having kissed the last step of the Royal Throne, and the nethermost hem of
the Muses garment, and made low reverence to the College of Literati, said in a
stately Oration for him and his Companions, that the two glorious Princes,
Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile having extirp'd the wicked
Mohammedan Sect from out the Catholic Kingdoms of Spain, at the expense of much
gold and blood, God was resolved to gratify them with a gift worthy of so
great piety: And that therefore his Divine Majesty having debarred the courage
and curiosity of men in former times from discovery of the new world, had
reserved it to remunerate the zeal which he had discovered in those two famous
and powerful Princes, to his service; who being born to propagate the holy
Christian Religion amongst Infidels, had piously caused it to be planted
amongst those Idolaters; and that the ever living God having at last permitted
men to make discovery of the new world, he himself first, and then those other
famous Pilats that were there with him, had so succesfully sailed over all the
vast Ocean, as after having discovered new and large Provinces, and very rich
Kingdoms, they following the same source which his Majesty had labored so much
in, from the East to the West, had compassed the whole world about. By which
their fortunate fate, not only Cosmography, Astronomy, and the Meteors, but
even Physic, and the other praiseworthy Sciences had received singular
advantage; and that to boot with the curiosity of infinite diversity of Customs
and Rites, newly discovered by them amongst incredible numbers of people: they
had also enriched the old world with spices, and medicines excellently good for
the life of man, and with such riches, as they had caused Rivers of Gold and
Silver to run throughout Europe, and great store of precious stones; and that
in reward for so great labors, they only desired that that eternal fame might
be granted to them and to their memory, for the purchase whereof they had
freely undertaken, and happily finished that which appeared so dreadful to men
of former times. Columbus's Speech was attentively listened unto; and it was
immediately decreed by his Majesty, that these so famous Heroes should be
preferred before the Argonauts, and that the glorious Ship-Victory, with which
Mageline had first compassed the world, should be placed in heaven amongst the
fixed stars, and that the names of so illustrious men should be engraven with
indilable Characters in the Tables of Eternity, in the Foro Massimo. And whilst
Nicholas Perinotto the Delphick chief Chancellor, held forth the Decree that it
might be the more binding, Mario Molza appeared in the Royal Hall, a cried up
Poet, but very deformed, as not having any hair either on his head or face, who
was yet rendered more monstrous by his having no nose, his face full of gum and
scabs, who pointing with his finger to his wounds, said with a loud voice,
These which you see, Sir, in my face, are the new Worlds, the new Customs and
rites of the Indians; these are the Jewels, Pearls, Drugs, Astrology, Meteors,
Cosmography, these are the Rivers of Gold wherewith these new and unfortunate
Argonauts of the French Pox, who are come into Pernassus only to add scorn and
derision to our mischiefs, have enriched and filled the world; these are the
new receipts which they have brought with them to infect mankind with a disease
so contagious, so cruel and shameful, as it is greatly disputed amongst the
Learned, whether it do more pollute the body, or shame reputation: These
hair-braind men have enriched and beautified the world with these Jewels
wherewith you see my face blistered, and my body wounded; these implacable
enemies of mankind have corrupted the very generation of man. Then turning
toward Colombo, Molza began to unty his briches, but the Muses, to keep their
eyes from being contaminated with the sight of any obscenity, commanded the
under Officers to hinder him from so doing; which Molza perceiving; I, said he,
most Divine Dieties; will show no dishonesty in this august place, but the
woeful calamities, and miserable wounds brought by these men from their stately
new worlds, which are unknown to all former Physic and Chyrurgery. And how,
Signor Christophano, would you have men taste the odoriferousness of those
Aromaticks which you so much glory to have brought from the Indies, if the
French Pox, wherewith you have so perfumed the world, be a capital enemy to the
nose? I know not with what face you can say, that God, to reward the merits of
your Potent Princes, has bestowed upon them the world which you have
discovered, when it is much more true, that his divine Majesty has made use of
you to transplant the pestiferous French Pox, which is so sore a scourge to the
libidinous, into Europe. And how dare you say that you have enriched the world
with Drugs, if Pepper, Cynamon, and Cloves cost thrice as much now as they did,
before you did imbitter those Dolci Fichi, which I have so highly praised in my
Verses, with the Arsnick, and Nax Vomica of those tortering plasters, and
shameful incissions which I dare not name in this place? And do you think that
your having brought such quantity of Gold and Silver as you speak of, from the
new world, into the old, can be termed our felicity, when our greatest
happiness would have been, never to have been acquainted with any of those
damned metals which are the chief cause of all our evils? But you and your
companions may doubly glory, first for having put the old world into such
confusion, with the great store of Gold which you say you have brought with
you, and then for having brought the new world to a final ruin, by introducing
the sword. But what need has Europe of so much Gold, since all things
necessary for human life grow daily dearer, and the peoples poverty increases
every day? And not to conceal that which ought to make you odious to his
Majesty, and to all his Vertuosi, it is not any thi^st after honor, nor (as
you have falsely affirmed) the desire of that glory which eternizeth men's
memories, which has eg'd you on to so dangerous and damnable an enterprise,
but incited by avarice, spurred on by ambition, and driven on by the thirsting
after that gold which your Country does value so lightly, is that which made
you rashly pass those Hercules his Pillars, which wise Antiquity set for bounds
to the insatiable curiosity of man; and for proof of what I say, did not you,
Signor Christophano, compel your Kings of Spain to pay your good deserts, by
making you be brought prisoner from your Judges, and fettered as a public
thief of the Regal Treasure? And you, Marquess Pizzaro, Did not you play the
trick of a special Gentleman to Antabalipa King of Peru, in robbing him of the
great store of Gold which you found he had? And fully to complete your infamy,
Did not you rebel against the Emperor your Master? An action so much the more
shameful, for that such bruitishness is seldom seen to fall out amongst the
Spanish Nobility. For these reasons, Sir, and for the evil behavior which
these famous Argonauts of Torters have used to the Indians, wrought off their
legs in the Forges of Gold, are so far from receiving any favor from your
Majesty, as they ought to be cudgeled out of Pernassus, as pernicious people,
and fatal to mankind. Molza's discourse appeared to Apollo, and to the reverend
College of Literati, to deserve better consideration then did appear at the
first; wherefore Colombo was answered in his Majesty's name, that he should
take back the French Pox, the Gold and Silver which he found in his Judges, and
that he and his companions should with all speed quit Pernassus; for that he
had gained enough; and because man's happiness consisted in living in a little
world well inhabited by men, and not in being Master of many great worlds, for
the most part uninhabited by men, and only fraught with wild beasts.

The XCI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Sigismond King of Polonia, prefers a Paladine to the prime dignities of his
Kingdom, who proving perfidious, the Polack Nobility, thinking the public
reputation was concerned in this private Palatines Misdemeanour, revenge
themselves severely upon him.

SIgismund Augustus, that famous King of Poland, being strangely affectionate
to one of the chief of his Nobility, raised him to be the greatest, richest,
and most powerful Paladine of his Kingdom; but with bad success to his Family:
For this great Personage, were it either through his particular vice of
ingratitude, or for that the fatal destiny of Princes will have it so, and that
human mischief requires it, that benefits which for their immensity cannot be
rewarded, should be paid with the wicked coin of ingratitude; or else that it
be the particular defect of great men, to love (like generous animals) Liberty
above all things, and to hate being fettered by the Chain of obligation; when
this Paladine found that he could expect nothing more from the King, nor that
the King could confer no more upon him; he did not only not stick to show
himself manifestly ungrateful, but had the audacity to discover himself upon
some important occasions, his deadly enemy. This man being stained with so
enormous a fault, was found the night preceding, the 14 of this present month,
dead in his bed, stabbed through with many daggers: and a Note was left upon his
head, which advised the Judge not to trouble any body concerning that fault,
which the Paladines of Warsavia, of Uratislavia, and of Posna, confessed to
have committed with their own hands, out of justifiable reasons. This accident,
very heinous, as well in consideration of him that was slain, as of those that
slew him, was of so much greater wonder in Pernassus, in that the Authors of so
great a Riot, were held to be the dearest and most intimate friends that the
slain Paladine had; wherefore the aforesaid Note was held to be fictitious; but
it was afterward believed to be true by those Paladines being retired into
their own Palatinates, who were that very day seen in Pernassus.

Apollo, who much loves the peace of Polonia, fearing lest it might be
disturbed by so sad an accident, which had made the chief Lords of that Kingdom
take up Arms, caused peace immediately to be treated of between the murderers,
and the sons of him that was slain; who out of such reverence as became them,
signified unto his Majesty, that to give him satisfaction, they would readily
forget the injury which they had received by their fathers death; but that to
wipe the tears from off their eyes, and to cure their wounded hearts, they
desired only so much satisfaction, as that their enemies might declare whether
their miserable father had so much distasted those his friends, as did deserve
so cruel a resentment; this request seemed very reasonable to Apollo, who
immediately gave order that the Delinquents should have notice given them
thereof. They returned answer, That having long before observed the great
ingratitude of that Paladine toward the King his Benefactor, they had often
severely admonished him to forbear those actions, which did so much misbecome
such a one as he was, but that all being in vain, the interest of the public
reputation of the Polack Nobility, had forced them with their daggers to
revenge the injury which was thereunto done by this ungrateful person.

When Apollo had read this Justification, it is said he confessed, that since many
riotous excesses were committed out of good intentions, and mere punctilio's of
honor; Judges and Princes must some times not only bear with Delinquents, but
punish the offended, and afterward sent the Note of Justification to the sons
of the slain Paladine; who being more virtuously minded then was their father,
came to Apollo, and told him, that having considerately reflected upon their
fathers demeanors toward his so well deserving King, and upon the occasion
which had forced those Paladines to bereave him of his life, they saw they were
compelled to pardon the public revenge which they had taken, for the so great
offense done to the Polack Nobility; and that they very well knew, that a Noble
man who had received great advantages by his Princes munificence, if he should
afterward prove ungrateful, did so cut up even by the very roots, all hopes of
greatness and honor, which the Nobility of a great Kingdom might deserve, as
that any whatsoever cruel revenge was taken in that behalf deserved to be
excused, if not justified: For that Princes terrified by the shameful example
of the ingratitude of Noble Personages, ought not to be blamed, when in the
bestowing of their most eminent dignities, they sought for that gratitude
amongst the meaner sort of people, which they feared they should not find in
the haughty Nobility.

The XCII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo having a notorious hypocrite in his hands, punishes him severely.

SO implacable is the hatred which Apollo bears to hypocrisy, as till he
published that severe Edict against them, of which you were fully informed by
our late dispatches, he promised great rewards to those who would discover such
devils to his Judges. And having had certain notice of one of them some six
days ago, his Majesty made him suddenly be laid hands on; and causing him to
be brought before him* at the very first sight he knew him to be a complete
hypocrite; wherefore having stripped him of all appearances, fictions, and a
number of falsehoods, and lastly plucked from off his back his glittering cloak
of feigned honesty, wherewith he was wholly covered, and showed him to his
Vertuosi who were there about him in his naked terms of devilish hypocrisy,
and then to the terror of others who trade in such wickedness, gave order that
he should be close tied to the Gate of the Delphick Temple, which was suddenly
done. Never was there any monster seen, any wild beast, or any infernal hag,
more horrid and dreadful then he, who made use of counterfeit goodness to cover
real vice. For then in this lewd companions eyes, who had formerly a
commiserating countenance, an incredible intense malignity was discovered, a
tyrannous pride in his speech, which was formerly all humility; and in all his
actions, wherein he first seemed to be content with a little, and to be
scandallized with having much, such a voracity of possessing the whole world,
as he publicly affected that all humane kind should be reduced to beg bread
of him. Besides, so envious a genius was discovered in him, as he desired
nothing more, then that the Sun should shine upon none but himself and his
affairs; which was so apparent a truth, as that his monstrous leanness was seen
to proceed more from other men's prosperity, then from his own misery. In fine,
he was so horrid and frightful a spectacle, as the people durst not come into
the Temple for fear of coming near him. The chief Literati of this State did
then much wonder how it was possible that these fraudulent hypocrites, with one
only grain of musk of appearing sanctity, could make the noisome jakes of their
stinking and most abominable wickedness appear so odoriferous to blockish men,
as with a little Orpine of affected goodness, they can cover over such wicked
vices. And the wonder was greater, to consider where the eyes and judgment of
lasie men were, when bewitched with the cunning of such raskals, they flock
like fools after them, whom they should fly from, as from the Plague.

The XCIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apuleius his Ass having given his Master two kicks in the breast, is severely
punished by him.

IT is sufficiently known to all the professors of Learning, that next to the
famous Pegasean Horse, Apuleius his Golden Ass is the beast of highest esteem
in all Perna^sus. Beroaldo the Bolognian, who by Apollo's own self is chosen to
have care of this highly prized Steed, for which he has three crowns a month
Sallary allotted him, was currying him the other day before the stable-dore,
whilst Apuleius himself, to make his Ass the more sleek, was stroaking down his
hair with his hand; and it happened that the Ass, without any bad intention to
his Master, flung out with his heels, and hit his Master on the breast,
throwing him backward on the ground half dead: And certainly Apuleius was
sorely hurt, for the Apothecaries had much ado to recall him to life, by many
comfortable applications. But as soon as he was come to himself, he laid hold
on the Pitchfork which he found in the Stable, and revenging himself upon his
unwary steed, laid load upon him therewith, and having well basted him, went
his ways. Then Beroaldo much afflicted for the misfortune which had befalne
his beloved beast, taking him about the neck and kissing him, said, my golden
Ass, what dire destiny of thine and mine was it that has drawn upon thee this
misfortune of being so sorely beaten, to the great affliction of thy dear
Beloardo? The brotherly love which I bear thee, forces me to tell thee that
thou have dearly paid for the misfortune which has happened unto thee, for
having foolishly, and with no advantage to thy self, dealt so hardly with thy
Master.

The Ass, as if the so many blows which he had received from h^s Master, had
been so many special favors, cheerfully answered Beloardo thus; Know my
Beloardo, that it was neither unadvertency, nor bestiality which made me do
that to my Master Apuleins, which you saw, and which does so much displease
you, but it is a thing which I have long premeditated, and resolved to do; and
know that the bastenadoes which I but now received* though I feel them to be
very sore, were notwithstanding very pleasing to me; for these fifty blows
which I have now at once received, will save me, I am assured, above a hundred
every month, and a thousand every year. And you shall see, Beloardo, that
Apuleius will deal more circumspectively with me hereafter for my late
resentment: I know that it is necessary and useful, suddenly to obey whatsoever
is commanded, and with patience to undergo whatsoever hard usage we receive
from our Masters; such Masters I mean as suffer themselves to be overcome by
the humility of those that serve them, and who will return gratitude and better
usage, for the good service that is done them; but to put on the resolution
which I have done, and does like me, with such indiscreet beasts, such as you
know our Master Apuleius is, who delights to dominier over such as I am, is the
way to make them wiser. And woe unto him who living in all submissness with an
humorous Master, has not heart enough so to resent himself once a year, as may
turn injuries into better observances: Nor are we burthen-bearing beasts more
beaten then Mules are, for any other reason but that they are excellently well
skilled in kicking, whilst we patiently undergo the lash; and you know much
better then I, Beroaldo, that in these times with Masters, Nihil profeci
patientia, nisi ut graviora, tanquam ex facili toler antibus imperentur. Tacit.
vita Agric.

The XCIV. ADVERTISEMENT.
Paulus Iovius presents Apollo with his most elegant Histories, which give full
satisfaction to his Majesty and the College of Vertuosi, and not withstanding
some opposition that is made, he is admitted with great applause into Pernassus.

PAulus Iovius, Bishop of di Nocera, that Noble and famous Historian, after
having been long expected by all the Literati of this Court, came some days
since to the Confines of Pernassus, where he was soon visited by an infinite
number of Poets, and of the greatest Historians, and welcomed with many learned
refreshments and entertainments. Moreover, all those men who were famous for
Arms or Learning, and of whom he had made honorable mention in his Elogies,
and other Writings, after having past their complements with him, accompanied
him with a numerous and noble attendance unto the Palace Royal, where the Senate
of the Vertuosi were met: He there presented Apollo with all his excellent
Compositions, which were acceptably received by his Majesty, who assigned them
over to the Censori Bibliothecarii. These caused Edicts to be posted up the
next day in all the public places of Pernassus, wherein notice was given to
every one, that the Histories, and other Writings of the reverend Paulus
Iovius, being to be consecrated to Immortality, they had prefixed five days for
the first, five for the second, and five more for the last peremptory term,
for every one to come in that had any thing to alleadg against him. The day
being thus appointed, all the Literati met together in the great Council-Hall,
where Iovius appeared before Apollo, where the Censori Bibliothecarii made an
honorable Relation of the Writings of that famous Prelat, and did infinitely
praise the purity of the Latin Tongue, the loftiness of his style, his
perspicuous method, the infinite variety of things treated of therein, the
exquisite diligence used in the texture of those his eternal labors, which
they said were such, as that there was not any Latin Historian, who since the
declination of the Roman Tongue and Empire, had advanced further in the Latin
History. Only some overcurious Literati said, they could have wished for some
of the Policy, and some of those Sentences, taken from the very bowels of the
Reason of State, in that Prelates Writings, which the Latin and Italian Tacitus
are censured to be too full of. Then he was bitterly reprehended for the vast
Voragini which were in his Histories; and the Censors, not without discovery of
some passion, told him, that if the Vertuosi could not with patience see the
defaults of such worthy Writers as Livy* Tacitus, Dion, and other famous
Historians, whose labors through the injury of time, were lost; it was
altogether intolerable in his. Nor was his excuse taken for good which he
alleged, that the Books which were wanting, were lost in the sacking of Rome,
for the Censors freely told him, that if he had spent those precious hours in
filling up what was wanting in his History, which he had thrown away in
entertaining the Cardinals, Fernese and Carpi, with his pleasant genius in the
winter evenings, he would have pleased his friends the Literati better. The
Censors having made their Relation, the Hall-dores were thrown open, and every
one had leave to make what objections they pleased against Iovius, for any
thing that they found amiss in his Writings. Wherefore he was accused by
Natalis Comes, for having too much praised Cosmo de Medici, the great Duke of
Tuscany; and that being bribed, he had published such prowess in the
Marquisses of Pescara and Vasto, as a maker of Romances could have said but
little more of the ancient Paladines of France. The Censors replied to this
accusation of Natalis Comes, that they had observed that Iovius had used
diversity of ink in his praises of the great Duke Cosmo, and the two
Marquisses, but that they found that by Edict from his Majesty, the like
License was given to Historians, as was permitted unto Poets, to imbroider
their Mecenas's Garments with Gold and precious Stones, in hatred to certain
greedy curmuggions, who value not the leaving of a good name behind them to
posterity. That therefore it was not only lawful, but very praiseworthy in
Bishop Iovius to exaggerate the praises of the Princes his Benefactors, and to
barter his purest quill with their liberalities: And though it be his bounden
duty to hold his peace, who is censured, as the Masters of the Pegasean
Ceremonies had signified unto Iovius at his first entrance into the Hall; yet
overcome with anger, he was not able to contain himself, but turning to Natalis
Comes, said, What humane praise may, I will not say a man, but a Demi-God
deserve, which ought not fully to be given to my great Cosmo, the second
Italian Augustus? Soon after Francisco Berni objected, That he had pursued the
memory of Lorenzo de Medici too bitterly. To which the Censors answered, That
Iovius was so far from deserving blame for that his action, as those seditious
Historians were rather to be punished, who invited ignorant people to rebellion
by their Encomium upon Brutus and Cassius, and such like, and who provoked
fierce spirits, beastial wits, and desperate persons to plot conspiracies
against good Princes. Lastly Giorolimo Mutio Iustinopolitano, said, that that
Iovius his Histories being full of falsehoods, deserved better ^o be burned,
than to have Eternity decreed unto them. The Censors wished Mutio to instance in
the places wherein Iovius had lied: Who answered, That he knew not any thing
himself, but that he had heard it commonly said so; whence they all found
Mutius to be one of those ignorant fellows, who accuse Iovius for a lier
without having read him.

The XCV. ADVERTISEMENT.
A very famous Literato, who was imprisoned by the Judges of Assise for being a
pratler, is freed by Apollo, as not guilty of such a crime.

THe Vertuosi of this State are bound to speak with as much premeditation and
weighing of their words, as other men write in other parts; for ^pollo's
pleasure is, for the general good, that to hear his Li^erati discourse upon any
whatsoever business, be as profitable as to study books; wherefore the speeches
of every one be so narrowly watched, as every least error is sure to receive
exemplary punishment. It happened some three days ago, that a very learned
Vertuoso discoursing upon some Poetical matter, fell into an incidental
digression, wherein he so far expatiated himself, as when he had finished it,
he could not reassume the thread of his former discourse, which was not only
noted for a great error, but the Censors being forthwith acquainted with it, he
was imprisoned. And the fault appearing to be true, not only by the testimony
of diverse, but by his own confession, the Judges proceeded with much rigor
against him, and inhibited him the use of writing or reading. This miserable
Literato, to the end that this severe sentence might either be totally taken
off, or at least much mitigated, had recourse to Apollo, who, though he much
abhorred that one of his Vertuosi should be esteemed a prater, yet that he might
upon better grounds judge this Literato, he would know from the accused
partie's own mouth, what the matter was; which is certainly an excellent way of
proceeding, and which if it were imitated by Princes who govern the world, they
would not be so much troubled with other men's faults. The Vertuoso acquainted
Apollo with all that had been laid to his charge; who having heard his
confession, did immediately revoke the sentence (so far does the Justice differ
which God infuseth into the hearts of Princes, from what Judges learn in their
Decrees) for finding that the digression into which that Literato had fallen,
and wherein he had so enlarged himself, was much more delicate than his first
discourse, his Majesty thought he had no ways misdemerited by that his
forgetfulness, since the error committed was not occasioned through his desire
to prate, but out of ambition to purchase honor to himself, by making that
digression. And therefore he commanded the Judges to set him at liberty, for he
was not to be blamed for much discourse, who discoursed well.

The XCVI. ADVERTISEMENT.
Philip the second, King of Spain, being offended at what the Duke of Alva had
told Apollo, concerning his Government of Flanders, whilst he seeks to revenge
himself upon that his Minister of State, is sent for by Apollo, who was
acquainted with what had past, and is by him pacified.

THere was never any Court wherein there were not of those maliciously minded
men, who reporting what ought to be concealed, are very desirous to raise
scandals, and to kindle enmity amongst their neighbors. This is said, for that
Duke Alva, formerly Prince of the Achaians, had no sooner told Apollo, that
(though he foresaw it would be occasion of great scandal) he had caused the
heads of Prince Egmont and Count Horn to be publicly showed upon the Skaffolds
in Brussels, only because men are of another opinion when they govern another
man's State, than when their own peculiar Estate is concerned: But the news
thereof was forthwith brought to the wise King of Spain, Philip the second, who
being highly offended with that his Minister of State, resolved to revenge so
great an injury by Arms; and therefore he commanded some of the Gentlemen of
his Chamber, to arm themselves suddenly, and evil entreat the Duke of Alva,
wheresoever they should meet him. This resolution of the Kings was discovered,
and being forthwith made known to Apollo, his Majesty sent for the King of
Spain and the Duke of Alva to come to him; who when they appeared, the King
being highly incensed, complained bitterly upon the Duke, that merely out of
ambition of perpetuating himself in the Government of Flanders, he had put his
patrimony into the present inextricable troubles, a thing the more worthy of
punishment, in that he himself had confessed his dealing so badly with his King,
with the same freedom as others glory in honorable actions. The Duke answered
in his own defense to this complaint made against him by the King, that he had
fought for his King, in Africa, in Germany, in France, in Flanders, and in
Italy, and still with victory; and that his faithful and honorable actions had
been so ill rewarded in peace, that not only men of the Long Robe, who were
unfit for War, had been preferred before him in those Provinces from whence he
had driven out the enemy, but even women, whereby he was either en tertained
idly afterward in the Court, or else in employments misbecoming such a one
as he, only that he might idolatrize the power of Ruy Gomes di Selva, and other
Subjects who were mean in comparison of him, and yet were in greater esteem
then he, in his Kings Court; a thing which misbecoming him to suffer, and which
he could in no ways digest, as being altogether contrary to his genius, and he
one that could not suffer indignities, was not only interpreted by his
malevolents, but even by his King; to be an intolerable pride in him, in not
being willing to tolerate an equal, much less a superior to himself in Court;
that it was true, that to preserve his reputation, and to keep such a one as he
from being numbered amongst the rank of ordinary Courtiers in the Court of
Spain, he had endeavored to eternize himself in the Government of Flanders,
which he would intentively have endeavored to have reduced into a peaceful
condition if he had thought he could have governed it in peace. The King of
Spain was much incenst at this so resolute answer, and said, that his
State-Minister having confessed his fault twice over, nothing remained but
condemnation. Nay rather (said Apollo to the King of Spain) I must by absolving
the Duke from all that you lay to his charge, admonish such great Kings as you,
to deal well with those Commanders, who having purchased the glory of true
Military valor at the expense of their blood, deserve their Kings full favor;
for it is just and reasonable, that Kingdoms, and great Provinces, should be
governed by those in times of peace, who had the courage to acquire them in
war, or who by their Arms have defended them against the public enemy; but
because many of you care not to do what is just, nor what out of gratitude
ought to be done, since I find you slow in learning by the advantageous reading
of History, how you ought to satisfy and content those Commanders, who with
their weapons in their hands, have deserved to be largely rewarded, be not at
least ashamed to take example in a business of such importance, from the
Ottoman Emperors, who in the troublesome times of War, give the charge of
Generalissimo of their Armies, and therein all useful and advised liberty, to
none but to their chief Vziiers, aso sublime dignity, as he who possesses it,
governs the vast Ottoman Empire in Supreme Authority, as sole Arbitrator of
Peace and War. Wherefore the chief Viziers, knowing that their places are much
more advantageous and honorable in Peace then in War, behave themselves very
faithfully in their warlike expeditions, to the end that through their worth,
they may maintain the dignity which they possess; moreover they hasten to get
the victory, that they may discharge so great an employment, by the acquisition
of new States, and by subduing the enemy. Philip, it is neither in my power, nor
yet in the power of any other Prince, to make men love the advantage of other
men, more then their own: And the true art of making Commanders eternally
loyal, is (as I have said) to show them honorable and gainful peace at home,
amidst the troubles of War.

The XCVII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Pompey the great having invited many Noble Lords of Rome to be present at the
dedication of the magnificent Theater which he had built in Pernassus, they
refuse to come.

POmpey the great having finished his stately Fabric of a Theater in
Pernassus, which was no whit inferior to that which he erected in Rome, when he
was to dedicate it, resolved to celebrate the show of Gladiators; and amongst
many other Princes, invited some modern Roman Lords to the entertainment, who
did not only excuse themselves, alleging they had not heart enough to behold
so bloody a spectacle, but confessed that they were much scandallized to think
that their forefathers did not only not detest that cruel pastime, to see men
become so merciless one to another, but that even women delighted in so horrid
barbarism; and that they would be bold to say, that such like Spectacles were a
shame to those that saw them, and did but little honor to those that caused
them to be represented. It is known that Pompey readily replied, that he should
very much admire and love the civility and humanity of the present Romans, in
abhorring the shedding of humane blood, if they had not stained this their
worthiness with the shameful curiosity of flocking with the basest sort of
people, to see men put to death by the Hangman.

The XCVIII. ADVERTISEMENT.
Peter Aretine being again assaulted, Apollo, in respect of the lewd conditions
of that Satirical vicious Poet, commanded that no Process should be made upon
that Riot.

THis last night past, Peter Aretine, as he returned from visiting his beloved
Titian, was assaulted by one who gave him a fowl slash over the face, which may
be said to be the twentieth blow that he has received, either by pugniard or
cudgel, wherewith people as quick of hand as he was of tongue, have so cut his
face, hands, and breast, as they look like a Sea-Card. Apollo was much
displeased at this Riot, and commanded the Attorney General to be diligent in
finding out the delinquent. Aretine was strictly examined, who swore that he
neither knew, nor could he imagine who it was that had hurt him. It Is said, that
Apollo having heard Aretines examination, his Majesty commanded that no further
Process should be made thereupon; for since Aretine could not so much as imagine
who it was that had dealt so ill with him, he must of necessity be guilty of
one of those two defects which deserve no compassion, either of having offended
so many, as he could not number his enemies, or of forgetting those that had
done him injuries worthy resentment.

The XCIX. ADVERTISEMENT.
Apollo having received news by an express Poet, whereat he was much rejoiced,
communicates it to his Literati with great Iubile.

SO greatly is Apollo pleased with men's virtuous proceedings, as he does
maintain an infinite number of men, not only in Italy, and the other parts of
Europe, but in all parts of the world where Learning flourishes, to whom he
gives large Salaries, to give him speedy notice by expresses of all the
honorable actions, and worthy works, that either any Prince, or private man does
perform in any whatsoever Kingdom. Which being after freely communicated by his
Majesty to his beloved Literati, serves them for a learned and useful Lecture.
This was the cause why the Royal Hall of Audience was filled betimes the next
morning with an infinite number of the Literati of Pernassus, who had heard,
that on Tuesday about eight of the clock at night, a Poet was come unto his
Majesty, that they might partake of the news he brought from Italy, which being
the Sovereign Queen of all Provinces, the Supreme Monarch of all the most
famous Kingdoms of the world, and the particular Seat of all the most reputed
Sciences, is not only looked upon by Apollo, and all the other favorable
Planets, but by all the fixed Stars, with those benign aspects which beget in
men the vivacity of a sprightly genius, born to new inventions of the quaintest
and rarest things, and the knowledge how to talk well, and do better, together
with the delightful vain of writing learnedly, and the easy apprehension of
all the Liberal Sciences. Apollo appearing then in the Hall, drew first the
Letters from out his bosom, which were brought to him by the Post from Italy,
and showing them to all the lookers on, said, My beloved Literati, the world
which never ceased in producing Princes of eminent virtue, and private men of
excellent Learning, will likewise for ever hereafter produce great store of the
like; for by Gods particular goodness, Learning, which by the inundation of
barbarous people, has some time been seen to go less, cannot notwithstanding
perish. Rejoice then all of you together with me, be blithe and cheerful; for
so the acceptable and happy news requires you to be, which I have now received
from Italy, where my most virtuous Francisco Maria della Rovere, Duke of Urbin,
and the Prince of all the modern Literati, perceiving that that sacred Justice,
which eternal God has pleased should inhabit upon earth, to the end that there
should no difference arise amongst men touching Meum and Tuum, and that it be
not suddenly lul'd asleep by the unfortunate labors of an infinite number of
Lawyers, who by their writings have buried the wholesome Laws in the ditches of
cautions, and confusions, so as it is now become prejuditial to that height, as
Suits at Law, may now be added as a fourth plague to the former three,
wherewith the living God is wont to scourge mankind; a punishment which
afflicting the mind, and consuming the wealth of whatsoever rich Patrimony is
more cruel then their War, Plague, or Famine: A disorder which, my beloved, is
the more harmful to human kind, for that though it be known, and complained of
by every one, yet has it been given over as an uncureable disease, nor was
there ever any Physician found yet, who durst undertake the amendment thereof;
but that God who by his inscrutable Judgments has suffered such a disorder to
reign thus long amongst men, now at last has out of his innate goodness which
suffers not mischiefs nor errors to reign long upon earth, raised up a new
Justinian, who has drawn sacred Justice, out of that obscurity and confusion,
wherein the unwary Lawyers by their imbroiled writing had thrown her: For the
Illustrious Francisco Mario della Rovere, has set forth a holy Edict, which
commands that no Advocate in pleading for his Clyent before any Judge of his
State, shall be suffered to alleadg any thing but the very Laws themselves,
Accursius his Gloss, the Comment of Bartolo, Baldo, Paolo de Castro, Giasone;
and in criminal affairs, Angelo de Maleficii, and some few others: This is so
excellent a Decree, my beloved, as I cannot but with tears call to mind, that
Lawsuits have been so inhumanely immortal in all Tribunals, as that more
disputes have been raised, then have been able to be decided in any one man's
lifetime. And yet every one knows, that even amongst the Turks (who are wise
in this point, though ignorant and without books they have been known to be
resolved and decided at one only Audience. Add to this, my beloved, that the
most pernicious disease of everlasting pleadings, which ought to have been
banished out of the Territories of all Princes who fear God, and covet their
peoples welfare; is for the final infelicity of man, become a dreadful and
mortal Merchandise of unprofitable men, who whilst they suck the vital blood
out of Artificers, husbandmen, Merchants, and others that are of service for
Commerce, and waste all their wealth; nothing is so much magnified in the
world, as the great incomes left by Advocates, Notaries, Sergeants, Proctors,
and Judges. His Majesty having said this, he went accompanied by an infinite
company of Vertuosi who had heard him, to the chief Temple of Pernassus;
whither being come, he beseeched God that he would grant many years of long
life to Francisco Mario, for the universal good, that he would fill the world
with Princes of like conditions, and that he would awake the like honorable and
holy thoughts in other earthly Potentates, as so wise a Prince had put in
execution in his happy Patrimony; for it was a misery and affliction not to be
endured by the best composed minds, to sea the administration of Justice
reduced to that confusion, as the common, more common, nay most common opinions
of private Doctors being more alleged at the bar, then the Authority of the
Law it self, Suits were grown so chargeable and so eternal, as it were better
for men to part with their patrimonies, then to defend it with much anguish of
mind before such cruel Harpyes.

The C. ADVERTISEMENT.
A more then usual sweet Odor issuing from the Delphick Library, Apollo goes
himself in person thither to discover the Miracle, and soon finds the occasion
of so great a novelty.

SOme six days since, an extraordinary and miraculous sweet Odor proceeded
from the Delphick Library, which increasing every day more and more, did very
much astonish the Vertuosi of this State: And not being able to guess at the
reason of so strange an accident, they earnestly requested Apollo that he would
discover it unto them. His Majesty being likewise moved at the novelty, went
the next morning early to the Library; and though the perfume of that Odor came
so generally dispersed from all parts of the Library, as the Literati could not
discern any particular place from which it proceeded; yet Apollo immediately
found out the very Fountains head from whence such Fragrancy did flow. And
going directly to the place, where, in an Urn of purest Oriental Crystal,
beset with Pearls and Rubies, the little less then divine writings of Seneca
the Morallist are kept, he first honored those happy Writings, took up the Urn
with both his hands, and then turning toward his Vertuosi, who thinking
themselves unworthy to behold Writing so exquisitely excellent, were on their
knees with head bowed toward the ground, My dearest Literati (said he) learn
from this strange fragrancy which you find does proceed from the immortal
labors of my beloved Anneus Seneca, that if by your late watchings you will
make your sanctified precepts savor well in the world, and will perfume your
persons with glorious Fame; you must, as Seneca did at last, live answerable to
your Writings, and do as you say.

The End of the Second Century.
THE Politic Touchstone.
CHAP. I. Why the Neapolitans are so strangely oppressed, and hardly treated by
the Spaniard.
EVer since it pleased Almighty God to give the Neapolitans into the power of
Pharaoh, as a severe punishment for their great treachery used to their former
Kings; the wary Kings of Spain did ordain by a Law, which has been ever
punctually observed since, that that unbridled horse which the State bears for
her Ensign, boasting that he can endure neither saddle nor bridle, should be
brought once every six months into the public Marketplace, and that exact
diligence should be used in choosing a formal College of Politic Farriers, who
should order whatsoever was thought necessary to tame so fierce, so inconstant,
and so seditious an animal, which has often chosen rather to be ridden by two
Kings at one and the same time, then by one. This unfortunate Steed was
yesterday led out of the Stable by the Spaniards who had the looking to him;
and because he was so consumed as he could not well stand upon his legs, he was
drawn with ropes into the Marketplace. It was a sad spectacle to see that
Steed which was formerly so glorious, become now so lean, as you might count
his bones; he was cruelly crest-fallen, and broken-winded, by reason of the
many blows he had given him, his nose was slit; yet the jealous Spaniards keep
shackles day and night upon his feet, a caveson upon his nose, a bit in his
mouth, a spectacle on his eyes, as if they were afraid of him, and certain to
receive quickly some great damage by him. These wise Farriers did diligently
consider this horses condition; and after having advised long about him, not
without much dispute, at last they concluded unanimously, that his rack should
be raised up a handful higher then ordinary, and that the third part of his
allowance of corn should be taken from him: Some moral Philosophers, and
therefore good men, happened to be present when this severe resolution was taken,
who being greatly moved to pity, to see him so extenuated; they asked the
Farriers why they were so cruel, as to diminish the food of that macerated
horse, which was reduced to such weakness, as he had nothing left but skin and
bone, and a little spirit, which could only keep him alive for some few weeks.
The wisest of these Farriers turning toward the Philosophers, told them in a
shameful manner, that they might have done much better in attending their
disputations about Entitie and Quidditie, then to reason of those politic
affairs whereof they were so very ignorant: That if it had fallen to their
share to have the government of this capricious beast, they would have found
their charity rewarded with kicking and biting, wherewith he had ofttimes very
unthankfully rewarded some of his most bountiful Masters; and would have been
thrown all broken and bruised into ditches: For it was the custom of that
fickle and seditious beast, to vex his Masters with all sorts of unruliness,
yea though they were never so good unto him, unless he were hardly used by
them, and brought by fasting, to that weak condition which they saw he was in:
And that to make right judgment of that horse, and how he ought to be
governed, they must not consider his lean sides, and weak legs, but the
lewdness of his genius, which was more fantastical, seditious, and capricious
now, and more given to love novelty then ever. And they further said, Woe to the
Spaniards, if the fierce Neapolitan horse had power and means to do that
mischief which he did fancy both night and day in that his paltery pate, which
was always naturally an enemy to the present Government.

All which things did make it appear clearly unto the world, that the present
Neapolitan oppressions proceed not from the cruelty of the Spanish Nations, nor
from the avarice of the Kings Officers, nor yet from the King of Spains
neglect; but from advised Counsel, it being great charity to bereave him by all
severe ways, of the means of doing ill, who could never be taught to do well,
by any good usage or courtesy. That they must therefore all confess, that the
detestable Cancer of the seditious Neapolitan dispositions could not be cured
by any better appropriated Medicine, than by the Corrosive Ointment of the
Spanish Severity.

Genua excuses her freedom in Pernassus.
FOr these many years last past, the Illustrious Liberty of Genua has not been
admitted to visit, nor to have domestical conversation with the renowned
Venetian Commonwealth, and other chaste Italian and Foreign Liberties: For
though she has formerly lived in Pernassus with a great repute of chastity,
yet she has much lost her reputation of late years by her too domestic
conversation with the perfidious Spanish Nation; the which (to the great loss
of her honor) she has not only accommodated with the best Lodgings of her
house, but has permitted her prime Nobility to serve her. For which disorders,
which in such a Lady are held to be very heinous, many have spoken freely of
her, That she has not only contracted too great a familiarity, with people who
seek to ensnare her chastity; but it is publicly said, that she has granted
things to be the Spaniards, which are exceeding prejudicial to her honor; and
her thirsting after the Spanish Gold is much talked of: An avarice which is as
proper to a base dishonest Whore, as it is altogether misbecoming a chaste
Madam. By which disorders it plainly appears, that so noble a Princess, who
before she lived so lewdly, was numbered amongst the loveliest and most
beautiful Commonwealths, is now become deformed in her members: For the Dorii's
Nose is grown four Inches longer, and the Spinola's right leg half a handful.
To this great inequality of members, the infinite shame is added, which is cast
upon her by men's public discourse, That her Citizens serve Spaniards for
Bawds; and things are so far proceeded, as there are some who do freely affirm
that the Kings of Spain would have been dishonest with this Lady; and that they
may know in what terms they stand with her, and what they may hope for from
her, they have some few days since, sent her a Love-Letter in form of a
Citation, by an Officer of theirs which they have in Italy, named Enriques
Gusman, Count de Fuentes, which they say did contain very exorbitant things and
which touched much upon her honor. By which all men perceive that the care and
affection which the Spaniards seem to bear to this Noble Lady, has nothing in
it of the Platonic, but is a mere lust to dominier over her.

Whereupon the renowned Liberty of Genua, as soon as she got so presumptuous a
Letter into her hands, first broke his nose that brought it with a Pantufle
which she took from off her foot; and then showed such resentment to the
impudent fellow that sent it, by way of words, and such willingness and
resoluteness, if n^ed should require, to come to action, as she has fully
regained that reputation amongst men, which without any fault of hers, she had
formerly lost. Whereupon so honorable a Lady, to give the world a more
particular account of her worthy actions, and chaste thoughts, has made it
plainly appear to all men, by her Ambassadors which she has sent to all the
Princes of Europe, that the domestic conversation which she holds with the
Spaniards, is not only for her own honor, and the advantage of her Citizens,
but very useful for Italy, wherewith her Interest is as nearly joined, as is
that of any other of her Potentates. For in former times, and now more then
ever, she has held, and does still hold the adverse Nation o^ Spain so oppressed
by change, and change upon exchange, and by exorbitant Use, as she does thereby
make more cruel war upon the Spaniards, than do the Hollanders and Zealanders
by their Fleets and Forces.

The Spanish Monarchy complains that her falsehoods are discovered.
IT is not known whether it were occasioned through the malice of any of the
French, or by chance, or as some have very much suspected, through the plotting
of that Nation which is so implacable an enemy to the French for these many
years, that the Royal Palace of the French Monarchy fell on fire, and so great
and fearful were the flames, as the neighboring Monarchies began to fear lest
that fire might end with the ruin of their States. So as every one for their
own concern, ran to quench the fire of their neighbors house. The English
(though naturally enemies to the French) brought with all speed the water of
their Thames; the Germans, those of the Mause and Rhein; the Venetians did
almost drain all their Marish grounds; and the most wise Dukes of Tuscany
hasted to quench that fire with their Arno, which wise men thought was to end
with an universal combustion. And truly it was strange to see, that the very
Monarchy of Spain her self, which was held to be so great an enemy to the
French, did bestir her self amongst other friends, to quench that fire, at
which it was generally believed she did rather desire to warm her self: In so
much as every one wondered to see how solicitous and charitable she was in
bringing thither not only the waters of her Tagus and Heber, but the very Ocean
it self, of which she is absolute Mistress, when the English and Hollanders
permit her to be so. For Politicians giving a sinister interpretation to the
Spaniards charity, would needs have it pernicious for the French, to admit in
their necessities, of aid from the Spaniards, who having been always mortal
enemies to the French, were rather to be esteemed the contrivers of the ruin
of that Kingdom, then zealous of its good; as being men who measuring the
actions of all that Reign, only with the Compass of self-concernment, do often
not admit of piety toward God, in what belongs unto the actions of Princes,
much less of charity toward men. And such Politicians became the more
abominable, for that it was plainly seen, that the Spaniards in their diligence
and charity of bringing water to that fire, did not only equal, but out-doe the
best friends that the French had. And that which was yet more miraculous, and
which won much honor to the Spanish Nation amongst simple men, was, that when
Flanders and Austria, her ancient Patrimonies, were cruelly pestered with the
fire of War, she had preferred the welfare of the French before charity to her
self. But no human help, no water whatsoever was able to quench any sparkle of
so terrible a fire, for all the diligence and remedies that could be had, the
flames of that bloody civil War did daily more and more increase. Wherefore the
best and most devout of the sillier sort of people began to listen to Politic
Records, and to suspect that the Spanish Monarchies Charity was wholly
Interest; which is indeed the Spaniards proper charity: Wherefore they resolved
to believe appearances no longer, but to look into the Barrels which the
Spaniards brought; and see what was in them. Wherein, instead of water to
quench the fire, they found them filled with Pitch, Oil, Turpentine, and
devilish dissension to increase it.

Some French Barons were found to use the like treachery, who appearing more
charitable then the rest, applied the self-same Barrels and materials which
were lent them by the Spaniards. Wherefore they were immediately put to death by
the justly offended French Monarchy, and were burnt in the same fire which they
had with such sedition and treachery fomented in their own Country? And the
Spaniards were not only forbidden further assistance, but were proclaimed to be
hypocrites by sound of Trumpet, and it was made known to all men by a
particular Edict of the French Monarchy, that if any one, at any time hereafter
should be induced to believe that it were possible for the Spaniards to have
any charity for the French, they should be held to be great Coxcombs: And that
if he should persist in his error after the first admonition, he should be tossed
in a blanket as a seditious malignant. 'Twas a wonder to see, that when the
Spaniards and aforesaid French forbore their said assistance the French
combustion, which was held by judicious men, to be unquenchable by human means,
ceased of it self; so as the famous golden Flowrede-Luces, formerly so trodden
under foot, sprung up more resplendant and glorious then before; and France,
which through many men's too much ambition, labored for above forty years under
intestine combustions, became peaceful and quiet in the twinkling of an eye.
Which made it appear clearly to all men, that the Spaniards were the first
Authors of that fire in France, which under specious pretenses of Religion and
charity, they would have made the world believe their intentions were to
quench. It Is said by all men, that the Spanish Monarchy retired her self into
her Royal Palace, and did not suffer her self for many days to be seen by any
one, giving her self over to a deep melancholy, and that not without shedding
abundance of tears, she freely confessed she would rather have lost two of her
best Kingdoms, then to see those her holy pretenses, whereby she had
oftentimes, much to her advantage, vented stinking Arsafetida, for Musk, and
Ambergrees, so quelled and derided. She thought she had lost her richest
Treasure, and the unexhaustable veins of gold and silver in Peru and the new
World, by being deprived of being ever able to paint white for black to the
common sort of people.

She thought it very hard for her to be reduced to that pass which she had
always seen the French to be, of winning Kingdoms barely by the sword: whereas
formerly she knew she had set the whole world on fire, only by her appearing
holy pretenses, in lieu of a formidable Army. She was very much grieved to have
lost so much credit amongst men, as she ran danger of not being believed in the
future, though she spoke truth, whereas formerly her false pretenses, and her
hypocrisy, were taken for sacred Truths, and perfect Devotion.

The Spanish Monarchy comes to Pernassus, and desires Apollo to be cured of an
Issue, but is dismissed by the Politic Physicians.
THough Apollo did not only give sudden order for the solemn entry of the
Spanish Monarchy, who came four months ago to this Court, but also for a
public Consistory of the Literati in the Royal Hall of Audience, where the
Muses were all to be present; yet was not the Ceremony performed til some two
days ago; for she spent four months time in agreeing with the Prince-Poets
touching the Titles that she should give to, and receive from every man; and in
what manner she should receive them, and be received by them in visits. Which
made the Vertuosi wonder, and bitterly bewail the condition of the present
times, which were infected with so much vanity: But the Vertuosi were more
afflicted when they heard that many learned Princes did openly forbid that
great Queen to visit them; affirming that they feared to receive some affront
from her; for they had received fresh Letters from Italy, wherein they were
advised by their friends, to be aware what they did in that point, for it was
the usual custom of Spaniards to visit people more to injure them, then honor
them; and that therefore they thought it a great piece of folly, instead of
shunning affronts, to wait for them at home, and receive them with cap in hand.
And though so potent a Monarchy, to the great wonder of all men, seemed more
close-handed in giving satisfaction to others in Titles, then in giving them
gold, she has notwithstanding received what greatest contentment she could
desire in point of Title from the Prince-Poets; and from all the potent
Vertuosi who mind realities more then vainglory. It Is true, that it has much
detracted from the reputation of so great a Queen, in this Court, to see, that
though she has great need of friends, she appears so indifferent in alienating
those who desire nothing of her but good words. Every one noted it for a great
singularity, that when the Master of the Ceremonies told her that that nice
punctilio which she stood upon was hateful, fit for a barbarous King, but far
unworthy so great a Queen as she, she should in a rage reply, That she wondered
at him, and at all Masters of Ceremony; since he seemed not to know that a
Prince without gravity, was like a Peacock without a tail.

It is impossible to write with what curiosity of desire, so great a Princess
was expected and looked upon by these Literati: For people flockt from all the
parts of Pernassus, to behold that powerful Queen, who with such strange
success, had in so short a time united great Kingdoms under her, and made so
formidable an Empire of them, as there is not any one Prince in the world, who
has not for fear of her put on a Coat of Male, and an Iron Brestplate. This
Queen attended by a numerous Navy, arrived happily some months ago in the
Island of Lesbos, and the Lady Republic of Genua lent her her famous Haven
gratis, though by a certain ancient prerogative, the Family of the Dorii
received a great Rent for it. The Spanish Monarchy is young in respect of that
of France, England, and the other ancient Monarchies of Europe, but of a much
larger body then any of them, and disproportionably great for her years: whence
it is believed, that if she should continue to grow as long as humane bodies
use to do, she would become so great a Gyantess, as she would arrive at that
immeasurable height of Universal Monarchy, at which the Roman Monarchy arrived.
But the accidents which attend State Affairs, say for certain, that she will
grow no greater; and that she is grown in her tenderest years to the utmost
height that ever she will be at. Which is clearly proved by this undeniable
Argument, That she has more ado to grow an inch in these present times, then
two handfuls heretofore. This powerful Lady is of so ssallow a complexion, as
she shadows upon the Moor: And therefore is rather proud in her behavior, then
grave; and all her actions relish much more of cruelty, than severity:
Wherefore having never been able to learn the so necessary Art for Princes of
pardoning; it is that which in the opinion of many, does most impede her
growth: For boasting her self of nothing more then in being called Doctor of
the Science of knowing how to cut off the heads of those detested Poppies,
which in her State-Gardens overtop the rest, she joys it should be said, That
in this Art she has exceeded that great Tarquin, who was the first Inventer of
such a Secret. Being then so bold and resolute in her severities, she is very
costive in conferring favors, which proceed but very seldom from her: And she
is so arrogant in those few which she confers, as they are not very acceptable:
yet in outward show she is wholly composed of civility and complement; but who
can pry into her heart with Politic Spectacles, will find nothing therein but
pride, avarice, and cruelty; in so much as they who have conversed longest with
her, tell us that no Princess gives better words, and worser acts. Whence it
is, that taken as a Mistress, men like her very well, but as a Sovereign very
ill. Her hands are extraordinary long, which she turns whither she lists, and
where it makes most for her advantage, without distinguishing between friend
and foe, kindred or strangers; she has Harpye's nails, and so hard and
tenacious fingers, as they never let go what once they grasp. Her eyes are
black, but very sharp-sighted; a squint-eyed look, wherewith whilst she seems
to look fixedly upon one, she is very intent in observing another (a very
dangerous thing for Princes) for having of late years her face turned toward
Algiers, she fixed her eyes upon Marselles: And much greediness is seen in her
eyes, for she sees nothing with them, which she does not in her heart desire:
So as those who are most speculative say, that this Queen does thirst
immoderately after what is another man's, and that she never had friend, whom she
did not soon make her slave.

All which things witness to the world, that she is fitter to command slaves,
than freemen: For she expects more then any other Princess, to be served not
only by her Subjects, but even by her friends. She stands so much upon her
punctilio, as she will not be civil, even on good occasions which have often
times come home unto her. She exceeds all past and present Princes, in knowing
how to cover all her diabolical Interests with a cloak of double Brocato: And
though she be every day seen to do unhandsom things, yet she boasts of nothing
more then of her conscience: Wherefore the French, who have been so often
deceived under the color of holy pretenses; have at their own cost learnt at
last; then to take up arms and get on horseback, when with her beads in her
hand, they see her treat of business full of Religious pretenses, and charity
toward her beloved neighbor; she is so skilful in riding, as she has not
only successfully tamed the Noble Neapolitan Coureer, but the very untoward
Spanish Mules, who are so naturally given to lay about them with their heels.
She is of so much more suspicious a genius then all other Queens, as setting
her own Nation aside, she has declared her distrust of all others that are
subject unto her, though she has found them upon all occasions to be very
faithful: Which makes so much for her prejudice, as those who mind the worlds
affairs, say, that were it only out of this respect, it is impossible for her
to grow greater. And this is occasioned, because no Queen loves less to be
loved, and more to be feared by her subjects then she: And therefore
Politicians think it a great piece of folly in her, to believe so firmly that
she can make people adore her, by ill usage: yet she allures people to serve
her by these hateful customs; for her great store of wealth is that Loadstone
which violently draws the souls, even of such unto her, whose duty it being to
abhor her, ought to seek her lessening. She is very accurate in petty affairs;
but in matters of great importance, no Princess suffers her self to be more
easily deceived. She shows a great deal of wisdom and understanding in arguing
and resolving upon matters of weight; but be it either out of her innate
slowness, or by the cunning of her State Officers (who are greedy Merchants of
great affairs) or for that she thinks nothing is done with decorum, which is
not long looked for, she is so slow in putting her resolves into execution, as
the face of affairs altering with the times, resolutions which are at first
wisely taken, prove unfortunate. She is therefore held by all men, to be better
at ordering of plots and business, then in the managing of Arms, wherein she
is very hearty, greatly constant, and does strangely undergo all hardships, but
is so little resolute, as her too great circumspection has many times the face
of fear: So as she appears fitter to keep States, then to acquire them; and
many singular men laugh at her, for that she will regulate all her actions by
certain sound and mature advice, not leaving any thing to the hands of that
Fortune or Fate, which has so favored the French, and made them so glorious,
when they have showed much boldness, but little advisedness in their actions.
And some think that this happens because she is as sparing of her own blood, as
greedy of that of other people; which makes the most understanding Warriors
laugh at her for aspiring at Universal Monarchy, without fighting: The which
she does, because being used to make great acquisitions by alliances, she
abhors the fearful French fashion, of purchasing other peoples Patrimonies at
the price of her own blood. Being therefore more advised then adventurous, she
is more prejudicial to her enemies in peace, than in war: Wherefore the French
who have hitherto lived with her in a supine carelessness, have after their so
many calamities, learnt at last, to double-bolt their doors when they have made
peace with the Spaniards. She is very careless of her own riches, but so greedy
of what is another, as she cares not to desert her own patrimonial estate, so
she may come by those of others. She is of so deep thoughts, and of so
concealed a soul, as it lies not in the skill of men to find out her ends: Nay
Linceus himself with his acute eyesight cannot so much as penetrate the
outmost film thereof: Whereas short-sighted men can see even into the bowels of
the French, and of the men of other Nations.

But he who will judge of this great Ladies genius and customs, must believe
her to be in all her negotiations clean contrary to what she appears to be
outwardly. And although amongst the virtues that have been named, she has many
enormous vices, yet she has the good fortune to have all things in her, held
virtues, and admired for such; wherefore many wise Princes think it an honor
to them to imitate her even in her vices. She is of a strong constitution,
which makes many men think her to be long-lived: She suffers only in having her
members so far distant, a thing which does infinitely weaken so great a body:
And though by the assistance of the Genoweses, and her alliance with the Duke
of Savoy, she endeavors to unite them; yet does she but little good therein,
by reason of the diversity of Interest of these two Potentates. But so great a
Princess is prejudiced by nothing more, then by her own Spanish
State-Ministers, which she makes use of in all great employments, wherein they
carry themselves so proudly, and with such hateful haughtiness, as they will
not be only honored as men, but even adored as Gods. An impertinency which
has made the Spanish Government tedious and nauseous, not only to the Italians
and Flemmish, but even to the very Spaniards themselves. All that behold so
powerful a Queen, wonder to see that she should all her lifetime be troubled
with Leeches, and those for the most part of Genua; And some of them are so
great as good big Eels. And it is not known whether her not shaking them off
proceeds from impotency, from negligence, or from the destiny of great Princes,
to whom it is always fatal to have these ugly animals suck out their very
life-bloud.

This potent Princess being come into the Royal Hall before Apollo, made her
left arm be untied by some of her servants, and showing it naked to Apollo, and
the whole College of Literati, spoke thus: Lord and Father of Learning! this
which you see, is that stinking issue of Flanders, which the French, Germans,
and some Italian Princes who seem to be my friends, and that unbowel'd
beyond sea Renegado made in me so many years ago, for the jealousies they had
of me. I confess that the before named Princes had reason to be jealous of me,
when after the death of Henry the second, they saw France fallen into the
calamity of infant Kings, and that I, in their minority, sought to sow discord
in that Kingdom: Now that there is no more cause for these suspicions, and that
(I do not blush to say it) I have been sentenced to pay charges in the great
contention which I had with the French, and particularly with that mad Prince
of Bearne, I desire your Majesty that so troublesome an issue may be closed up,
since every one sees that it is become so enraged a canker by reason of the
abundance of humors that have confluence thither, as I wish to God it may not
prove my ruin. I did not pass into Italy merely out of mine own ambition, nor
had I so immoderate a thirst (as my enemies affirm) to command it all. Every
one knows that I was called in, and haled by mere force, by the Italian Princes
own selves, to free them from the fear of being Lorded over by the French: And
there is none in Europe that does not know, that I lose so much of my
principal, every year in the States which I hold in Italy, as they serve but to
weaken and oppress me. Happy had it been for my Spanish Palace, which I would
have tiled over with Silver and Massy Gold, if I had never meddled with the
Italians, a double-dealing people, full of fallacies and interests, and who are
only good to Imbarque people in dangerous businesses without biscuit, and then
to abandon them in their greatest necessities; professing nothing more openly,
then to take Crafish out of their holes with other men's hands. And I strangely
wonder why Italy, which (as every one knows) has suffered her self to be
overrun by all Foreign Nations, should now make such profession of chastity to
me, as she cannot see me move never so little, but she is afraid I should
bereave her of the honor of her Liberty: And though the greatness which the
Kingdom of France is at present in, does secure Italy, and all the aforesaid
Princes from the fear they have of my power; yet, if your Majesty shall be so
pleased, I am ready to give security to every one de non offendendo; provided
this my so troublesome issue may be closed up.

The Issue was forthwith by order from his Majesty, very diligently considered
by the Politic Physicians, and having held a careful Council thereupon, they
said, That it being clearly seen that the Spanish Monarchy was affected with a
continual ardent thirst of Rule, she had need of that issue, by which those
gross humors might be purged away, which fell upon her stomach from Peru, and
occasioned that unquenchable thirst. And these able Physicians considered, that
if the aforesaid Monarchy had not had that issue, it was apparently dangerous
that the pernicious humors of Peru might mount to the head of Italy, to the
manifest ruin of her so principal Members, which remain as yet unviolated; And
that the Monarchy of Spain might fall into a Dropsy of Universal Monarchy: For
which inconveniences, they said excellent provision was had by this issue of
Flanders; which ought to be kept open, whilst Peru did subminister such
pernicious humors to the Kingdom of Spain.

She was much displeased with this resolution, wherefore, greatly incenst, she
said, Sir, If by the malignity of others I must so shamefully consume away by
administering ointment to this Canker, which my enemies term a diversive issue;
others who least believe it, may pechance bring clouts to it. The meaning of
this was soon understood by the French, English, and Italians, who replied,
That they feared nothing less: For they sent but the scum of their States to
Flanders, whereas the Spaniards spent their gold, and very life-bloud therein.
For, to secure themselves from the formidable power of Spain, and from the
Spaniards ambition, which they found had no Orison; the English, French,
Germans, and Italians, were forced answerable to Tacitus his Aphorism.
Consiliis and Astu res externas moliri, armaprocul habere.

A Secretary of Monsieur de Guise is punished for having spoken amiss.
MOnsieur de Guise his Secretary, speaking yesterday with some French Barons of
the late Tumults in France, as he mentioned his Masters party, called it the
holy League; which when Apollo heard, he caused him to have the Strappado given
him thrice in public, and made him be told he might learn to put a difference
between a Holy League, and a devilish Rebellion.

The Spaniards endeavor the getting of Savioveda, but in vain.
SInce the ill advised Princes of Italy made use of the Spanish Pickax, to take
the French nail out, which was fixed in the Table of Millan, which Ax entered so
far into the Table it self, as it was never able to be got out by any
whatsoever Pincers; all the Potentates of Europe, and more particularly the
Princes of Italy, who were aware, that the Spaniards, after having inslaved
Millan, did openly aspire to get the absolute Dominion of all Italy; to the end
that they might secure the remaining Liberty that was left them; they made an
agreement amongst themselves, that once every five and twenty year, the Chain
which the Spaniards forged for the Italian slavery, should be exactly measured
by people purposely deputed thereunto. And coming not many days ago to the act
of measuring, the Italian Princes found much to their amazement, that the so
hateful Chain was increased by five prejudicial Links: The politic Smiths were
immediately sent for, who very diligently took test, or say of the Iron which
was added to the Chain, and they found that the first Link was made at
Piombine, the second at Finale, the third at Correggio, the fourth at
Portolungone, and the last at Monaco. The Princes wondered exceedingly hereat,
and many of them were ashamed of themselves, to find that by their supine
blockheadishn^s, the Spaniards had increased the Chain of the Italian slavery
much more in time of peace, then they would have done with four Armies in time
of War. They were therefore so incensed against the Spaniards for these
exorbitant novelties, as they freely told them, that if they would not keep
themselves within the bounds of honesty and modesty, in case the Italian Files
were not sufficient to reduce that woeful Chain to its due measure, they would
make use of those of France; and if they could not thereby compass their ends,
they would bring enough from Germany and England; and that if put to despair,
they would provide themselves of those excellent damask blades which are made
in Turkey.

Whilst the Italian Princes were in this dispute, a Post came to them dispatched
in all have from Italy, advertising them that the Spaniards were hammering
another Link in Savioneda, to add unto the Chain of their slavery. At the news
whereof the State of Venice straight ways threw open her Arsenal, and all the
Princes of Italy hasted to take up arms: The Warlike French Nation commanded
her Nobility to get on horseback; the Germans put themselves in order to pass
over the Mountains; numerous Fleets of English, Hollanders, and Zealanders,
hasted toward the Straits of Gebraltar; when just as the whole world was up in
arms, a new Post came with the joyful and certain news, that the Spaniards had
done their utmost endeavor to make the important Link of Sabioneda; but that
they had lost their labor; for as they were sodering it, it knapt in two.

Sir Thomas Moore, an Englishman, asks Apollo when Her^sies will cease.
SIr Thomas Moore, that Englishman, who the very first day that he was received
into Pernassus, was honored with the Title of singular and holy Literato, and
who lives much afflicted in this Court, being perpetually cruciated by reason
of the wicked heresies which proceed from his Country, and from elsewhere; and
which having chased true Christian piety from out the hearts of men, has put
both holy and profane things into a horrid confusion; this singular man's
affliction grew so really great, as he was perpetually seen to bemoan the
heresies of the seduced people, and the seducers open Atheism. This so famous
Personage came yesterday before Apollo, and earnestly desired his Majesty that
he would let him know when the present disorders and heresies which were crept
into the Christian Religion, and which were invented and sown by wicked men,
either out of ambition of getting, fear of loss, or desire of revenge, should
have an end.

To this Apollo suddenly answered; You shall see (my beloved Moore) the
mischiefs of the present heresies cease, when the Spaniards contenting
themselves with their own Spain, will cause no further jealousies in other
Princes: And when the House of Austria resting content with her ancient
Patrimony of Auspurg in Germany, shall bound her ambition of dominiering over
the whole world. For the present Heresies being nothing else but a League of
Potentates, against the greatness of the House of Austria, the evils will not
cease before the true occasion thereof be taken away.

The French desire Apollo that he will teach them the true Spanish Perfume for
Gloves.
GReat and eternal is the emulation between the two Warlike and Potent Nations
of France and Spain. There is no singularity in France, which is not
ambitiously coveted by the Spaniards; nor are the French ever quiet, till they
have made themselves Masters of those rarities, which they see Spain endued
with. And because the Perfuming of Gloves with Ambergrees, is a particular
invention and gift of the Spaniards, the French have left nothing untried, how
to come to the like perfection. They have been at great cost in providing
themselves of Musk, Ambergrees, Civet, and of all the odoriferous drugs which
come from the East; but all in vain: For neither has their expense, nor their
diligence been able to make them obtain their desired end. Yet before they
would give over their business as desperate, the Noble French Nation had
recourse to Apollo's Majesty, who is the bringer forth of all Aromaticks, whom
they earnestly desired, that he would vouchsafe to teach the French the true
Spanish perfume, wherewith to dress Amber-gloves. It Is very certain that Apollo
was not seen to laugh so heartily at the downfall of unfortunate Icarus, as he
did at the request of these Frenchmen. He commanded the Priests that were by
him, to smell to their hands, and tell him of what they smelt. The Priests
obeyed, and told his Majesty they smelt very well. Then said Apollo to the
French, Nature always helps men's defects, with somewhat of rare virtue; and
that therefore she had given the Monopoly of making sweet Gloves to that Nation
whose hand did stink insufferably.

The Spanish Monarchy goes to the Oracle of Delphos, to know whether she shall
ever obtain the Universal Monarchy of the whole world; and receives a negative
answer.
THe Spanish Monarchy parted very privately from Pernassus yesterday morning two
hours before day, in a Coach with six horses; carrying along with her only some
of her chief Court-confidents, which caused great jealousies. And the French
Monarchy was particularly so moved hereat, as she presently took Post, and
followed after the Spanish Monarchy, to know the reason of this Voyage; and
overtook her just as she arrived at Delphos, at Apollo's Oracle. Before which
the Spanish Monarchy presenting her self, those who were then present, say,
that she made this supplication unto it.

O Eternal and resplendent Lamp of the world, Heavens right Eye, which art not
only the producer of day, but of all good that befalls mankind! Thou know
that all my thoughts have for this long time been set upon the Universal
Monarchy, which only the Romans arrived unto: Thou know what effusion of
blood and treasure it has cost me to compass my intent. The watchings, sweat,
and cunning industry which I have used to atchieve so important a design, are
only known to thee; and thou likewise know, that by the valor of my Nation,
the dexterousness of mine own wit, and my moneys efficacy, it is not many years
since I sowed such troubles and civil Wars in France, and whereupon I had
chiefly grounded my hopes, as that I was near compassing my desire; nothing
remained to overcome all difficulties, but to join Naples to Millan; which if I
shall at any time be able to do, I may safely say I have done the deed. But
since, were it either through my fatal misfortune, through the impossibility of
the business, or through the power of my cruel enemies who appeared against me,
the scandallous revolutions which I have been so long a plotting, and sowing
amongst the French, are in despit^ of me, turned on the sudden into that peace
and tranquillity which it breaks my very heart to think on: That I may not
utterly ruin those my people, whom I have almost brought to utter desolation,
by this undertaking which I propounded unto my self, and that I may be no
longer the discourse of people, I now present my self before your Majesty,
humbly beseeching you to give me a clear answer, whether that Universal
Monarchy which I have so much set my heart upon, and which is the only scope of
all my actions, be by the will of heaven destined to me and to my Nation. And
this I desire to know, to the end that if the business prove impossible, I may
appease my self, and set my mind in quiet; or if it be feasible, I may
encourage my Spaniards in the possibility thereof; for to tell thee the truth,
who see the hidden thoughts of men, by the so many hardships and sufferings
which I have undergon by sea and land, by the so many conspiracies and
counter-plots, which have been framed against me by my implacable enemies, and
which are framing faster now then ever, I begin to be totally discouraged.

After this request the Temple shook, and a great Earthquake followed
immediately after; when these words proceeded from the mouth of Apollo's
Minister.

The Universal Monarchy shall again return to the Noble Italian Nation, when
she shall have banished all those intestine discords which have made her a
slave to other Nations.

This sad answer being given, the Spanish Monarchy went much afflicted out of
the Temple, and was very much astonished; and when she saw the French Monarchy
present her self before her, she first past usual complements with her, then
taking her by the hand, drew her aside; and having acquainted her with what
answer she had received from the Oracle, she told her, That since the Universal
Monarchy was by the will of heaven to return again to the Italian Nation,
France would as soon make trial of new Julius Cesar's, as Spain should do of
second Scipio's: That therefore to secure themselves, she thought the b^st
course would be to divide Italy between them. She offered to teach her the same
receipt which (as she affirms) she had made happy trial of in the Indies, by
which they would so secure themselves from the Italian Nation, as nothing
should remain in the world, of that wicked generation of men, but the bare name.

Suffer me (replied the French Monarchy) to forget that unfortunate division
that my King, Lodovick the twelfth, made lately with you; and we will then
speak further of this business: For the French are not deceived the second time
so easily, as I perceive you fancy they are. Then, for the receipt which you
propose unto me to secure our selves from the Italians, keep it I beseech you
for your self. For, to rout out men from out the world, to enjoy the naked
earth without inhabitants (as it has been your practice to do in the Indies)
is a politic precept which is not found in the French Reason of State. I have
at my cost, learned to content my self with a little, provided it be good. And
therefore I ground my greatness more upon the multitude of my Subjects, then
upon the largeness of my Dominion. And provided that my Frenchmen enjoy some
satisfaction in this world, I am content that others may do the like. The
business of agreement concerning Italy, will require time; and you know by
experience, that purgations taken to preserve ones self from apprehended
malladies, do often bring them the faster on. I will be bold to tell you, with
that liberty which is proper to my nature, that the business of subjugating
whole Italy, is not so easy a thing as I perceive you persuade your self it
is. For when I had the same caprichio, it proved pernicious to me; wherefore I
believe it will prove little better to you: For to my great loss, I have
learned, that the Italians are a sort of people who watch always how to escape
out of our hands, and which are never tamed under foreign slavery* And though
like crafty Apes, they transform themselves into the customs of those Nations
which rule over them, yet they preserve their ancient hatred concealed inwardly
in their heart. And they are expert Merchants of their slavery; for they make
you believe they are become good Spaniards, by only pu^ng on a pair of Sicilian
slops, and us that they are become Frenchmen, by putting on a Cambrick band:
But when they come to the point of business, they show more teeth then a
thousand saws. They are very like those greedy dames, who by their alluring
smiles, soundly fleece their Sweet-hearts, without ever coming to the
conclusive point which they would be at. Believe me therefore, who have paid
dearly for my learning of it, that you shall reap nothing but loss and shame in
going about to subdue Italy.

Philip the second, King of Spain, after some dispute concerning his Title,
enters in great State into Pernassus.
PHilip the second, that potent King of Spain, who came two months ago to this
Court, was not permitted to make his public entry till yesterday: The reason
why, was because in some Triumphant Arches which were built for him with great
magnificence, by the Spanish Nation, these words were written.

Philippo secundo, Hispaniarum, utriusque Siciliae, and Indiarum Regi
Catholico, Italiae Pacis Auct^ri felicissimo.

At which words the greatest part of the Italian Princes being displeased, they
desired they might be cancelled, saying they would by no means acknowledge that
peace from the Spaniards, which they bought with ready moneys from the
Hollanders and Zealanders.

This Aromatic business suffered a long dispute; and though the Italian
Princes did sufficiently prove that the present Peace of Italy ought not to be
owned from any good intention in the Spaniards, who would have wholly overrun
it, had it not been for that great diversion; yet in the greatest heat of this
contention, the Queen of Italy with her wonted wisdom quenched the fire. For
having summoned all her Princes together, she bad them leave ostentation and
boasting to the Spaniards, and that minding realities, they should not stick to
feed them with smoke. The Cavalcata was the stateliest that was ever seen in
Pernassus, both for the number and quality of Princes who came thither to
favor and honor that great King; who was placed amongst those Monarchs who
have been held famous in the world, more for their wisdom and sagacity in
peace, then for their valor shown in War. And therefore the Impressa which he
bore in his chief Standard, which was a writing Pen, afforded much wonder to
the Literati; with which Pen, as is fully witnessed by all Historians, he had
caused greater ruin and hurleyburleys in France, and wheresoever else he had
occasion to use it, then his Father Charles the fifth could have done with all
the Cannons of Europe. This Impressa was much commended by all the College of
the Vertuosi; Writers having attributed it to great honor, that a Pen in the
hand of one that knew how to use it, had done such remarkable things. So great
a King is always treated in Pernassus, alla Grande, for even the chiefest
Monarchs of Europe have thought it an honor to serve him: In so much as, as he
was under the Barbers hands the next day after his entry, the Queen of England
held the basin to his neck, and the warlike King of France, Henry the fourth
thought it great glory that he was able to wash his head; which he did with
such dexterity, as if he had been bred up to that exercise; though some
Malignants say it was without soap, and with very strong lie. This great
Monarch was presented by all the Vertuosi of Pernassus, with many pieces of
Poetry, and other elaborat Writings, which he rewarded very liberally. He gave
twenty crowns in Gold to a Literato who presented him with a solid Discourse,
wherein he showed how the Noble Parthenope, and the whole flourishing Kingdom
of Naples, which is now brought to utter desolation, by the plundering of
soldiers, Judges lewdness, by the Barons pilling and polling, and by the
general ransacking of the Viceroys, who are sent from Spain to grow rich
there, might be brought to its ancient glory and splendour, and gave the
discourse to his Confessor, and willed him to have a care of it, as of that
which was written very highly* But he gave twelve thousand crowns a year Rent
to an excellent Politician, who gave him a long Treaty; but clean contrary to
the other, wherein was discust what way might be taken to afflict that Kingdom
of Naples much more then it is now, and how it might be reduced to such
calamity and misery, as that generous Steed without or saddle or bridle, which
the City of Naples gives for her Impresse, might be brought to bear a
pack-saddle and a heavy burden patiently, nay even to draw in a Cart; and
moreover he made him a Grandee of Spain, affirming that it was discreetly
written according to the true terms of good Policy.

All Princes, Commonwealths, and States, are justly weighed in the Scales by
Lorenzo de Medici.
SInce it is clearly seen, that the Commonwealth of Rome, after the acquisition
which she made of whole Italy, could in a short space arrive at that Universal
Monarchy, which was, and is so famous, and to which many ambitious Princes have
since in vain aspired: The Empire and Kingdoms which were afterward built out
of the ruins of so great a Monarchy, came to a great contest, Whether it were
possible to hinder that Potentate who should be suffered to grow to such a
greatness of stature and strength, as that he was not to be counterpoised by
anyone single other Prince, as the Commonwealth of Rome could never be, after
she had once got to be Mistress of Italy, from arriving in a short time at
Universal Monarchy.

Since it is evidently known by many occasions which have happened, that peoples
aid and succor are but vain hopes, and woeful remedies, by reason of the
diversity of Interests, and infinite jealousies, which use to reign amongst
Colleagues; and the Empires and Kingdoms which arose in the world after the
ruin of the Roman Empire, to the end that they might shun those calamities and
dissolutions which those Potentates underwent, who were oppressed by the Roman
Power, did wisely make an agreement, that all the Princes of Europe should meet
together every fifteenth year, and that their Forces should be weighed, and a
due counterpoise and allay should be given to him who should be found to be
grown to such a greatness, as might prove dangerous to his neighbors.

Many great wits were propounded for the honorable employment of this poysing;
but for above these hundred last years, it has always been discharged by the
Princely House of Medici, and particularly by the great Lorenzo. At which
Prerogative, though many thought the Pope was highly offended, and the Venetian
Senate, who have been always as watchful at least, if not more, to maintain the
power of Potentates equal as well in Italy, as elsewhere, as Lorenzo, or any of
the Florentines, yet all Historians do agree that the weight of this business
was bequeathed to Lorenzo.

The first day of August then, all the Princes and Potentates of Europe met at
Phocides, to be present at the important affair of having perfect knowledge of
their own actions, and (that which imports more by much in matters of State) of
those of others. By ancient and just prerogative the Aristocratical Monarchy of
the Apostolic Sea, was put first into the Scales; and because the weight
thereof did not exceed six millions of pounds the last fifteen years, and now
it was found to weigh seven millions and a half, every one knew that the
addition of the Dukedom of Ferrara was the occasion thereof: And then a vail
being taken off, the sacred sharp edged sword appeared, shining as clear as the
Sun amidst spiritual and temporal Authority. And because a thing of so great
esteem cannot be weighted by the Scales of humane judgment; it was honored,
adored, and admired only by the minds of all men. Next to this, the Roman
Empire was brought to the Scales by the seven Princes Electors; which was found
in the old books to have weighed seventy millions of pounds. But her healthful
complexion being spoiled by the irregular living of many of her Emperors, which
made her be dreaded by every one; she is fallen into such dangerous sicknesses,
as after a long Quartane Ague has terminated in a Hectic Fever, which has
so macerated her, as nothing is seen to remain in her in this our age, but skin
and bones. Yet though she be so much lessened in Revenue, she makes a fair
appearance by the stately motion of her body. Moreover, to the end that her
intrinsecal imperfections may not be known, good people have much imbellished
her outwardly, and honested her with the ancient Title of August, and the
Majestical name of Caesar. But when she came to the Scales, she was found to be
altogether empty within; no feather being so light as the name of a Prince
without authority, is idle. The weight therefore of the Roman Empire did not
exceed 480 pound; and this redounded certainly to the infinite shame of the lay
Electors, who were thought to be those that by their cunning had brought her to
that unfortunate condition: For the common opinion was, that they had wrought
it so, as those Cities, and States which they themselves could not enjoy,
should by rebelling against the Empire, vindicate their Liberty; to the end
that those Emperors might not have power to regain those States by force of
arms, which they had possessed themselves of with so much perfidiousness: So as
to the miserable example of the vicissitude of humane affairs, the formerly
dreaded Roman Empire, has wickedly wasted her ancient Dominions, by her
Subjects avarice and ambition, and is now reduced into a Lodging, with the
miserable salary of seven ducats a month; which is given her rather by way of
recognition and alms, than as any due tribute: In so much as the House of
Austria, is forced to maintain the Imperial dignity (which is now brought to so
low a condition) out of her own Patrimonial Estate.

And though this so great misery moved commiseration in many Princes; yet those
who did remember the Henrie's insolences, the cruelty of the Fredericks, the
seditions, impieties, and plunderings used by many other Emperors in Italy,
affirmed freely, that it was not the rapacity of the Electors, nor the Germans
infidelity; but that it was the great wisdom of all the Princes of Europe, who
for the good of the public peace, cut the talons, and plucked the chief
feathers of the Eagle, which had always made profession to live by rapine; and
which made her self believe that all the people of Europe, like so many tame
pigeons were her prey. And it was observed by many, that the Princes of Italy
did very much rejoice to see the Roman Empire reduced to so great ruin, as
those who remembered what hard usage they had often received from thence in
Italy.

Then was the flourishing and warlike Nation of France brought to the Scales by
her famous Peers; a apiece Edifice, of five hundred and fifty miles extent
on every side, full of an infinite well armed Nobility on horseback, who do not
only maintain peace at home, but make so great a King formidable to all
Nations; where are seen great abundance of sacred Personages, which render her
religious; of Learned men who do beautify her; of Merchants and Artificers who
enrich her; and of Husbandmen who do make her abound in all good things. But
nothing makes the beholders wonder more, then to see that the Kingdom of France
is a Sea which is sailed upon, and a Land which is sowed by all Wines. The
ancient weight of this famous Kingdom, was twenty millions of pounds; but when
she was weighed the last fifteen years, by reason of the great calamities she
was put into by some of her disloyal Barons, she reached not to twelve
millions. And at this present she does not only equal, but exceed her weight,
in the best of her former times; for she weighs 25 millions, a thing which all
men have much wondered at; in so much as the Spaniards put their Spectacles upon
their noses, and did observe very punctually, whether the weights were just or
no. Since Bressia is added to the ancient Kingdom of France, given unto her by
the Duke of Savoy; which because it flanks the City of Lions, has increased
her weight above one million.

Next the many Kingdoms of Spain were put into the Scale by the Spanish
Grandees. And to the great amazement of those old men that remembered that some
sixscore years before those Kingdoms were but meanly esteemed of; the weight
came to twenty millions: And they assured themselves, that by the addition of
so many other States which were yet to be put into the Scales, she would not
only equal, but exceed the greatest weight of the French Monarchy.

They did then forthwith put into the Scales, the flourishing Kingdom of
Naples, which was believed would add two millions to the weight; but did take a
million and a half from the weight thereof. At which the Spaniards being much
astonished, said, that Lorenzo had either used some cosenage, or else the
scales of necessity must not be just; since it was not to be believed that the
weight should grow lesser by addition. And growing into great choler, the
Spaniards said that the Medici should do well to be once quiet, and not add new
offenses, and things hateful to the Spaniards, to the insufferable distastes of
Flanders, Marselles, and Aldighiera. Lorenzo, without any the least alteration,
replied to these resentful words, That his scales were just; but that the
Neapolitans and Millaneses did not add any weight thereunto, being so far
distant from the strength of Spain, and full of people who did so unwillingly
undergo the Dominion of Foreigners; and that the Indies were void of
Inhabitants; that the love and multitude of subjects, the fertility and
conjunction of States, was that which weighed down his scales. Then answering
with some more show of anger to the particular of Flanders, Marselles, and
Aldighiera, Lorenzo said, that as long as the Spaniards would keep themselves
within the bounds of honesty, they should always be beloved, honored, and
served by his gre^ Dukes of Tuscany; but that they were very much deceived, if
they thought they should ever be able to draw the Medici out of Florence, as
they had done the unfortunate Sforz out of Millan: That States could not be
deposited into the hands of Princes, as moneys were, with a mind to recall them
in a fitting time: And that the merit of any gift, how great soever, was lost
when one went about to reassume it. Then the Princes, who heard words begin to
multiply, interposed themselves between Lorenzo and the Spaniards; and breaking
off that hot discourse, bad them proceed on to the scales.

The Spaniards put then thereinto the Dukedom of Millan, which withdrew
likewise a million from the weight; whereat the Spaniards were so astonished,
as they would not put Flanders into the scales, fearing to receive some further
affront. 'Twas said, that if they would have put in the Indies, they might have
done some good, but not such miracles as some wide mouths speak of, who speak
of millions of crowns with as much ease as Pigeons eat pease.

The English were next called in, who put their Kingdom into the scales,
formidable for the strength of its miraculous situation, for the mountains
wherewith she is environed, serve for walls, made like bulwarks by Gods own
hand; and the sea supplying the place of a deep ditch, makes her a redoubted
Kingdom, by reason of the commodity she has to assail others, and the
insufferable difficulties which they mee^ with, who will assault her. This
Kingdom the last fifteen years, weighed fifteen millions; but at the present it
comes short of nine; the occasion of this decrease, to boot with the Apostasy
of that Kingdom, was said to be because the King is of a foreign Nation, a
stranger to the Kingdom, and therefore must require some time to sit fast in
the saddle, and to get his foot into the stirrup of that his new Kingdom: The
English to add to the weight of their Nation, would put the Kingdom of Scotland
into the scales; when all the Scots Nobility appeared with their swords drawn,
and boldly said, they would never suffer that their Kingdom should be joined to
the Kingdom of England. It Is very certain that the King of England seemed not
to be any whit offended with these men who had spoken so boldly in his
presence, and in the presence of all the Princes of Christendom who were there
present: But told them in very mild words, that this Union of the Scots would
be of infinite commodity. To which the Scots answered, that the sad example of
the miseries of Flanders was fresh in memory, which when she saw her Counts
become Kings of Spain, did foolishly believe that she should master the
Spaniards; but it was not long ere Flanders was sacked by the Spaniards, not
Spain by the Flemmish. And to fill their miseries up to the brim, the Emperor
Charles the fifth, and King Philip his son, who were formerly Flemmish, being
become Spaniards, the unfortunate Flemmish, for having lost their Prince, from
being natural subjects, began to be accounted strangers, and to have their
loyalty suspected. And therefore Flanders which was the native Country of
Charles the fifth, and Philip the seconds Patrimony, in terms of modern Policy,
was become a conquered State; and was therefore begun to be governed by
forreiners, with such jealousies, hard dealings, such grievousness of new
gabels, aids, contributions, and donatives, which ingendered those ill humors,
and gave that bad satisfaction, which was the rise of the civil war that
insued; which after an unspeakable profusion of Gold, an infinite effusion of
blood, and an incredible loss of honor to the Flemmish, is turned by the
Spaniards into a Merchandise. That the Scots had learned by these deplorable
miseries, not to suffer their Kings to leave their Country, and Royal abode of
their ancient Kingdom, and carry it to a greater Kingdom whereunto he was
lately called: Which should they do, the Scots were to expect all the
calamities from their cruel enemies the English, when Scotland should be united
to England, and the Scottish Kings were become Englishmen, which inferior
Nations are forced to suffer by superiors who rule over them. That Scotland for
misfortune would be like Flanders; and the English for their pride, cruelty,
and avarice, like the Spaniards.

Those that were present at this dispute, say, that the Spaniards told the King
of England, that those Scots who had spoken with such arrogance in his
Majesty's presence, ought to be punished. To whom the King of England answered,
That the Spaniards should not give that advice to others, which had proved so
very pernicious to themselves. But commanding that they should forbear the
business of the scales, assured the Scots, that ere long he would give them
full satisfaction.

The vast Ottoman Empire was next put into the scales, which the last fifteen
years arrived at the weight of 32 millions; but was found to weigh less then 16
millions now. A novelty whereat those Princes were much amazed, and
particularly the Venetians, who could not believe so great an abatement;
wherefore they desired that it might be again weighed, and more exactly: And it
was found, that in the little interim of time betwixt the first and second
weighing, it weighed less by 822 pounds; a thing which made it appear evidently
to all men, that the Ottoman Empire, formerly the terror of the world, hasted
toward its ruin; which all the Princes were very glad to see. It Is true, that
the wiser sort of men observed that the Spaniards jollity was altered, fearing
lest the Turks depression might turn to the exaltation of the Venetian
Commonwealth.

The Senators of Poland brought their Kingdom next unto the scales, which by
reason of the seditious heresies which they have suffered to creep in amongst
them, by reason of the little authority which their King has over them, and
the overgreat power which their Paladines have arrogated to themselves, did
not now weigh full out six millions, whereas formerly it weighed above twelve.

After this, the wise Grandees of the Terra ferma, and the dreadful Magistracy
of the Council of Ten, brought the flourishing State of Venice, to the scales,
miraculous for her greatness, and for her situation: she proved of good weight,
for she weighed eight millions; which was said to be, by reason of the mass of
Gold gotten in so long a time of peace, into her Treasury by her wise Senators.

Then the Swissers, Grisons; and other free people of Germany, brought their
Republic to the scales, which the Princes desired might be weighed severally
apart; which the Germans were contented with, if the poyser were able to do it.
But when Lorenzo had put the Commonwealth of Basil into the scales, he found
that the greatest part of the other free States of Germany were so linked
together, as it was impossible to separate them one from another. Which made
sweat appear upon the brows of many ambitious Princes; wherefore Lorenzo, being
necessitated to put them all together into the scales at once, was not able to
raise up the heavier scale.

The Duke of Savoy was brought next unto the scales by Knights of the
Annuntiation, who weighed as much as he had done the last fifteen years: But
when Lorenzo put into the scales the noble Prerogative which the same Duke
Charles Emanuel enjoyes, of being styled Il primo guerriero Italiano, it added a
million and 420 pounds to his former weight.

Then with equal pomp and Majesty to that of Kings, did the Duke of Lorain
appear; whose State, though it were but small, equalled the weight of great
Kingdoms; which happened through his good fortune of having his Territories so
seated, as he can put great difficulties upon the Low countries, by impeding
the passage of succors which the Spaniards bring from Italy; which raised him
to such a height of reputation, as he sold that his adhearance at the weight of
Gold, to him that would give most for it; in such sort, as after having
assisted the Spaniards as much as any of the devoutest French Barons of the
holy League, turning to the French who won the field, he faced about so fairly,
as so great a King as was Harry the fourth of France, the great Duke of
Tuscany, and the Duke of Mantua were glad to have alliance with him. And to add
to the Spaniards jealousy, the very immortal State of Venice did so
affectionately take one of those Princes into pay, as had not that illustrious
Lady vowed perpetual chastity, and had not her privy parts been sown upon the
very first day of her birth, by Venetian Gentlemen who are very jealous of her
chastity, many men thought she would have married him. The Duke of Savo^ was
known to envy this Prince his felicity very much; for he being likewise placed
as a bar between the French and the Spaniards of Millan, as was the Duke of
Lorain between the French and the Spaniards of Flanders, yet had he received
hard usage, both from the French when they were his enemies, and from the
Spaniards when his friends; instead of so many good turns and advantages which
he found in the Dukes of Lorain: so as every one thought the Duke of Savoy did
now clearly perceive that the Spaniards had practiced pernitiously against him.

Next, the most flourishing State of the great Dukes of Tuscany was brought to
the scales by the Otto di Balia; very admirable for the excellent cond^tions of
her inhabitants, all of them being fructiferous, and who have always taken
pains both with their brains and bodies, for the exact government, perpetual
plenty, peace and quiet which she enjoyes. So as she being altogether
substance, weighed as much as any whatsoever famous Monarchy. And Lorenzo was
observed to rejoice very much, when he saw that his successors, according to
the model which the great Cosmo had left them, had known how to build strong
Cittadels upon the foundations of Churches and Hospitals, which he and his
Ancestors had laid in their Country, in the time of the Florentine Liberty.
Wherefore Lorenzo, the more to show the worth and wisdom of the Princes of his
Family, put the sound headpiece of Ferdinand the great into the scales, which
weighed so very much, as the scales fell over and over, and broke the great
chain which governed them, and all things went topsey turvey.

All the Princes were then aware of the Prerogative which the Court of Rom^
has in producing men of singular wisdom; for that all knew so great a Scholar
came out of that School. The breaking of the scales was the cause why some
Italian Princes who were yet to the fore, could not be weighed. Wherefore it
was agreed upon, that the Monarchy of Spain being according to ancient custom,
to be weighed against all the Princes and Potentates of Italy, the particular
weight of every Italian Prince should be calculated by the general weight of
them altogether. A large and just balance was therefore brought into the midst
of the greater Hall, into which on the one side were put all the Kingdoms
belonging to the Monarchy of Spain, and on the other all the Italian Princes:
and the scales were found to stand in equal balance. A thing which the Italian
Princes were much troubled at; who whilst they were in that agony, it was
observed by all that looked on, that the powerful Monarchy of France, by one
only loving smile which she cast upon the scale wherein the Italian Princes
were placed, made it, to the great joy of all men, suddenly weigh down on their
side.

It must not be forgotten, that the Spaniaros, when they saw the Duke of Savoy
(who refused the last fifteenth year to be put into the same scale with the
rest of the Italian forces) put himself into the scale, to counterpoyse the
Spanish Forces, in a threatening manner, bit their fingers at him; the which
when he saw, he with great generosity said unto them, You Gentlemen of Spain,
it is now no longer time to feed men with hopes, I have at last clearly
discovered all your tricks; and do so call to mind your past actions; as for
the future, I will score up my accounts with another cole; for yours, which
till now I have only made use of, has stained and scorched my hands too much.
Your baits of hope have not brought me yet to be such a fool, as to make me
forgo the little bit of bread which I have yet in my mouth, to snatch at the
shadow of the great Spanish Inheritance which I see in the bottom of the water.

And the Spaniards further complaining that the Dukes of Parma, Modena, and
Urbine, the Lord of Mirandola, and the famous Roman Barons, Gazitani, Colonesi,
and Orsini, who have all of them the Golden Fleece, and are their Pensioners,
were weighed together with the Italian Forces; whereas by the Orders of that
Knighthood, and by the Pensions which they received, they were bound to adhere
to the Spanish Interest, and to contribute unto the Spaniards greatness: They
were by them answered, That the Lords and Princes of Italy received the honor
of the Golden Fleece, and rich Pensions from the Spanish Monarchy, just as do
those honorable Ladies, who receive Presents from their sweet hearts by way of
Courtesy; not out of any intention to do the foul thing you wot of.

Why the Monarchy of Spain withdrew her self into her Palace.
BEcause for many days past the Monarchy of Spain had not been seen to come
abroad, nay that not only she had been all this while retired into her own
house, but had continually kept the gates of her Palace shut; the Italian
Princes, and especially the Venetians, who are not only the diligent observers
of the actions, but the most subtle pryers into the very thoughts of that
great Queen, began to grow exceeding jealous of such a novelty: And because it
was still impossible for them to know what might be the meaning of so much
solitariness, they all concluded that there must needs be some great mystery in
it.

The Venetians out of a jealousy for their States becoming impatient of any
delay, with ladders set against the Palace of the said Monarchy, got in at the
windows, and saw her hard at work; and with a State-Minister of hers, called
the Conte di Fuentes, and some other sturdy fellows, very busy in stopping up
all the holes in her house: Whereupon the witty Venetians very well foreseeing
to what end all this pains was taken, advised their friends to arm themselves;
for the Spaniards, as soon as ever they had stopped up the holes of supplies,
would be sure to fall a hunting of the Rats, to make a great massacre of them.

The Duke of Alva being arrived at Pernassus, in complementing with Prospero
Colonna, he falls to cuffs with him about Titles; whereof he had defrauded the
Colonnesi.
DOn Fernando di Toledo Duke of Alva, some few days ago, came to Pernassus,
and according to an express Order from Apollo, diligent examination having been
made of his actions, was, by the Military men, found worthy to be admitted into
Pernassus amongst those famous Captains; who fighting with patience and art,
knew rather how to overcome their enemies without bloodshed, then with open
force and desperateness, to hazard the fortune of Kingdoms in the doubtful
chance of a set battle. But because Lodovick Guicchiardin, a very judicious
Writer of the Affairs of Flanders gave in a complaint, That for some distastful
things which he had written of the Duke, he had been evil entreated by him, he
was fain to wait yet a good while to clear himself of that foul imputation:
For in Pernassus there is yet in force an Edict very strictly observed by
Apollo, wherein that Prince or private man is declared to be fallen into a
praemunire, and liable to the penalty of reproach, that should dare to affront
any Historian, or other Writer, for things written, though little for his
honor, yet (howsoever) true: But so potent were the Dukes friends, that
Guicchiardin was content to withdraw the suit; whereupon he was admitted into
Pernassus with all the greatest solemnities possible, and had a place among his
Majesty's Gens d'armes, commanded by the famous Quintus Fabius Maximus, who for
his singular wariness was surnamed Cunctator. And it happened, that among other
Princes and great Commanders whom this Duke visited, that one was the most
excellent Signior Prospero Colonna, of whom he was received with all sorts of
honor, and so much the more, because he understood that the Duke made public
profession of being a Disciple, a follower, and imitator of that slow, but sure
way of waging war, used by this Signior Prospero. But in this visit, there fell
out a strange accident, and in truth a very troublesome chance: for at the
first meeting, the Duke having given to Signior Prospero the Title of Vostra
Merce, he grew into such a rage, that taking so base a Title for a great
affront, he said with an angry voice; Duke, I thought thou had come into my
house to reverence one that is greater then thy self, not to undervalue him:
But because the men of the House of Colonna answer injuries done by words, with
deeds, Get thee out of this house, for in the street, with weapons in hand, I
will make it good upon thee* that they which proceed with such as I am, in base
uncivil terms, deserve not to be admitted into any commerce with men of
honor. The Duke was amazed at this so resolute resentment which he observed in
that great Commander, and resisting the violence that Signior Prospero used to
thrust him out of the Chamber, he fell to fisticuffs with him. And because the
Spaniards that were in the Dukes company, seeing him struggle with Colonna,
came in to help him, the Italians that waited upon Signior Prospero, did the
same too: So that a great many men being gotten into a very narrow place, there
insued a very cruel scuffle; the noise whereof being heard into the street, was
the occasion that the news of so dangerous an accident was suddenly carried to
Apollo: Who in great have dispatched away thither the Lord Lieutenant of that
place, with a guard, which took the Duke out of Signior Prospero's hands; and
having quieted the uprore, commanded the Spaniards, who had been already
shrewdly handled, to get them home again. Then Signior Prospero, before any
body could give in sinister information against him, presented himself before
Apollo, to whom it is reported, that with great haughtiness of mind, he spoke
these words: Sir, It is well known to every one, that those of the house of
Colonna, which have been men of my quality, have always enjoyed the Title of
Excellency, antequam Abraham fuerit, and ere the Spaniards were in rerum natura.

Now, that this Nation should undertake to misuse such a one as I am, as at
this very instant the Duke of Alva has had the audaciousness to do in mine own
house, is a thing by no means to be endured. For if the abjectness of him that
makes the trespass, does infinitely aggravate the injury to him against whom it
is made, how is it possible that an Italian Baron of my quality, should contain
himself within the bounds of modesty, when he sees he is so much undervalued by
that Spanish Nation, whose miseries within these four days, the whole world
did so pity, that the Christians were fain to have gatherings for them in
their Churches, to free them from that wretched slavery, wherein they were so
unfortunately oppressed by the Moors of Granada. The Spaniards enjoy the
Dominion over the greatest part of Italy, where, by such as I am, though every
day they threaten us with cruel and universal slavery, they are loved,
honored, yes, and served. And they with their portentous avarice have deprived
us of our estates; and in the deplorable sack of Rome, with their unexpressible
sensuality, have bereft our chastest Matrons of their honors: Yet that now in
return of so prostrated a patience, they would fain take from us this little
vapor of honor that we have left, and these poor Titles, the unhappy
remainders, and lamentable Relics of the Italian Reputation, is a thing so
hard to be digested, that by every honorable Baron of Italy it ought to be
revenged; not with verbal complaints as I do, but with the daggers point.

They that were present at this passage, say, that all the while Signior
Prospero was speaking, Apollo looked something smiling: And still the angrier
Colonna grew, the more did the mirth of his Majesty's divine and resplendent
face appear; insomuch, that when Signior Prospero had broken forth into those
over-daring words, that the gross abuses which the Spaniards offer to the
Italians, ought to be revenged with the daggers point, he burst out into a
downright laughter, and said, Prospero, Thou have been, and always wilt be,
too choleric. And I must needs tell thee, I am infinitely scandalized, that
such a one as thou who has always made particular profession of a sound
judgment, should wonder that slaves, which for twenty years together have been
fed in a Galley with black and musty biscuit, when they light upon a batch of
Manchet, use to fill themselves, till their guts be ready to crack. Yet that
their outrageous greediness, and every indecent action with which they use to
gorge themselves, is so far from being odious to those good honest men which
look on* that it rather moves them to pity. Do you Italians therefore give way
too, that the Spaniards (men so newly come into the world, and but lately
gotten out of the slavery under the Moors of Granada) may glut themselves with
diet so delicious to their taste, and with the honored Titles they have met
with in Italy. For I assure you, that as soon as ever they shall be satiated
with these vanities, they too, as well as the French, will be so fair
conditioned, that, not only to such as you, but to the very Grooms of their
Stables, they will very gladly give the Title of Excellence. And let me tell
thee, that if thou had that discretion, and that perfect knowledge of worldly
things, as I ^ould with thee, thou would very well know, that these
exorbitances, and this so odious manner of behavior which the Spaniards use in
Italy, whereat thou art so extremely vexed, is as so much of the best sugar for
you Italians, and as so much of the bitterest poison for the Spanish Nation:
Which if to her valor, to her subtilty, and to that inexplicable ambition of
hers, she had added amiable conditions, by absolutely casting out that
remainder of Liberty which is not yet quite gone; she would soon have made her
self entire Mistress of the Universe. All whose insolences would be revenged,
not with the daggers point by you Italians, but with all manner of cruelty by
the Monarchy of Spain her self, upon her own Spanish Officers, who with their
vapouring, distaste the good servants of so great a Queen, and make her
Sovereignty unpleasing to all her subjects. Disorders, against which, some
course of necessity must be taken, since they greatly hinder the main
subsistence of that universal Monarchy, to which with the public have of all
Italy, it will not ever be possible for her to attain.

And with this answer, Apollo sent home again Signior Prospero, very well
satisfied.

After which, appeared before Apollo, the Duke of Alva, with all his retinue,
so mel^ncholike, that the great store of Unguentum album, then on their faces,
made that those Spaniards did not look so black as the Moors come from
Granada, ordinarily use to be.

Then Apollo, interrupting the Duke in the complaints which he was about to
make against Colonna, said, Duke, I like not that disorder which I understand
has lately fallen out; and so much the less, as the cause of such a tumult
has been unjust, and no less dishonorable on your part. And upon this
occasion I am pleased to put you Italians in mind, that your not only being
covetous (as by every one you are known to be) but your not using to be
prodigal in giving others those Titles which are desired, is a manifest sign
of a malign nature. Since ingenuous Nobleness is known by showing little
greediness after Titles, in receiving them; and much liberality in giving them:
For, not to speak of such as are due, even by those honors as are superfluous,
he acquires more reputation to himself that gives them, then he that receives
them. And for you Spaniards, that would so rigorously ingross great Titles to
your selves alone, you are so far from increasing your good estimation by it,
that you are rather grown so odious and ridiculous to people, that the Italians
(born to scoff at every one) when in their Comedies they would represent to the
world a perfect braggadochio, instead of a Neapolitan, do not undeservedly
personate it by a Spaniard: A thing whereof you Spaniards should be much
ashamed: And I wonder you perceive not, that your intent of attaining to
universal dominion, by means of affronting all men, is a going the clean
contrary way to work. The hearts of men, Duke, are taken with that bait of
courtesy, with the whistle of gratitude, of civilities, and of being
courteous; for very ignorant does that Fowler show himself, that (as I see you
Spaniards foolishly do) goes into a Dove house to catch Pigeons with a Drum.
And I tell you moreover, that if ever any Nation had reason to bait the
Italians with honou^s and dignities to bring them into their Nets, and take
them with their bird-lime, it is you Spaniards, because of the ends which you
have upon Italy. And besides, you should consider, that with those States of
Naples and Milan, you are fastened there but with wax: For so long shall you
govern those two members which you have there, as till the Italians shall
resolve to drive you out: Who if after your ruin, they could be sure to keep
themselves from falling into the hands of the French, you know very well, that
with only a little trouble which they might give you in the Port of Genoua,
they could put you into a thousand inextricable distresses. All which are
things that admonish you to give satisfaction at least in words, to those, to
whom by the dominion which you have in Italy, you will be forced to give so
many bitter distastes by your deeds.

As for the affront which you say you have received from Signior Prospero; I
tell you plainly, that whatsoever mischief may be done you, upon such a titular
occasion as this, I shall not only no^ express any resentment against it, but
imagine that you have paid your self for it beforehand. Then the Duke would
have excused himself, by saying that he had instructions from his King, how he
was to carry himself toward the Barons of Italy in point of Titles; when
Apollo told him that the Spanish insolence over the Italians, reached not but
to the Neapolitans, and the Milaneses; and his Majesty added, that if much
passion had not blinded the Spaniards, they might very well know that their
grandees, whom Spain it self cannot contain, and which in Italy, will needs be
playing the Giants* when they come to be compared with the Barons of Rome, and
those too but of the middle size, prove mere Dwarfs. With that a cloud, white
as snow, beginning by little and little to cover the person of Apollo, the
Priests that were about him* perceived that his Majesty would prophecy.
Whereupon all of them being fallen prostrate upon the earth, the Duke, and the
rest that were with him did the same. Then was his Majesty's Divine voice
perceived to come out of that hollow cloud, and with a most delightful accent,
thus it spoke.

I prognosticate to you, Spaniards, that with your troublesome and odious
behavior, you will enforce the Nobility of Italy, Mistress of the cruel
Sicilian Even-song, to plot against you some bloody Neapolitan night-service.

It being a custom most proper to the Italians, with greater fury to revenge
the insolences of words, then the injuries of blows: As those who having short
patience, and long hands, are not only born with hearts much inclined to great
resolutions, but so that they use not to revenge their wrongs (which when they
do, they do to purpose) till those which have done them, have quite forgotten
them. And you, to your infinite ruin shall then find them, with arms in their
hands, to be doughty Orlando's: When you shall be fully persuaded that they are
grown to be but so many over-jaded and dry-basted Asses.

Boccace is as^ssinated by Salviati.
LEonardo Salviati, a man (as far as the present times, and the condition of
the modern Tuscans allow it, of singular learning, did an action two days
ago, which has been infinitely blamed by all the Vertuosi. For about two a
clock at night, at the entrance of Forum maximum, having affronted Signior
Giovanni Boccacio, Prose-Master Major to his Majesty, he gave him many wounds,
with which he so disfigured and maimed him, that his most intimate
acquaintance, which have seen him since this mischance, affirm that it is not
possible to know him for that same bonny Boccace which formerly he was. And
that which infinitely aggravated so foul a fault, was, that Salviati did not
thus inhumane trespasses for any particular distaste given him by Boccace; but
at the request of the Giunti, Printers at Florence, for greediness after five
and twenty crowns, which they gave him by way of reward for so impious an act.
In so much, that this morning, Cavalier Leonardo Salviati, a man born of so
Noble a Family, was, out of the public Pulpit, standing in the Rostra,
proclaimed a public and notorious Asassinate.

The Sicilian Ambassadors cannot obtain Audience from Apollo; but are
disgracefully driven away by his Majesty.
IN the Port of Pindus, about two days agone there arrived a ship, which set
on shore some Ambassadors from Sicily, sent by those of that Island to Apollo,
about matters of great importance, who having given his Majesty notice of their
arrival, demanded Audience. No sooner did Apollo hear Sicilians named, but he
showed open signs of extreme indignation against them, and commanded Luigi
Pulci, Provost Marshal of Campania, to tell them he would not so much as see
them, much less hear them; and that therefore they should get them aboard
again. For because of that insupportable wrong which he had received from the
Sicilians, he had of a long time firmly resolved never to have any commerce
more with that Nation.

The Ambassadors returning to their ships, obeyed his Majesty's commands* To
whom they sent an humble Petition, wherein they declared, That they were sent
to give his Majesty an account of the new Drudgeries, the unheard of
oppressions, the miserable impositions which they suffer from the Spaniards.
And that so calamitous were the afflictions wherein the miserable Sicilians
found themselves involved, that they not only deserved to be graciously
listened to by his Majesty, but were worthy to be pitied and bewailed by the
most barbarous Scythians that ever the earth bore.

The Petition was presented to Apollo by the reverend Father T^maso Fazzello, a
very elegant Writer of the Affairs of Sicily, who assured his Majesty, that at
this present, the miserable condition of the Sicilians surpassed the utmost of
all humane afflictions. Apollo told Fazzello again, that the Sicilians demerits
were such, as they had thereby made themselves most worthy of the hard usages
whereof they complained so much. That therefore as soon as may be, he should
give the Ambassadors to understand, That if within two hours they did not pack
out of the Haven of Pindus, he would have without more ado, their ship sunk
with his Cannon: For he was absolutely resolved not to see the face of any that
was of that most unadvised Nation, which was the first Author of those horrid
scandals, that had brought excessive miseries upon her self, and other people
of Europe: For having attracted that inhumane and ambitious Spanish Nation,
before utterly unknown to Italy, and the other Provinces of Europe, when with
fatal resolution, they made themselves subjects to the Kings of Aragon. They
then likewise gave the beginning to that fatal and cruel Tragedy, whereof did
the Italian Princes know what the conclusion of the last Scene of the fifth Act
is likely to be, they would keep a perpetual Fast, and upon their naked knees
continually pray for the obtaining of Divine aid, to free themselves from those
mischiefs, against which it is apparent that humane remedies are not able to do
any more good.

Fazzello then replied, That his Majesty was not to be offended with the
Sicilians; but that Queen Ioane the second, by her ever to be deplored adoption
of Peter of Aragon, had occasioned the present evils of the Spanish Government
in Italy; and that with very good reason, he might vent his discontents against
that indiscreet and unchaste Lady. To this Apollo answered, That indeed, those
who had not an exact insight into Princes secret thoughts (as he for his part
had) laid the blame of the present slavery of Italy, upon that Queen; but the
truth was otherwise: For it was a clear case, that she would never, to defend
her self from the French Kings, have fallen into that error, of adopting a
Spaniard for her King, had she not first seen him a powerful one, by his rule
over the Kingdom of Sicily: and that the Kings of Aragon were no sooner called
to the Government of that Island, but they began those designs upon Italy,
which for the Italians exceeding great torment, have had but too good success:
And that they were all so u^questionably deserved by the Sicilians, that to
seek to lessen the calamities in which they did penance for the sins of their
indiscretion, was as heinous a kind of impiety, as it were an act of highest
charity, to make them yet more severe, that they may serve for a manifest
example to all Nations, what bitter fruits the plant of wicked and cruel
resolution does in time bring forth, when out of a desperate rage, people run
headlong into that abyss of subjecting themselves to the dominion of a foreign
Nation*

Fazzello replied* That all this had been very true, had the Sicilians altered
the rule of an Italian King, to make themselves slaves to Barbarians: But that
having by their Vesper changed the indiscreet and hairbrain'd French, into
considerate and grave Spaniards, it seemed that the intention of the Sicilians
having been good, deserved not such an odium from his Majesty.

At that, Apollo grew extremely incensed againk Fazzello too; and full of
indignation, he said to him, And do thou think that was not a very lewd
ignorance of the Sicilians to remove from the insolence, the prodigality, the
carelessness of the French Government, to the cruelty, to the avarice, and to
the insupportable strictness of the Spanish? Were the Sicilians only ignorant
of that which is known to every man, that the Dominion of the Spanish over
Countries, is eternal: And therefore out of all question, deadly? Whereas the
Government of the French is just like a violent fever, though it may be very
dangerous, yet it yields one some hope of life, and there are many medicines
with which it may be cured; as indeed you cured it with your Sicilian Vespers.
A glorious Vesper certainly, had you not by that Physic brought your health
into an infinitely worse condition. For, Fazzello, those people that are wise,
never take up the Arms of Rebellion, but when they are sure to gain very well
by it, and to change bondage into liberty: For the fish which perceives he
cannot make his passage out of the boiling oil into cold water, thinks it less
hurtful for him, to stay in the fryingpan, than to make an escape, and leap
into the glowing fire.

Sigismondo Battori has learned the Latin Tongue.
YEsterday, late in the evening, arrived at this Court, the ordinary Post of
Germany, who made every one joyful with the welcome tidings he brought, that the
most Illustrious Sigismondo Battori, late Prince of Transylvania, was grown so
much in love with the Latin Tongue, that to his exceeding great glory, he
spoke and wrote it, with the purity and sincerity of Cesars style. Whereupon
all the Vertuosi earnestly besought Apollo, that for so joyful news, there
might be made all those demonstrations of gladness, which when any Prince is
become Learned, were usually made to encourage great men to love Learning. But
because his Majesty sees into the inside of all things, he denied those
Vertuosi their request, and told them, That Pernassus then only feasted, when
Princes took their Learning, out of the free choice of a noble mind, and mere
love to their books, not constrained by any necessity at all. And that they
must all know that Prince Battori had attained to this elegancy of the Latin
Tongue, not out of any ambition to show himself learned, nor out of a virtuous
curiosity to know many things, but out of the necessity he was put to, of
correcting for his credit's sake, that simple boyish misconstruction which he
committed in Gender, Number, and Case, then, when in the Hungarian War, he made
that fatal resolution of taking up arms against the Turks, that he might adhere
to the Emperor of Germany; of whom, having so strong and lively pretenses upon
the Principality of Transylvania, he should have stood in more fear, then of
threescore and ten Ottoman Emperors.

The French are freed out of the Mad-mens Hospital by the Spaniards.
SOme two days ago, did Apollo now at last cause to be released out of the
Mad-mens Hospital, a great number of French, that had lain there many years:
During which time, in their raging fits, they had committed both against
themselves and their friends, many lamentable trespasses, and had given cause
sufficient for tears to all Europe.

Now, because by Affidavit formally given in to the Court, of the most
illustrious Physicians (or Medici) of Florence, who have always been assisting
in the cure of the dangerous malady of that Nation, it was made fully to
appear, that they were recovered, they have been dismissed. But before their
departure out of Pernassus, his Majesty sent for them, and told them, That for
the future they should understand how to enjoy so flourishing and potent a
Kingdom with more discretion then formerly they had; and that above all things,
they should remember, that for the recovery of their healths, they had been
wholly obliged to the Spaniards, who with only appearing armed in France, and
particularly in Paris, had returned some brains into the beetle-heads of those
Frenchmen, that formerly had played such mad pranks in France.

Many and hearty thanks did then these Frenchmen return to his Majesty, and
said they should be so far mindful of the wholesome counsel he gave them, that in
measuring the distances of places, they would hereafter accustom themselves to
make use of the Italian mile, that so they might avoid that woeful name of
League: But as for the recovery of their brains, they were altogether beholding
for that, to their most generous, and ever victorious King, Henry the fourth,
who with the splendour of his valor, had opened the eyes of the French, that
had been foully blinded with Spanish hypocrisy: Besides that the Spaniards,
which had been the first authors of that lamentable French Tragedy, had so
cunningly gotten a trick to make way for themselves in France, with their
glittering and most beloved double Pistolets, that they had made both the
foolish and the wise too, to run out of their wits.

Some for examples sake are made a spectacle to the people.
APollo, to his singular discontent, was informed that the greater part of
modern Princes do not for the subduing of their enemies, make use according to
the custom of the ancient Heroes, of open force, but sometimes of fraud: In the
exercise of which they so much preval, that only by the powerful means thereof,
they have made shift to bring their most important enterprises to pass. Whence
it is; that the first weapon which these draw against their enemies, is that so
shameful one of corrupting the Loyalty of their discontented Subjects, and of
stirring up the Nobility to rebellion. Wherefore to remedy such grievous
disorders, about thirty years ago his Majesty gave command that the most
unfortunate, the Count St. Paul, the Prince of Orange, and the Duke of Guise,
should be brought in a wheele-barrow by John Francesco Lottini, privy Register
of moral Precepts in this Court, and set under the Porch of the Delphick Temple.

Whereupon these three great Princes, with their hands fingerless, and all
pitifully mangled, looking as if the dogs had gnawn them, were shown by
Lottini, to the people that went in and out of the Temple: To whom with a loud
voice thus he spoke; Ye faithful Vertuosi, devoted to Learning, and sacred
Morality, take example by the so wretched calamity of these unfortunate
Princes, deprived of the use of their hands (which God send you ever to enjoy)
and learn to know what comes of it, when men will be persuaded to be so simple,
as to draw Crabs out of their holes with their own hands, for the benefit of
others.

A discovery made, that the Spanish Officers are wholly concerned in their own
profits.
THree days ago, about one a clock at night, forty Carts of Hay were seen to
enter the Royal Palace of the Spanish Monarchy: and because the
unseasonableness of the time filled with jealousy the French, the Venetians,
and other Potentates, that live in perpetual jealousy of so formidable a
Princesse's greatness; with exact diligence, inquiry was made, whether the
Carts carried any thing prejudicial under the hay? And the Spies brought in
word, that under the hay were hidden chests full of mattocks, spades, and
pickaxes. And because these are tools that belong to Pioneers, the French were
resolved to stand to their arms, and the Venetians would needs lanch out those
Galleys that were in their Arsenal; when it was resolved, that before they
would discover themselves, they should do well to be informed whether the
Spaniards had brought any other quantity of those instruments, or whether they
expected any from some other place. And they were assured, that neither
formerly had they received any, nor for the future did they expect any. And the
Spies added, That as soon as those chests were taken down, they were not
carried into the Royal Magazine; but all the Grandees of Spain, and the prime
Officers of that mighty Monarchy, suddenly divided amongst them, those
mattocks, those spades, and those pickaxes, with which the next morning, very
early, with all speed, they fell to digging of ditches, to drawing of channels,
to making of banks, and to loading the earth with a thousand Aqueducts, every
one with so much labor and diligence drawing the water to his own Mill, as
they had brought the public affairs to such a sad condition, that the Mills of
the Commonalty of Spain could grind no longer for want of water.

Maximilian the Emperor is advertised of the tumults sprung up amongst his Sons.
THis last night there came in three Posts to the Emperor Maximilian the
second; and instantly it was divulged, that they brought news, how Matthias the
Archduke had taken up arms against his brother Rodulphus the Emperor, with
which he seditiously claimed the Kingdoms of Hungary, of Bohemia, of Austria,
and the absolute Sovereignty over other Provinces.

These unhappy tidings infinitely troubled the Emperors mind; for he very well
knew, that the discord arisen amongst his Sons, afforded to the enemies of the
House of Austria that contentment, which they so much desired to see. Whereupon
yesterday morning very early, he presented himself before Apollo, and with
tears trickling down his cheeks, he desired to know when the disasters of the
House of Austria, long since begun by a cruel Conspiracy of all Germany against
it, would come to an end, and for what demerit such bitter punishments were
inflicted upon his Family? To this demand Apollo answered after this manner;
Great Emperor, the persecutions, and all the troubles of your Family will then
cease, when it shall wholly give over those ambitious thoughts of desiring to
dominier over Hungary and Transylvania; which thoughts have put Germany into
such jealousies, that to secure her ancient Liberty from the power of your
House, she studies nothing else but how to keep it down. For the Germans
fearing much greater mischiefs from your acquisitions, then from the Turks
victories, are absolutely resolved rather to lose Vienna, then to take in Buda:
And then will the potent Conspiracy begun against you be dissolved, and all
Germany heartily affect your Archdukes, when laying aside their present
ambition, they shall make it appear to all men, that they desire to be the
other German Princes equals, not their Superiors.

The Dogs in the Indies are grown Wolves.
Upon the twelfth of this month, about midnight, came to Apollo, a Post sent
from Lisbon in all have; and told him that he had brought news of very great
concernment from the West Indies.

Very early next morning, all the Literati ran to the Palace-Royal, to know
what was the news. And the Spaniards were the first, who with much carefulness,
demanded if there were discovered in the Indies some second Monte di^otossi, or
some new Rio della Plata, whither they would fain go, and there sow the Holy
Word of God? The French were very inquisitive to know whether there were any
new World found, that by making the Spaniards so very potent; might perfect the
ruin of the old. But it was taken for a very bad sign, to see Apollo, after
he had read the Letters, grow exceeding sad; and that muffled up in a thick
cloud, he fell a weeping bitterly. For which novelty, every one conceived that
the Post had brought very unhappy news. Whilst then the place was full of
Literati, and every sort of Vertuosi, which much afflicted, were there waiting
to know the cause of his Majesty's so evident sadness; after many claps of
Thunder, and infinite store of Lightning, they heard a dreadful voice, which
spoke thus; Fast, be mortified, cloth your selves in sackcloth, sprinkle your
selves with ashes, eat your bread mingled with tears, O ye that inhabit the
earth, and with prayers appease the wrath of God; with a contrite heart, and a
pure spirit, beseech him that of his infinite mercy he would vouchsafe to free
that part of mankind as dwells in the old world, from those portentous
novelties, which for certain have happened in the new. At such terrible news, the
Vertuosi for very grief fell a swouning; and believing that the West- Indies
had either been consumed by fire, or drowned by water, were much afraid of the
same disasters. For which all the people of Pernassus being in a terrible
fright, with abundance of tears, sighs, and howlings, whose like was never
heard, cried out, Mercy! mercy! and humbly entreated his Majesty that he would
reveal to his devoted Subjects, what those mischiefs were, from which they were
to beseech Almighty God that they might be freed. Then from the same Royal Seat
was heard a second voice, giving them all to understand, that the Dogs which
the Spaniards had transported into the Indies, to preserve the Flocks from
Wolves, were grown Wolves themselves; and that so ravenous ones, as in
devouring sheep, they surpassed in greediness and cruelty, the very Tigres.

After so unhappy tidings, there was heard a public lamentation of all the
Literati, every one bitterly complaining, that the Dogs which had charge of the
Sheep, should become such greedy Wolves, that they devoured the Flocks. ^o what
Guardians shall the Shepherd here-after trust their Flocks, the Guardianship
of Dogs, which have been so faithful to their Shepherds, being no longer
secure? And why came there into the world the species of Sheep, the most
unfortunate of all animals, since they must be a prey, both to Wolves their
enemies, and to Dogs their friends?

Whilst all the Nations in Pernassus, for the great affright they were in,
looked as if they would sink into the ground, only the Flemings, and the rest
of the Low-countrey-men were observed to go up and down Pernassus undaunted,
encouraging every one to cheer up, and not to be out of heart, saying there was
no calamity threatened to any man, which may not be happily avoided by stout
resolutions proceeding from spirits unmoved. Whereupon the Flemmings cried
aloud to every one, that likewise in their Country, the dogs whom the Spanish
Shepherds had set to keep the Flemmish Flock, were grown to be such ravenous
wolves, that with savage cruelty they devoured the sheep, and had consumed all
the Flemmish flock, if by the resentment of that courageous resolution, which
is known to all the world, they had not taken a course ^or it. That therefore
if those mischiefs which are reported to have ^en out in the new world, should
happen in the old, every one ought to know that the true way for chasti^g of
those dogs which have a scurvy quality of worrying sheep, was to give them some
Low Country Nux vomica, and make them burst, as they deserved.

The Spanish Monarchy visits the Queen of Italy, and there pass between them
Complements full of kindness.
SO great was the affright which the most illustrious Queen of Italy was in,
when she perceived that the most puissant Kings of France, at that time become
Lords of the Kingdom of Naples, pretended to the Sovereignty over the Duchy of
Millan: And though they made a show of continuing in their ancient amity, yet
did they very cruelly lay snares, both against her life and reputation; and all
this with such bitterness of minds enraged, that what with the machinations of
money, what with the crafty wiles of the pen, they held up, even in peace, a
cruel war for many years.

Now whilst the heart-burnings and jealousies betwixt these two Queens were at
the fiercest, and their minds were observed to be poysed with the most deadly
feud; the Monarchy of Spain, beyond all expectation, went with a Train worthy
her greatness, to give the Queen of Italy a visit; who entertained her with
such demonstrations of honor, and of intimate affection, that all the
Literati, who in the face both of the one and the other Princess, took more
notice of the motions and dispositions of the mind, then of their fine verbal
Complements, knew for certain, that there was grown between them a perfect and
real reconciliation. Nay, never since the memory of man, did there happen in
Pernassus any peace or concord, which did more astonish the Vertuosi there, and
make them more curious to know the true cause of so strange a thing.

And because the Philosophers, the Poets, and other Literati, of whatsoever
Science, are but dim-fighted in the art of discovering the true ends of those
wary resolutions which great Princes take, they made their recourse to the
University of the Politicians, whose peculiar profession it is, by the light of
that knowledge which they have of all Potentates interests to know how to
penetrate into the abditos Princip^m recessus, and quicquid occultius habent.
From whom they received this answer; That the Queen of Italy, to secure her
Liberty from the Arms of so potent a Nation, was enforced to join with the
Spanish Monarchy; but that perceiving how she also having gotten into her hands
the Kingdom of Naples and the Duchy of Millan, did with more earnest ambition,
with more profound artifices, and with more fraudulent machinations, than the
French themselves, put in for the Sovereignty of all Italy, and that to compass
this end in the minority of Henry the second's Sons, she endeavored to embroil
France, and how for the base Panders of her vast ambition, and for Agents for
the common bondage of Italy, she made use of some principal (but indiscreet)
Italian Princes, she began to hate her so extremely, that by every sort of
flight, the one sought the ruin of the other: but that since, by the
unfortunate end which at last the business of Savioneda came to, the Monarchy
of Spain plainly perceived that the purchase of all Italy was not feasible, and
a business utterly to be despaired of, she gave over that ambition of being
Mistress of it all, to wh^h she was before wholly addicted; and observing that
the greater part of her troubles in Flanders, and elsewhere, had sprung from
those ambitious thoughts, she perceived there was no better way for the settling
of her own affairs, then to let others live in quiet: And because she palpably
found, that without the friendship, the favor and aid of the Italian Princes,
it was not possible for her quietly to possess the Kingdom of Naples, and the
Duchy of Millan, she was desirous with that visit, to pacify the troubled mind
of that Queen. A Policy, which the ^oliticians called a very good one: For what
manner of men would begin to rouse up themselves, if the Spaniards should but
make as if they would fall upon Brescia, B^rgamo, Turino, and Genoua, when for
offering to take in that poor petty Town of Savioneda, there were contrived
against them (and that by those from whom it was least expected) such
machinations, that the Quail ^ad bin caught in the Trammelli, and could not
have avoided falling into the Spaniels mouth, had she not courageously resolved
to make a breach in the net, and so to save her life by getting out at a torn
mesh.

The Monarchy of Spain throws her Physician out of the window.
THis morning the Monarchy of Spain having sent for her Physician in ordinary,
presently after she her self with her own hands, threw him out of the window of
her Royal Palace: So that the poor wretch having all his bones broken to
fitters, died immediately. An accident which seemed so much the stranger, in
that the Physician was held by all the Court to be a very honest man, and in
the exercise of his profession, admirable. Diverse were the discourses made
upon so notorious a novelty.

But Apollo desiring to know the true cause of this hideous resentment, from
the Spanish Monarchy her self, she told him, how about forty years ago, by some
fittes that she had, and by other signs which were discovered, she was afraid
that in process of time, she should catch some dangerous French disease or
other, of the Royal House of Bourbon; and to provide against the mischief she
foresaw, she asked counsel of her Physician* who prescribed her a tedious,
fulsom, and chargeable Purge, of diverse Oils of holy Leagues, of insurrections
of people, of Rebellions of Nobles, of Cauteries, and other very painful
Medicines, in which she had wasted her stomach, weakened her strength, and
quite lost her appetite: And that the infinite store of Syrops, and the many
Medicines taken with so much anguish, had procured nothing but the acceleration
of the malady; which had it not been for that unlucky and unseasonable Purge,
would perhaps never have come: Besides, that the continual and ravenous leeches
which were applied to many parts of her body, had so sucked out the best vital
blood of her Spanish Gold, that by reason of her weakness of constitution, she
was not able to evacuate those bad humors of Flanders which have so much
oppressed: her For which disorders, all occasioned by the exceeding bad counsel
of that indiscreet Doctor, she was so vexed at him, that she seriously swore to
him, that if to free her from future infirmities, he ever prescribed her a
purge again, she would throw him out of the window. And that perceiving the
Low Country Ach, which at this present she feels in her shoulders, to be an
absolute French Pox, she had asked counsel of the same Doctor, how she might be
rid of it: Who unmindfull of his former errors, very simply prescribed her the
other purge, for all the world just like the first: and that hereupon, overcome
with passion, throwing him out of the window, she was desirous to punish him
for his first fault in his second. And she conceived that he had deserved the
misfortune, because he had not learned by that case which had proved so unlucky
to her Spaniards, to know, that purges made before the time, for evils that are
but feared, work not those good effects which the Physician believes, and the
Patient desires.

The Cardinal of Toledo's Summa is not admitted into the Library of Pernassus.
THe most Illustrious and right reverend Francisco Cordouese Cardinal of
Toledo, a Personage of exemplary life, an exquisite Divine; and a prime
Philosopher, one, that while he lived, did more honor to Gods word in the
Pulpit, than any other Preacher whatsoever, appeared some few days agone in
Pernssus, being met at the borders of this State, by Alexander de Hales, and by
Monsignor Cornelio Musso, Bishop of Bitonto, and entertained all the way at his
Majesty's charge. This honored Literato presented his Writings to the reverend
College of the Vertuosi; and those which treated of Philosophy were not only
praised, but admired, as likewise the Commentaries which he had made upon the
Subjects of Divinity, were received by all the sacred Wr^rs with extraordinary
applause; and presently they were carried in a sumptuous Urne under a Canopy,
into the Delphick Library, and with the name of so great an Author consecrated
to Eternity. Only his Summa, though very learned, was not received by those
Vertuosi; who plainly said; there was such a multitude of these kinds of
Summaries and Collections in his Majesty's Library, that some of them seemed
superfluous: For an infinite number of the greatest Divines had with such
diligence handled matters appertaining to private men's c^nsciences, that they
had put to arbitrament the salvation of men's souls, upon a three farthing
business; and that the world did very much desire to see a complete Collection
made of Cases touching the consciences of great Princes: A Subject very
necessary for the universal tranquillity, and yet wholly omitted by Divines. In
which Collection men should exactly discourse upon those act^ons of Princes,
wherewith they so often put the world in confusion; filling it with Pillages,
Plunders, and so many Murders, that many of them blinded with an ambition of
reigning upon the earth, have made it flow withrivers of humane blood. And the
most judicious College of the Literati hearing these particulars, desired that
they should dispute and resolve upon these present questions, viz. Whether
Christian Piety does admit of that pretense of Right* which the violence of the
sword has usurped upon other men's Estates? W^ether a Principality taken either
by force or fraud, from another Prince, may be held by one that has the true
fear of God in him? Whether the determination of Governing a Kingdom that is
conquered, with a purpose only to impoverish and waste it, that he may Reign
over it without jealousy, may be put in practice by him that has been bred up
in the Christian Faith? And whether to set and cry up mere damned Policy,
called Ragione di Stato so high, that at this instant she tramples upon all
Laws, Humane and Divine, be not a more detestable and accursed Idolatry, then
to adore Nebuchadnezzars Image and the Golden Calf? Lastly, the College
declared, That then their desires should be fully satisfied; when there should
be found one Divine so truly fearing God, that with his Writings he had
affrighted Princes from doing amiss, as ('it is confessed) many of them have with
a great deal of pains terrified private men. For it seemed to them unreasonably
strange, that such a multitude of Learned Divines should so trouble themselves
to dispute of the strict account which Shop keepers were to give to the Divine
Majesty, even for idle words; and yet should forbear to make any mention of
those horrid offenses which great Princes commit, when with armed Troops
plundering men's States, they bring all things, both sacred and profane, to
utter destruction. And that their Ministers should, with far greater benefit to
mankind, and eternal rewards to themselves, have discoursed upon the actions of
Lewis the twelfth, and Francis the first, both Kings of France; of Ferdinand
King of Aragon, and of the Emperor Charles the fifth, whose souls departed this
world charged with the heavy load of half a million of Homicides (all of them
committed out of an ambition to Reign) for which they were to give a very
strict account to God; when to stuff up volumns with the venial sins of private
persons.

All which would be things very necessary, to the end that mankind, so much
afflicted by the ambition of Princes, may one day receive that consolation,
which with so much anxiety it longs for, that those which reign may be
frighted from evil-doing; and be brought to know, that Hell was made as well
for mighty persons as for mean.

Almansor, that was King of the Moors, meeting with the Kingdom of Naples, they
two fall a weeping, and rehearse their miseries brought upon them by the
oppression of the Spaniards.
THe most famous King of the Moors, Almansor, he that for many years governed
the Noble Kingdom of Granada in Spain, met yesterday with the Kingdom of
Naples, and walking to and again, began to discourse with him: And after he had
for a good while viewed well the chain which this Kingdom of Naples wore about
his leg, he told him, that being of Morisco* work, he thought he had often
seen and handled it: And a little while after, with gestures of much amazement,
he assured him that he knew it very well, and that it was the very same, with
which he and the Mauritanian Kings, his predecessors, had for seven hundred
years, kept many Kingdoms of Spain in bondage: And that therefore he earnestly
entreated him, that he would discover to him, how, by whom, and when he was
enchained.

A good eye, and a very excellent memory have thou Almansor (answered then the
Kingdom of Naples) for this unhappy chain which thou see upon my leg, was
brought from Spain by Consalvo Cordoua, called il Gran Capitano: And therefore
I think it very likely to be the same you speak of: And it is now a hundred
years that I have been in that miserable slavery which you see me in. From
which I know not whether ever I shall be able to free my self: because, by
reason of the excessive power to which I see the Spanish forces are risen,
having utterly lost all hope of aid that I can expect from men, I know my
ancient liberty lies all in the powerful hand of God, who must renew upon me
the miracles of the Red Sea, if ever I recover.

The years (replied Almansor) do agree very well; for it was but a little
before thy bondage that the Spaniards loosned from off the Kingdom of Granada's
leg, this chain, with which they have bound thee: But do me the singular
favor, good Neapolitan Kingdom, to tell me how it was possible for the
Spaniards to make themselves Masters of such a Kingdom as thou art, so potent,
and so far distant from their Forces.

By fraud, Almansor (said the Kingdom of Naples) did the Spaniards get footing
in Italy; for with open force they would never have been able to have made such
notable achievements, and (as you say very well) so infinitely surpassing
their forces, and those too lying so far off.

But listen, and you will be amazed at the exceeding large conscience which in
matters of State, a King of Spain had, though he used incomparable artifices to
be taken amongst fools for a Saint Macarius painted upon a Wall: For you will
hear a Tragedy, according to the rules of my Christian Religion, cruel and
impious; but according to the terms of Modern Policy, the most witty, as ever
any Nation represented upon the Stage of the World.

Alfonso my King, to his final, and my principal ruin, gave his Grandchild
Isabella (^or from that unhappy marriage, had my ruin its beginning) for wife
to Giovanni Galeazzo Duke of Millan. At first the unfortunate Princes
childhood, afterward his unspeakable sottishness, encouraged Lodovico Sforza
to seize upon his Nephews Estate. Alfonso (as it behooved him) sought to hinder
this usurpation. Of which ^ent Lodovico being aware, and knowing, that without
the ruin of my Kings, 'twas impossible for him to compass the end of his
unjust desire, he threw himself headlong upon that resolution which since
proved so fatal to him, to me, and all the Italian Princes, of calling the
French into Italy, for the gaining of me. My Kings, to defend themselves from
so puissant enemies, called in to their aid, that good soul, Ferdinand King of
Aragon, their Cousin; who showed himself such a loving Kinsman, and so faithful
a friend, that instead of driving out the French, he shared me out betwixt
himself and them; and to perfect the Tragedy in all points, a little after this
unhappy dividend, he made War upon the French, whom having overcome, he forced
to return into France, with abundance of shame and loss. Whereupon the good
King Ferdinand, without any scruple of conscience, became my absolute
Sovereign: And then it was that he clapped on my leg this chain, which you have
taken notice of for your Countrey-making and workmanship. And I make a
question, whether in the Chronicles of the Saracens, of the Moors, or of the
Turks (which you must needs have read) there be found registered a more
treacherous act, committed by a King, who would needs be esteemed a man of a
most Saint-like conscience, and one that bare a very good mind, and who but a
little before had received from the Apostolic Sea, the glorious Title of the
Catholic King.

Certainly (replied Almansor) in the Chronicles which you have named, one may
read of very foul actions done by diverse Princes, out of an ambition after
Sovereignty; but this which you have related of Ferdinand, goes beyond them
all. But (said the Kingdom of Naples) if you Almansor, and your Nation have
held the Kingdom of Granada enchain'd so many hundreds of years, what course
did the Spaniards take to set it at liberty? That fatal Union (replied
Almansor) of the Kingdoms of Castile, with those of Aragon, which ensued upon
the marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella, was it that occasioned the Kingdom of
Granada's Liberty, and most unhappy Union! which the greatest Potentates of
Europe have bewailed, do bewail, and with true tears everlastingly shall
bewail, no less then I have done, and do; as that which has been the true and
only root from which have sprung all those mighty subversions of States that
at this day are seen in many parts of Europe; and more notoriously in Italy.
And believe me (Neapolitan Kingdom) I had reigned happily in Spain to this very
day, had not that pestilent Union broke the neck of my greatness. For those so
fierce jealousies that were between these Castilians and the Aragonians, were
my impregnable Citadels, which would have made me Reign in Spain eternally. Yet
take it upon my word, the assistances that the Popes gave to Ferdinando and
Isabella, did greatly hasten on my suppression. Peace good Almansor (quoth the
Kingdom of Naples) no more of that, if you love me: For after you were driven
out of Spain, the Popes suffered so great miseries from that ambitious Nation,
that it may be very truly said, they then purchased with ready money, those
infinite calamities which they have met withal. For, although the Sea
Apostolic was very well contented to see the Mauritanian Kings driven out of
Spain; yet did that great pleasure prove extremely painful, by my servitude
which followed soon upon it: The Popes having never dreaded any thing more,
then that I should fall into the hands of some potent Prince, who might make
them live in those perpetual jealousies, wherein finding themselves at this
instant plunged up to the very eyes, many of them, and specially those that
have most insight in the affairs of the world, take but little rest in their
beds. A clear testimony of the truth of what I tell you, was that lamentable
and most vil^anous sack of Rome, committed by the Spaniards a little after my
bondage; with which ingratitude they paid the Apostolical Sea all they were in
her debt, both for the release of the Tribute of Naples, and those succors
besides, that they had from her in the War of Granada. A calamity which passing
the bounds of any the do* efullest miseries, has so opened the eyes of even
the most drowsie-witted men, that every one begins to perceive what it is, out
of a zeal toward Piety, to unchain Lions. For no sooner did the Spaniards
perceive themselves freed from that encombrance, which the Moors of Granada
were to them; but by reason of that ambition which they openly declared, of
desiring to sway the Universe, there were discovered not only in Italy, but all
Europe over, most important jealousies of State, most troublesome differences in
points of Religion: in so much, as I have heard it maintained by men of very
good understanding in the affairs of the world, that perhaps it would have been
better for the Princes of Europe, that you had still Reigned in Granada, then
that the Spaniards should have come over into Italy, to get from us such
important Estates as now they possess there.

Which disorder has caused such an alteration even in matters of Religion,
that they which know how to discourse of the true causes of the weighty
resolution of Princes, stick not to say, that the fear which Germany was in of
the monstrous power of the Emperor Charles the fifth, was the occasion that the
Moors which were in Granada, are changed into those many Heretics which our
age beholds in Germany, and elsewhere. (A race of men so execrable, that with
their heinous impiety they have defiled a great part of Europe.) To this very
sad disorder of sacred things, are added the prejudices both public and
private, which my ruin has both brought, and continually does bring to the
Italian Princes; and more particularly to the Popes. For no sooner had the King
of Spain clapped this Chain about my leg, but they began to aspire to the
Sovereignty of all Italy: And to come quickly to it, they had a very excellent
way of interessing themselves in the differences that were in agitation between
the Italian and French Princes, touching the possession of the Duchy of
Millan; in which, that Man of Men, Charles the fifth, carried his matters so,
that he made himself to be known for a Grandchild worthy of his Grandfather
by the Mothers side. For having with the Forces of the Italian Princes, driven
the French out of Italy, instead of re-investing the Sforzi into the State, as
had been agreed upon between him and the other Confederate Princes, by the
deceitfulness of a thousand Turkish cavils which he made a shift to invent
against those poor Dukes, he made himself absolute Master of that so important
Dukedom.

Hold! good Neapolitan Kingdom (says Almansor) and make a stop here.

Well; If that disorder has likewise ensued, that the Noble State of Millan is
fallen into the Spaniards hands, what hinders them, that they do not suddenly
take in all Italy? And if your slavery has made it apparent to the world, that
the aids and succors of Princes, serve rather for the benefit of him that
gives them, then for the profit of him that receives them; why did not the
Italian Princes rather suffer the French to rule over Millan, then by receiving
aid from the Spaniards, run the hazard that so important a member of Italy, as
that Duchy, should fall, as indeed you say it did fall, into the power of the
Kings of Spain.

What hinders? (Replied the Kingdom of Naples) why the power of the Kings of
France, defending from the Spanish ambition, that remainder of Liberty which is
yet left in Italy: For those glorious Kings, for the interest of their own
greatness, will not endure it, that the Sovereignty of all Italy should fall
into the power of the ambitious Spaniard, who has not been able to quench his
vehement thirst of Reigning with the Purchase of all the new World which he
has discovered, and so much of the old as he does possess.

Besides that the Italian Princes, who know in how shrewd danger of a
mischievous and most wretched slavery, they stand, are so united together, that
although they be many in number, yet make they up but one body; and the
Spaniards which have used, and still do use all possible artifices to disunite
them, perceive that they were as good let it alone.

But as for the State of Millan, you must know it was judged safer for the
public Liberty of Italy, that the said Duchy should fall into the power of
the Spaniards, then if it had remained in the hands of the French; who
bordering upon Italy, if once they had possession of never so little a part in
it, it is a thousand to one but they would make themselves absolute Masters of
all. But in the Spaniards the case was clean contrary: For their forces, though
very great, yet lie so far off, that with a great deal of difficulty, can any
be transported such a long way by Sea, out of Spain into Italy, for the making
good of what they have gotten there already; much less such as would be
sufficient for subduing of the whole.

You say true (quoth Almansor) but go on in your relation to me, of the
prejudices which your falling into the Spaniards hands has brought to the
Popes.

Know (replied the Kingdom of Naples) that whereas formerly the Popes were a
terror to my Kings; now the case is clean otherwise; for they live in extreme
torment, lest one day there should happen to be an union of Naples with Millan;
which they perceive to be the scope of all the Spaniards intentions; Whereupon
the Spaniards (whose proper nature it is, to reap singular profit from the fear
in which they perceive they have put their neighboring Princes) have arrogated
to themselves such high Authority in the Court of Rome, that they boastingly
give themselves out for the true Arbitrators of all important matters that are
handled therein. Besides what I have told you, there is this more; When the
Kings of Naples were not Kings of Spain, the Popes with every slight,
threatening to deny the Investiture, got from my Kings Principalities, Dukedoms,
Marquissates, and other great Estates, by way of Present; besides, that the
Kings bought their friendship with Alliances, and every other sort of
Liberality.

But that fear being now over, if the Popes will aggrandize their Kinsmen with
the Titles of Important States, they must pay for them with ready money. And
the subtle Kings of Spain, over and above the precious Gold of Entreaties
which they will have howsoever for the first payment, sell afterward at dear
rates.

Important Interests, and grievous disorders (quoth Almansor) are these you
have told me; but how comes it to pass that you, Kingdom of Naples, who are the
Magazine of Silks, the Granary of Italy, go so ragged, and are so lean? As long
as the Spaniards (answered the Kingdom of Naples) that come naked out of Spain,
will within four days after they are arrived at my house, be covered all over
with Gold; needs must I strip my self to cloth so many, and such pitiful
tatter-de-Mallions. Moreover, did you but behold the greediness of the
Viceroys, that are sent to my house to repair their fortunes; and did you know
the rapines of the Secretaries, of a thousand Officers, and other Courtiers,
whom every Viceroy brings with him, all thirsting after my blood, you would
extremely wonder how it were possible for me to satisfy the ravenous and
dog-like unsatiableness of such a company of starvelings. As for that small
store of flesh you see about me, the Spaniards say they find it written in a
certain Book of a Florentine, which has given out rules of the cruel and
desperate modern Policy, that being a conquered Kingdom, I must (like those
Barbary-horses which are employed only in running of Races) be kept low.

And how (added then Almansor) are the Millanois handled?

Why they too (replied the Kingdom of Naples) are bathed in the same water,
wherewith you see me so wet. Only this difference there is betwixt us, that at
Millan it drops in, and in my house it powers in amain. The true causes of this
diversity of usage, are the qualities of the Lombards inclinations, very much
unlike to those of my Neapolitans: For the Nobility of the State of Millan is
naturally humorous, free, resolute, and far from those vices that are most
proper to my Neapolitans, of flattery and affectation: But so ready to lay
about them, and of that wavering disposition, as I dare say, were there but one
headpiece of Cremona amongst my Barons, it would be sufficient to obstruct that
on-forced Donative, that has brought me to live upon bread and onions: Which
though it had been often demanded by the Spaniards in Millan, and that in very
high terms, they were told again, that they should mind their own livelihoods.
Besides that the neighborhood of the Grisons, of the Duke of Savoy, and of the
Venetians, are some cause, why the Kings of Spain proceed in Millan with more
discretion. When the Popes stood to their arms, I was then, for their sakes,
much respected too. But withdraw, good Almansor, for I see my most capital
enemy, Don Pietro di Toledo coming this way, and I would not by any means he
should perceive that I make my moan to you: And certainly, even for this, may
my slavery be termed most unhappy, that I am enforced to call this miserable
condition which you see has brought me to the last gasp, a most happy Golden
Age.

The Conte di Fuentes is admitted into Pernassus.
DOn Pietro Enriquez Gusman, Count of Fuentes, was admitted the last Consistory
into Pernassus, but with a very severe censure, because Apollo would be exactly
resolved whether in the time that for many years he had governed the Duchy of
Millan, he had given any distaste to those Italian Vertuosi, who for the
admirable fruitfulness of their wits, born to the invention of elegant things,
are deservedly called by his Majesty, The first born Sons of Learning. And
albeit that among other Objections made against that truly famous man, that
accusation did him most prejudice, wherein he was ^axed for giving his mind to
that mischievous husbandry of sowing jealousies, and planting contentions (by
which he had made those Italian Potentates whose friendship he should have
procured with all the skill he had, to be suspected by his King) more then to
the Government of the people, yet were the difficulties of the heaviest
accusations taken off by the conclusive proof of his having been in Italy a
prodigy of nature, a monster never seen before, a Spanish Officer that hated
money. For which things F^ntes was declared to be very worthy of a residence in
Pernassus. And because Apollo took him for a singular lover of Justice, and a
capital enemy to roaring boys, of which sort of rascallity he knew that he had
purged the State of Millan, and that he had laden with it the Galleys of Spain,
he gave him the superintendency over the Satyrick Poets, with full authority to
punish some Poets that in Pernassus playing the Libellers with their defamatory
Verses, wounded the honor, and maimed the reputation of persons of quality.
And the Lord high Chancellor of the Court sent to the Count the Patent of his
admission in a very rich Basin of Gold, together with all the Acts of Grace,
Prerogatives, honors, and Pensions accustomed: But with a restraint under
Apollo's own hand, wherein his Majesty strictly commanded him; that he should
not by any means presume to stir out of doors in the month of March.

Bitterly did Fuentes make his moan to Apollo of this so strange a restraint,
not used in the Letters Patents of Bartolomeo Alviano, of Pietro Navarro, of
Antonio di Leva, of the Marquess of Pescara, and of other Commanders that were
his Camerades there. And with all subtilty of Rhetoric he besought him that it
might be taken off: But all in vain; for Apollo bad him plainly be quiet: Since
were not he himself in that Month withheld by the important respect of not
leaving the world without light, he would have pretermitted his wonted journey,
that he might not afflict mankind with an evil quality he has, which is, to
stir up pernicious humors in men, and not be able to dissolve them. That
therefore he would not at that time have a person seen in Pernassus, which had
the same defect, more then himself.

For all this, the Spanish Nation (liberal in making a great show of matters
that go on their side, and most skillful in concealing such as go against them)
did with artificial fires, with squibs, and vollies of Cannonshot, make signs
of extraordinary jollity for the admission of the Count into Pernassus. In
which it happened, that an hour within night, while the Court wherein the Royal
Palace of the Monarchy of Spain stands, was thronged with Princes, who taking
delight in beholding those rarities, went up and down disporting themselves;
Fuentes, whether out of a seditious genius, or the dictate of a mind desirous
of novelty; or out of some private distaste, or to disturb the quiet of Italy,
offered to dismount him in War, who commanded in Peace. Forth he came; and as
he was going to fasten a long squib of wildfire upon an Italian Prince, it
took fire so suddenly, that it went off in his hand, and the flash did so singe
his face, having monstrously besmutted him, that immediately he went out of
Pernassus; some say, to get himself cured in some secret place: Others say
'twas for shame, that the damage and affront which he would have done to
another, was returned upon himself. But the more common opinion is, that he
will come no more into this State, lest people should jeer him, for having by
such an action, utterly lost all that honor and reputation, which for so many
years he had purchased by his upright Government of Millan, and by his most
important enterprises in Flanders.

All the States of the World are censured in Pernassus for their errors.
APollo having no business which runs more in his mind, then that the Princes
of the Universe should by the upright Government of their States, give that
satisfaction to the people as they ought, did many hundreds of years ago;
introduce into Pernassus an admirable custom: Which was, That every year the
names of the chiefest Potentates on earthshould be written in little scedules,
and the Princes should be drawn out of an Urne, one by one: Whom, in the
presence of all the sacred College of the Literati, the public Censor of
Politic Affairs should put in mind of the disorders which he had observed in
the Government of their States, withal binding the said Princes, either out of
hand with important reasons, to make good the things laid to their charge, or
within the space of a month to amend them. An Institution certainly most Noble
and Religious; seeing that in the progress of so many ages that it has been
put in practice, it has been an occasion that many Princes have mended an
infinite number of their errors. Besides, that knowing they must be called to
such a strict account, they study to live so virtuously, that they may not come
to be disgraced in the presence of so many Princes.

On the day appointed them, all the Potentates of the Universe appeared before
Apollo; and Count Baldassar Castiglione, Politic Censor, told Giovanni della
Casa, Nuntio for the Apostolic Sea in this State, and who was first drawn out
of the Urne, that it seemed to him a very scandalous thing, and altogether
unworthy the Majesty of Popes, that there should be seen in Rome, some Potent
Famlies, to whom it was, instead of a rich Patrimony, to make themselves known
to foreign Princes, ill-affected to the greatness of the SeaApostolike, for
such as upon any occasion are ready by the Forces of their Faction, to put the
Popes to a great deal of trouble; and that with much truth he could say, that
in all his time, he had not seen a more foul and execrable act, then that which
the Emperor Charles the fifth did, when he rewarded the cruel seditions, and
shameless treacheries which Cardinal ^ompeo Colonna used toward Pope Clement
the seventh, with the most noble Charge of the Government of Naples.

Monsignor Giovanni then asked the Count, how long 'twas since he had
frequented the Roman Court? And he answering, Threescore and ten years ago: The
Nuntio replied, he should go thither again, now: For he would find, that the
Pompei, the Fabritii, the Prosperi, and the Ascanii of the Family of Colonna,
the Virginii, and other principal Barons of the House of the Orsini, had eaten
such store of sour grapes, as their Grand-childrens, and great-Grand-childrens
teeth are so set on edge, that they cannot chew so much as their pottage. For
the Popes, who tied those exorbitances about their fingers, knew so singularly
well how to put Tarquin's Precept in practice, that they had brought the
Poppies formerly as tall as Cypresses, to the low growth of ridiculous shrubs.

At this answer, the Count held his peace. Then turning to the Roman Empire,
which was the next that was drawn, he told him, that the present disorders
which were seen, not only in the large Patrimony of the House of Austria, but
all Germany over, were caused by the negligence of the now Emperor Rodolphus;
and earnestly desired that his Majesty would embrace the Government of his so
great States, with more care, remembering, that Princes, Rulers of mankind, bear
a heavier weight upon their shoulders, and have taken a more laborious work in
hand, then any the most toiling earth-delver whatsoever can deal in.

The Roman Empire returned the Censor many thanks for this advice; and then
very gravely answered, that it was a mischance common to all Princes, when
scandals arose in their States, to be accused of negligence, although it were
notoriously manifest, that since those scandals had been occasioned by the
machinations of over-potent enemies, they could not be avoided by never so wary
a Prince. That therefore he left it to every one's consideration, whether the
prodigious felicities of the most puissant House of Austria, in inheriting by
alliances, the States of Flanders, the Kingdoms of Spain, Naples, Sicily,
Bohemia, Hungary, Portugal, and the acquisition of the Dukedom of Millan, had
not raised up in all the Princes of Germany, Italy, and Europe, such devilish
jealousies, as have caused the past and present desolations which are seen in
her ancient Patrimony: To which, not all the Emperors that have been since
Maximitian the first, though they have been accounted very valiant and wife
Princes, ever knew how to apply any salve which did not infinitely inflame the
Ulcer of the German disorders, to which there flocked so many, and such
malignant humors, that man might truly say, it was incureable: And that
besides this, he desired them to remember the little authority that the modern
Emperors have in Germany; and that it was not only incivility, but open
injustice, to require that one which had his hands fast bound, should do with
them the feats of Orlando. That moreover he left to every ones consideration,
the quality of the Empire, which being elective, they that served had more
authority in it then they that commanded. Besides, he put them in mind of the
House of Austria's present weakness in Germany; which impious men having by the
sedition of Heresy, robbed of his subjects hearts, (a robbery of that
consequence, that those States may be given for lost, in which so diabolical a
seed is sown) the lateEmp. saw himself clean stripped of the obedience of the
greater part of his vassals. And therefore he entreated every one to reflect
upon the quality of those Cousins which the German House of Austria has in
Spain; for they will find that the Germans being a people born to Liberty, to
secure themselves from the monstrous power of so great a Family, take impious
and over-thwart revenge of even those that would not be secure, from suffering
slavery under the Spaniards, if they for men's sins sake, should ever come to
get the Government of the Universe: From which, by the mere goodness and mercy
of God, they are still kept the farther off, by how much the nearer, by their
subtilties, they endeavor to come to it. And that they should all remember,
how, the first that both in Italy, and out of it, did with all manner of
irreverence, and disrespect, dishinherit the Empire of his Majesty, were the
very same Cousins of his in Spain; which all men plainly perceived, by the
usurpation of Finale, and by other Imperial Fee-Farms, which they have seized
upon.

All which things, stirring up very dangerous humors, without dissolving them,
have brought it so to pass, that the House of Austria in Germany, is cruelly
battered by very powerful enemies; while the Spaniards were very busy only
with threatenings, in filling the whole world with jealousies and distastes.

Lastly, he earnestly pressed, that the whole College of the Literati would
well consider how, to the miserable barrenness of Sons, which is seen in the
modern Emperor, was added a lamentable fruitfulness of Brothers, one of which
hurried on by the violent instigation of ambition, made no scruple at the last,
to give a push to his house that was tumbling down headlong. All which have
been accidents so unlucky, that they would have made the world have taken King
Solomon himself for a blockhead.

With these replies which seemed to every one very weighty, the Censor was
pacified. Who turning himself toward the Warlike French Monarchy, told her
that all the Vertuosi of Pernassus did earnestly desire her that she would
regulate the furious, restless, fantastical, and too-too rash brains of her
Frenchmen, reducing them to those terms of discretion, wariness, and calmness
of mind, as they see is in the Noble Italian and Spanish Nations: And it took
off much from her reputation, that the Kingdom of France, which holds the first
place amongst the Principal Monarchies of the world, should be inhabited by
infinitely hasty, and hairbrain'd men.

To this advice the French Monarchy replied, That the Censor not well informed
of the Interests of her Kingdom, had censured the prime virtues that she most
fancified in her Frenchmen (as madness, levity, heedlesness, and a hasty
nature, which had made her so dreadful and formidable a Queen) for defects:
Since her Frenchmen, at any, though never so slight a beck of hers, did with
alacrity and readiness of mind, expose themselves to those dangers, in which
they saw that other Princes could not force their wary, circumspect people to
engage neither by halters, bastenado's, nor all the cruel tortures they could
put them to. And that in those many battles which she has had with diverse
valiant Nations, she has learned to know that Armies composed of Soldiers,
that have but little wit, and much courage (so they be directed by a General of
worth) carried the victory from those that made more profession of being
circumspect, and wondrous wise.

So much the more highly was the answer of the Monarchy of France extolled by
Castiglione, by how much the more apparently he knew by the quality of her most
puissant Kingdom, that the French possessed all those endowments and virtues of
mind, as were necessary in a Nation, for the founding, enlarging, and
maintaining of a huge command. Then the Censor turning to the High and Mighty
Monarchy of Spain, he told her, it was generally observed, that nothing did
give greater satisfaction to all sorts of people, but more particularly to
those which we^e subjects to foreign Nations, then the humanity and courteous
behavior of those that rule over them: And that she sending none to govern
Naples, Mill an, and Sicily, but her Spanish Dons, these with their usual
Castillian strutting, and with unsufferable Spanish ostentation, incomparably
much greater then the Kings of Spain themselves, either would or could have
used in those States, did so turn the stomachs even of her good and faithful
subjects, that they made the Spanish Government infinitely odious to men. And
that moreover he desired that in all negotiations, whether of more or less
weight, she would use more expedition: Seeing that by reason of her overmuch
tediousness and perplexity in the determining of important affairs, she had
lost very fair occasions, which were presented her for the aggrandizing of her
Power.

Very much did the Spanish Monarchy thank the Censor for the warnings he had
given her; and to clear her self, she said, That noble Gentleman, which had a
young wife extremely handsome, but naturally inclined to wantonness, would show
himself circumspect; if he liked it better, that a houshold-servant of his,
which was a spruce gallant, should rather be infinitely hated, then much
beloved, of his wife: And as for that tediousness of coming to a resolution in
her affairs, which she knew to be faulty and full of danger, it was not in her
power to remedy it: For ^od Almighty having, not without important reasons,
created her Spaniards in all and every thing, of a geni^s differing from that
of the ^rench, as long as these were in their determinations, rather
hairbrain'd then good at action, she by being slow and unresolved, obeyed the
will of God, who had appointed that it should be so.

Presently after was drawn the Monarchy of Poland; to whom Count Baldassare
said, That all the Princes of Europe desired that the present King Sigismond
should have used against those sedi^ious Nobles which lately rebelled against
him, some severity worthy of so grievous an offense, only that he might thereby
terrify other Nobles from committing the like.

To this the Polack Monarchy answered, That in her Elective Kingdom, those
punishments inflicted upon the Nobility had always proved dangerous, which in
an Hereditary State were beneficial: And that Kingdom, which one has received
as a Donative from a Nobility that had the election of the King in her own
power, could not be governed with that rigor which in hereditary States was
necess^ry, without running an evident hazard of ^umbling down headlong from his
greatness. ^or that Senate whose election of love gave one a Kingdom, if it were
thoroughly moved by that most powerful passion of hate, knew as well how to take
it away again: For the wary Senators used to reserve to themselves those
necessary instruments, whereby they might be able, upon every occasion of
dissatisfaction, to repent their liberality. And that the pre^ent King
Sigismond being the first of his stock that Reigned in Poland, was in all his
thoughts to aim at nothing more, then wi^h extraordinary diligence to get the
good will of the Nobility of his State, that so by his dearly esteemed memory,
he might perpetuate the succession of so great a Kingdom in his own stock. An
advice so much the more necessary for her King Sigismond, in that the Polacks,
though they had their King by way of election, yet they never defrauded the
bloud-Royal of the succession; if he that reigned, knew but how by his
gentleness to gain the universal good will of the Nobility. For Poland, being a
Nation which knew not how to live in an absolute freedom, yet so much abhorred
total servitude, as that King (a thing common to all elective Principaliti^s)
was amongst them the most sharp-fighted and vigilant in the affairs of his
State, that most of all made as if he did not see, and made the greatest show
that he desired not to know all things.

Not only the Censor, but the whole College of the Vertuosi admitted for
excellent, the Justification of the Polack Monarchy. And because the most
famous English Monarchy was drawn out of the Urn, the Censor, with something an
angry countenance, yet in gentle words, told her, That if humane wisdom were
necessary for any person, it was was most necessary for Princes, because of the
important business which they had in hand, of governing mankind: And that the
chiefest and truest wisdom of men, being the fear of God, little store of
discreet government could be expected from him who had committed the impious
and detestable ^olly, of falling away from his Divine Majesty. That therefore
he required her to let the present James the sixth know, that the politic
precept which England and Scotland had impudently put in practice, of
conforming Religion to Ambition, and making use of her for a Winch* to turn and
wind the people, was a point of Policy that either was unknown to the Ancients,
or which they durst not use; for fear of offending God. That therefore she
should put him in mind to have always before his eyes, the deplorable
calamities of the Greek Empire, which although for ampleness of State, for
multitude of Subjects, and wealthiness of Treasure, it did vastly surpass the
Kingdom of England; yet, because to avoid being subject to the Divine Supremacy
of the Pope, it disagreed from the Catholic Religion, it so much deserved the
Divine anger, that the world has beheld it made slave to the basest and most
barbarous Nation as ever, since the memory of men, reigned upon the earth. That
therefore she should give notice to the now-King James, that he ought so much
the more to reconcile himself to God, in that he being Sovereign over two
Kingdoms, so great enemies to one another, it was not possible for him, without
especial assistance from God, to establish the union of those two great Crowns;
That therefore he should know, that every day he did more and more provoke him
against himself, when spending the greater part of the day in defending the
manifest errors of his Sect, he busied himself in nothing but Disputations of
Religion.

At this severe and just censure of Castiglione, the English Monarchy was seen
to fall a crying.

And after this, the Censor turning toward the vast Ottoman Empire, told him,
That the cruelty which he used so much, upon slight suspicions, against his
most principal Officers, was judged by all the world to be a savage action,
every one being of opinion, that men of extraordinary worth and high deserts,
should never be questioned, but for grievous delinquencies, and such as had
been proved against them: And that if the Ottoman Princes might be justified in
taking away their Officers lives; yet the custom of seizing upon their goods,
and making them to be carried to the Royal Treasury, or Casna, and so utterly
to deprive the children of them, had no color of justice in it; for every one
conceived, that by this cruel rigor, men's Estates were rather proceeded against
then their demerits.

With admirable gravity answered the Ottoman Empire to this so open reproof,
saying, That he was grown up to that greatness, in which all men saw him, only
by those two powerful means, of Reward without measure, and of Punishment
without limit: And that the only foundation of the tranquillity of every State
being laid in the fidelity of the more important Ministers thereof, Princes
were to seek after nothing with greater care, then by immense rewards to allure
them to Loyalty, and by infinite chastisements to frighten them from treachery.
And that it not being possible for those Officers, which had in their power the
Forces of Emperors, and Government of States, to trespass but in matters of
greatest moment; it were the course of a simple Prince, in suspicions of
highest consequence* to draw up Processes, to allow Apologies, and to hear the
Defendants Justifications: Whereas in such cases as these, the Prince that will
not endanger all, must strive to take his Officer unawares, and secure his own
affairs, by making the execution of the punishment, precede even the accusation
it self. And that it has oftentimes fallen out, that by a hasty punishment,
he has prevented the consummation of very foul treasons: Which resolution,
though he must confess it to be very severe, yet he knew it was one cause, that
in his State there were seen no Counts of St. Paul, no Princes of Orange, no^
Gaspar Colligni's, no Dukes of Guise, d'Aumale, du Main, de Mercury, and other
odious monsters of disloyalty, as have been seen elsewhere, to the shame of
those Princes that with halters, daggers, and axes, have not known how to
prevent so dangerous offenses: It being in matters of State, a rule as common
as it is certain* that, that Officer which gives his Prince never so little
cause to suspect his fidelity, forfeits his life; since those Commanders that
have in their power the charge of Armies, are (no less then the Wives of
honorable Persons) obliged to live with such purity of mind, that they must be
without, not only any fault, but any the least suspicion of an unchaste desire.
That for his taking away of his B^ssa's goods after their deaths, he could very
truly tell them, that the Pensions, the Donatives, and Wealth wherewith other
Princes reward their servants, were in comparison of those inexhausted riches
which he bestows upon his well-deserving Officers, poor pitiful things: as the
Royal Treasures which Rusten, Mehemet, Ibrahin, and many others left behind
them, have fully and amply testified: And that the greatest forecast which a
Prince ought to have in rewarding his servants, consisted in taking a course,
that it might never be possible for others to employ those immense riches
wherewith he had purchased their infinite fidelity, to the detriment of him
that had been so liberal. That he had learned by the most lamentable disorders
which happened in the States of other Potentates, how it was a most pernicious
thing for Princes, that the extraordinary wealth left by a deserving Officer,
should pass to his children, whether by that virtue, by that valor, and by
that same Loyalty which was in their Father, they had first deserved it from
the Prince, or not. And that he confisc^ted the great Inheritances of his
Bassa's, not out of avarice, as many wrongfully judged; but that he might not
make those subjects, who for being descended from fathers of noted worth, put
the Prince in certain hope that they would imitate their Progenitors in virtue,
by the convenience of living idle, consequently to grow vicious too; and that
he kept the gates of his Treasury always open to his Officers heirs, that he
might restore to them their paternal inheritances doubled, whenever by
Loyalty and Valor they should deserve them: And that how apt great riches
possessed by a vicious man, and an ambitious subject, were to dist^rb the peace
of any Kingdom, how great soever, was a thing known to every man, by the fresh
examples which the world has seen in France and Flanders.

While the Ottoman Empire spoke these things, he observed that the French
Monarchy by shaking her head, did show (as it seemed) that she by no means
approved of these discourses. Whereupon something passionately he said; Most
renowned Queen, my custom of seizing upon my Bassa s inheritances, makes well
for my greatness, and the tranquillity of my State; and for the friendsh^p that
is betwixt us, I could wish that the like were observed in your France. For you
know well to what use Henry Duke of Guise did put that vast deal of wealth,
wherewith the liberal King Francis the first, and King Henry his son, rewarded
the deserts of Duke Francis his father.

For woe to that Prince, who because he knows not how to be severe to others, is
so cruel to himself, as absurdly to breed up Serpents in his bosom. You, I, and
all the rest of us that bear rule, know that the sweetest honey that men can
taste, is Sovereignty; and there being no man that for never so little of it,
would not gladly adventure to lose his life; Princes ought to be still most
vigilant in keeping all the avenues to Government blocked up, and by all
possible severity to hold every one out of the reach of ambition. Nay they
ought to order their matters so, that every private m^n whatsoever, may despair
of ever being able to taste of so pleasant a liquor.

And I tell you plainly, had your Duke of Guise but offered to think in my
State, that which with so much scandal he publicly made bold to put in
execution in your Kingdom; that very first day would I have showed him the same
play which your Henry the third (though urged to it by most of the Italian
^rinces) knew not how to resolve upon, till the last day of his insufferable
vexarions; and just then when the sore of the French commotions was grown to be
an incureable Canker. For where ambition reigns amongst the Nobles, Princes are
enforced to show themselves totally severe, keeping the gibbets always ina
readiness, for punishing of the seditious and rebellious; and their Treasury
open to reward the peaceable and loyal; that Prince being unworthy of command,
that has not a genius to make himself obeyed: Neither is there any thing more
scandalo^s ^n a State, then that the Prince should live in jealousy of that
Officer which ought to live in fear of him. But it is proper for you Princes of
Europe, that making a profession of Learning, and of living according to rules
of great Policy, call me Barbarian, and my safe manner of proceeding
Tyrannical, to suffer your selves by your heroical virtues, of clemency and
mildness, to be brought to the shameful condition of suffering* most unworthy
things.

Impossible it is to say, how much the Ottoman Empire did with his discourse
offend all the Vertuosi of the sacred College, who standing up in very great
wrath, told him, That with Reasons in hand they would make it good to him, that
all the particulars which he had spoken, were most wicked conceits, unworthy to
be uttered by a person that had a soul, and as much to be listened to by men
that made profession of honor.

At which the Ottoman Empire smiling said, That in the Politic conceits, by
which others governed Kingdoms, respect was had to the commodiousness of Moral
Precepts, which by well regulated customs, were serviceable to goodness. And
that yet the tranquillity and peace of States were to be preferred before all
other humane interests.

Then the Censor, to cut off so odious a disputation, turning to the great
Dukedom of Muscovy, told him, that among the greatnesses of a Prince, it was
called the second Noblest Prerogative, to have command over people that were
lovers of Learning; and that it was not only little for his credit, but a thing
for which he incurred much reproach, that he should so much give his mind to
have his Subjects brought up in gross ignorance; for he was scoffed at by every
one, that having banished the Liberal Arts, he had given his people leave only
to learn how to write and read.

To this Censure the Dukedom of Muscovy answered, That the hideous fire, which
he had observed Learning always kindled in those States where it was admitted,
had made him resolve, by no means to give way that so scandalous a Cockle
should be sown in his Dukedom: For Men being as much Princes Herds, as Sheep
are private persons Flocks, it were the height of madness to arm those humane
sheep (subjects) which by reason of the much simplicity that God created in
them, are, though many, easily governed by one only Shepherd, the Prince, with
that craft and malice, which Learning engrafts into the brains of those that
entertain it: And that it was no more the proper quality of fire to give heat,
then of books to transform the simple sheep into most corrupted wolves.

Lastly, that he held it for a thing unquestionable, That if the Germans, the
Hollanders, and the Zealanders, had been kept by their Princes, in the
simplicity of their ancient ignorance, and they withal had given charge, that
the pure minds of those Nations should not have been contaminated with the
pestilence of Greek and Latin Literature; they would never with such havoc of
the old Religion, and the casting out of many Princes which formerly governed
them, have had the judgment to know how to settle in their Countries, those
perfect Forms of Commonwealths, which the wit of Solon, the wisdom of Plato,
and all the Philosophy of Aristotle to boot, could never attain unto:

This answer so troubled the minds of the Censor, and of the whole College of
the Literati, that with threatening countenances they said, That the arguments
alleged by the great Duke of Muscovy, were most manifest blasphemies: Nay it
seemed that the Literati were minded to do themselves right by arms; but their
courages were cooled when they saw the major part of the more potent Monarchies
betake themselves to their weapons in defense of the Muscovite* Who growing yet
bolder by the ready assistance which he perceived he should have from so many
Potentates, freely said, That if there were any present who would deny that
Learning did infinitely hinder the tranquillity and good Government of States,
and that the Prince might with more ease command a million of Idiots, then a
hundred Learned men, born to command, not to obey; he lied in his throat.

At this generous defiance, the Vertuosi were all in a pelting chafe, and
courageously said, That the Muscovite had spoken with insolence worthy of an
Idiot; and that they would make it evident to him, that men without Learning
were two-legged Beasts.

Already was the scuffle begun, when the Censor cried out, Hold! bear due
respect to this place where you are all assembled to amend disorders, and not
to commit scandals. And such was the reverence every one bare to the Majesty of
the Censor, that the minds of the Princes, and the hearts of the Vertuosi,
though stark mad for anger, and enraged with disdain, were wholly paci^ied on a
sudden.

Here it is not to be concealed, that the Duke of Urbin, who before sat in the
Classis of Princes, as soon as he saw the fray begun, went on the other side to
help the Vertuosi, and placing himself in the first rank, showed a mind
resolved to lose his State, so he might but defend the Liberal A^ts.

All Tumults then being appeased, the Censor told the most renowned Venetian
Liberty, who was drawn out of the Urne, That the hardest bone which
Aristocracies could never gnaw (as she well knew) was the bridling of the young
Nobility, which when by overmuch licentiousness it had distasted the better
sort of Citizens, had often occasioned the ruin of the most famous
Commonwealths* and that to his great grief, he heard that the young Nobility of
Venice did by their proud demeanor give offense to many honorable Citizens of
that State; who loudly complained, that as the insolence of the Nobil^ty
increased, the punishments abated. That he therefore wished her to remember, it
was a dangerous thing in Aristocracies, for those which should glory of being
wholly freed from the perils which a State is subject to, that obeys the
caprichio of one Prince, to be heard complain of being baffled by many Tyrants.

To these things the Venetian Liberty answered, That the disorder recounted by
the Censor, was true, and withal dangerous; but that pride and insolence are
so annexed to authority of command, that they seemed to be all of a birth; and
that the excessive licentiousness which the Nobility of all Aristocracies
exercised over the Citizens, was reputed by all the famous men that have
discoursed of Commonwealths, a desperate cure: For though it were necessary
that insolences should be restrained by severe punishments; yet on the other
side, Aristocracies should forbear openly to chastise Noblemen, though
seditious: and this, that they may not by disgraceful, sufferings bring the
people to undervalue that very Nobility, which having in their hands the
Government of the State, ought for the main Interest of the public
conservation of Liberty, to be maintained in highest reputation. And that if in
her Venice, the more stubborn and insolent Nobles were not openly punished in
St. Marks Place, between the two Columns so often, as, it seemed, many desired,
that yet by the Gran Consiglio, by the Pregadi, by the Collegio, and other
superior Magistrates who dispose of public Offices, there was, with the
torments of disgraceful repulses, made a terrible massacre of those seditious
Nobles, who in a free Country were discovered to bear tyrannous minds; and
that in Venice there were seen many persons of very Noble Families, whose
ancient reputation had been shot to fitters, with Harquebuses charged with
bullets made of rags, and that being by such odd blows sometimes felled to the
ground, they were never able to rise again to honors and dignities. And that
there could not be invented, no not by Perillus himself, a more torturing rack
for the tearing of ones body limb from limb, then that which a Noble Venetian
has sometimes undergon, when in the Rival ship about Offices of credit, and
much stood for, he has seen go before him, a person younger then he, only
because he was known by the Senate to be more deserving.

Castiglione not only admired at the justification of the renowned Venetian
Liberty; but infinitely praised both the circumspectness and the severity which
she used in punishing and chastising her Nobility, in case either of any
demerit, or of any defect.

Presently after, the Censor said to the Dukedom of Savoy; that his State being
placed between the confines of France and Italy, he was necessitated with all
possible diligence to maintain neutrality between those Princes upon whom he
did confine. But that in these last tumults of France, having openly discovered
himself to be wholly Spanish, he had put not only his own, but the States of
all the Italian Princes in great trouble; and that while with the bellows of
his Forces he had puffed in the fire of the French commotions, enkindled by
Spanish ambition, he ought to believe, that that flame would burn up friends
and kindred, before it could come at the other Italian Potentates that were
enemies.

The Dukedom of Savoy readily answered the Censor, That the adherence of his
last Duke to the Spaniard was true. But the fair advantage which he had of
three sevens in hand, had enforced him to set his Rest, hoping to have gotten
the famousest Prime as ever any Prince whatsoever had at Cards. Upon which
hazard he had so much the more willingly put himself, because it seemed a thing
appointed by destiny, that those moneys which had been gotten at play, should
at the same Game be lost. That afterward if by his ill fortune, in the fourth
Card that was dealt him, he should happen to be affronted by an ugly
Court-Card, with which he should have the worst Game that could be in the Pack,
yet he knew that honest good fellows would have confessed, that though the
resolution were very full of danger, yet they themselves, not to wrong the
Cards, would have played it no otherwise. The Censor understood the Metaphor,
and highly praised that Dukes resolution: Who, because from a little Fever, he
might have received as a Donative, the command of the greater part of the
world, when not only without any note of indiscretion, but to his infinite
glory, he threw the Die of all the greatness of his Fortunes, in the Tables of
chance, he might once more say those famous words; Aut Caesar, aut Nullus.

Then the Censor turned to the great Duke of Tuscany, and sharply reprehending
him for rousing up the Wasp with those Galleys of his, he put him in mind of
the calamities and troubles which the Knights of St. John suffered in Rhodes,
in Tripoly, and the great hazard they ran at last in Malta, only because like
fools they would needs be fastening of squibs upon the Bull: And that every
discreet Christian Prince should rather favor the Turks present carelessness,
then with injuries that yield but little benefit, nay which may bring much
danger and damage to awaken them, and enforce them to set their minds again
upon Maritime affairs, which now-a-daies they had given over. He likewise
recalled to his memory the many complaints, of infinite multitudes which
continually cry out, that by his hindering of the Trade between Italy and the
Levant, all the Drugs that came from beyondsea, were grown excessive dear.

To this reproof the Grand Dukedom of Tuscany answered, That the power of a
Prince could not be termed perfect, unless with a considerable party of men of
War, he had some command upon the sea: And that his Galleys were very
necessary, not only for the Tuscan greatness, but for the securing of the
Liberty of all Italy; as those which served for a School to Mariners, as a
Seminary both for sea-Captains, and sea-souldiers. He confessed that the damage
they did to Trading, was true; but that withal he desired every one to
remember, that the mystery of War, both by sea and by land, could not be
learned by soldiers, nor practiced by Princes, without bringing some damage
along with it. And that since Tuscany did breed a numerous rascallity of
turbulent mad-caps, and extravagant humors, he had yet farther very great need
of those Galleys, which were as the scavengery of his State, by which he kept
it cleanly, employing them for slaves, which had done mischiefs already, and
for soldiers, those heteroclitick dispositions, who by reason of their
restless natures, 'twas thought were likely to do worse.

With wonderful applause was the great Dukedom of Tuscany's Apology approved
of, both by the Censor, and the whole College. Whereupon the Count told the
Comomnwealth of Genoua, which was drawn last, That the use of Exchange which
she allowed her Nobility, caused the great disorder of enriching the private,
and withal, impoverishing the public stock: whose in-comes would have yielded
a notable sum of Gold, had the King-like wealth of her Nobles been employed in
the just traffic of Merchandise. And that together with the prohibition of
Exchange, her Nobles should give over that dangerous conversation with the
Spaniards, which so much lessened her reputation.

With a readiness that much took all the Literati, the Commonwealth of Genoua
answered, It was true that the Exchanges wrought that effect which the Censor
had intimated, and therefore were most pernicious in any Monarchy; but that
yet, without any prejudice to the public interests, they might be permitted
in a well ordered Republic; for the most substantial and sure treasures of a
free State, were the riches of the nobility or gentry, and of all the body
Politic one with another. Athing which happened not in Monarchies, where
betvveen the Princes possessions, and private men's goods, there was a
partitionwall of the largest size, made up of meum and tuum: Because in
Monarchies the change of State happens ordinarily with no great matter of
concernment to the people, only changing the name of Matthew to that of
Martine: But in the subversion of Commonwealths, where Liberty was to be
changed into Bondage, the public treasure was made out of the peculiar goods
of private men, who then would profusely lay out all their Estates, to defend
as long as breath lasted, every man's peculiar Liberty.

As for the dangerous Commerce that her Nobility held with the Spaniards, she
desired every one thoroughly to consider whether the intercourse of her
Genoueses were hurtful to the Spaniards, or the familiarity of the Spaniards
to the Genoueses: For certainly they would find that the drying pan stood in no
great fear of being smutted by the kettle.

The Spanish Monarchy invites the Cardinal of Toledo to be Secretary of State:
who refuses: and why.
It Is given out up and down this Court, that the high and mighty Monarchy of
Spain has invited the most illustrious Cardinal of Toledo for her chief
Secretary of State, with a large Pension, to assist as her Divine in the
Counsel-Royal, that so nothing be determined there, which may be against her
conscience. This news has filled all this Court with great admiration, every
one knowing how much this Prelate did work against the interests of her King,
in the re-benediction of the most Christian King Henry the fourth: Wherefore no
man could imagine the reason why so sharp-witted a Princess should desire to
make use of a person so little to be trusted in a business of highest
importance.

Those that most profess the knowledge of the subtle Spaniards manner of
proceeding, did even in this, observe the old cunning of the Spanish Kings;
whose peculiar custom it is, never to give over, till with Pensions, with
honorable places of Command, and with all courteous demonstrations of
affection, they have brought over to their side, all those eminent persons whom
they perceive to be estranged from their interests, and from whom they know,
that at a pinch, they may receive services. They that are most inward wi^h this
great Cardinal, report that his grace cheerfully accepted of the ^oble charge
propounded to him: But upon this condition, though, which by the Spaniards was
immediately rejected. For he said, that when by the authority of holy
Scripture, by the Doctrine of the holy Fathers, by the institutions of the
Canons, he had made it evident to the Co^nsel-Royal, that the results of it
disagreed with the Laws of God and man, he would then desire but power to
hinder the execution of them; all to no other end, then to let the world know,
that the Kings Divi^e was in that Counsel only to assist the conscience of his
King, with knowledge of the will of his Lord God; not for a Vizard to settle
upon him the Rule of Kingdoms over men: for he conceived it would be too
shameful an action, that such a one as he should be employed to authenticate
the diabolical impiety of modern Policy, and make silly souls believe, that the
nastiest Assa foetida that would outstink a Polecat, is as pure Musk as ever
came from the Levant.

Apollo detesteth the means that are recommended to him, for getting of Moneys.
Extraordinary is the want of money which at this time is in Pernassus; for not
only his Majesty's Exchequer, and Treasures, and the greatest Princes of this
Court, but likewise the Gentlemen, the Merchants, and the Artisans are in great
distress for it; in so much, that many days since the Commissioners for
Apollo's Royal Patrimony, and others deputed by his Majesty over this business,
did a long time consider and consult, what course was to be taken for the
remedying of this disorder.

And it was resolved by all to be very expedient, that likewise into Pernassus
should be introduced that admirable custom observed by many Princes in Italy,
of selling the public revenues to private men, they which bought them, paying
the honest Rent of six in the hundred; and that it should be lawful also for
private men to put out their money to such as had need of it, at the return of
eight in the hundred, by the name of Consideration.

This course which these Gentlemen so highly approved of, as soon as ever it
was proposed to Apollo, was immediately rejected, as most pernicious to all
Estates public and private: And his Majesty then said, that he would not by
any means, by the engaging to another the public Revenues of his Estate, give
an odious president to other Princes, for encumbring in their life times, those
incomes, which as they had received free, so they ought to transmit them to
their successors. For by such inventions as these, there was not only a door
opened to the ruin of Estates, but the way was levelled for the avarice and
malice of those Princes, who either because they Reign in States elective, or
because in hereditary, they have no successor of their own race, would
dismember those public Rents, which are the true Storehouses, and the secure
Magazines that preserve and aggrandize Kingdoms.

A disorder, which being by the excessive malice of some Princes introduced
into their States has extremely weakened them. And upon the very same subject
his Majesty said further, that in many States, the Taxes and Imposts were
now-adaies observed to be much increased, because the new-entring Princes have
found the public Revenues mortgaged by their Predecessors; and that they
themselves, to provide for the urgent necessities of their States, and the
private exigents of their Families, were enforced to invent new Taxes, and even
against their wills, with odious Impositions to overload their afflicted and
tired subjects. Which errors men should so much the more fear that they would
one day ruin their States, by how much the more Princes, not to run the
manifest hazard of enkindling great commotions in their jurisdictions, and
being no longer able to charge the people with new Taxations, should at last be
constrained to grow desperate, and to seize upon the Rents, coloring their
rapacity with the pretense, that it was more then their predecessors could do
to empawn them so prodigally and maliciously, to the prejudice of the State,
and of their successors.

And that States being subject to the sentence of the sword, and the tribunal
of violence, if it should happen that a Kingdom, where the disorder of engaging
the public Revenues, was practiced, should be usurped and taken on him, by any
Potentates; the new Prince by relinquishing the ordinary payments, would have,
if not a just, at least a colorable reason, to commit that cruel outrage of
ruining the Patrimony of infinitely many widows, orphans, and other poor
creatures that had had all their estates laid out upon the purchase of the
public Revenues. And that he knew, the abuse of alienating the public
Revenues, was gone so far, that many Princes with unheard of avarice and
greediness, had either ransacked their own estates, or suffered them to run to
ruin; and this horrid cruelty they would have to be taken for politic wit, so
to weaken, in elective States, a hated successor; in hereditary a stranger. And
lastly Apollo said, That it was most wickedly resolved upon, that private men
by the purchase of the public Revenues, and the mischievous bringing in of
Consideration-money, should fetch gain out of mere and bare money, without
putting it forth upon any commodities; it being a most abominable thing, that
men born to live by the sweat of their brows, to manure the earth, and attend
upon the multiplication of cattle, should be maintained by those Usuries which
are got out of a dead heap of money. A piece of bruitishness that is good for
nothing but to make Industrious men lean, and Usurers Fat.

FINIS.

