A Plea for Moderation TOWARD DISSENTERS: Occasioned by The Grand-Juries
Presenting the SERMON AGAINST PERSECUTION, at the last Assizes holden at
Sherburn in Dorset-shire. To which is Added, An Answer to the Objections
commonly made against that SERMON.

By SAMVEL BOLD, Author of the SERMON against PERSECUTION.

If a Man walking in the Spirit and Falsehood do lie, saying, I will Prophecy
unto thee of Wine and of Strong Drink, he shall even be the Prophet of this
People,

Mic. 2. 11. They build up Zion with Blood, and Jerusalem with Iniquity,

Mic. 3. 10. Qui pacem and concordiam in Ecclesia vult esse, oportet eum rerum
necessariarum confessione contentum esse,

Jac. Acont. Strat. l. 7. LONDON, Printed for R. Janeway, in Queens-Head-Alley
in Paternoster Row, 1682.

A Plea for Moderation TOWARD DISSENTERS, etc.
AMongst the many Stratagems Satan has invented and made use of to hinder the
progress of True Christianity, his engaging some Pretenders to it, to appear
extremely concerned and zealous about Unnecessary Rites and Ceremonies, has not
been the least fatal. For by advancing this Point, he has induced many carnal,
vicious, and sensual men to embrace this Profession, with (as it is very
probable) a particular design to supplant its Power.

It is undeniably evident, that the Primitive strict Discipline of the Church,
with relation to Manners, did decay answerably to the proportion of warmth, and
zeal, men were allowed to lay out about little Indifferences. And when the
Church was so far corrupted, as to busy her self mainly with making and
executing such Decrees and Orders as did only relate to some external and
unnecessary Circumstances, she did apparently decline the vigorous prosecuting
those things in which Religion does indeed consist.

And I am persuaded, one of the Principal things which has hindered good men
from an universal concurrence, in observing the same Orders about Indifferent
things, is their observing that by this means, that strictness of practice, and
holiness of conversation, which should most of all be minded, was in a great
measure neglected, and almost decry'd as a needless singularity and preciseness.

It is certain this did open a very wide door for those to enter into the
Communion of the Church, and prevailed very much for the continuing of them in
that Communion, and for the having of them encouraged and carest, whose vicious
courses made Christianity evil spoken of by Strangers; and who according to the
Ancient Rules and Canons of the Church, should have had the Censures of the
Church inflicted on them, to the casting them out of her Communion, not any
more to be admitted, without giving extraordinary evidences and demonstration
of their being brought to better minds.

And this sort of People having thus insinuated themselves into the Church, did
soon obtain so great an interest, as to alter the very Design, Intention and
Use of those Instances which were appointed by Christ Himself. They procured
such Restrictions to be laid on Peoples communicating in Divine Ordinances,
that whereas before none were to communicate, but such as had in the course of
their lives given good evidence that they feared God, and worked Righteousness,
now none must communicate but only those who would observe such Outward Orders,
Humane Constitutions, and Unnecessary Rites. And whereas anciently the Censures
of the Church, especially Excommunication, was not inflicted on any, unless
they were stubborn opposers of the Christian Faith, or were guilty of some
great Immorality in their Practice, they had now brought the Christian Religion
to consist mainly in two Points, viz. Dignity and Outward Rites, and
consequently the Censures of the Church were inflicted principally for peoples
not being implicitly and blindly obedient.

There was now nothing known to be disorderly walking, but not observing
appointed Rites; nor no Disobedience, but when people would not own their
Authority in every thing they enjoined. And then men might be as vicious as
they pleased, swear, and be drunk, and commit all manner of lewdness, and yet
be admirable Zealous Christians, because they were for the Church. But if a man
were ever so pious, strict, chaste, and every way truly Religious, yet if he
would not pay them every Groat they did unjustly demand, or would not observe
every Ceremony they did enjoin, they presently summoned him, and if he would
not then yield a blind obedience to their Order, they forthwith gave him to the
Devil.

Men, tho extremely vicious, yet having not worn away all sense of Religion,
are willing to strike in with that way, which has most public countenance,
especially if they perceive that some Outward Formalities are by that part most
Rigidly insisted on, and that by showing a great zeal for these things they may
both satisfy for their other Immoralities, and be reputed, according to common
Vogue, Religious to a High Degree.

And no wonder then, if such as these do in any Age give out themselves for the
only Sons of the Church, when they find the observation of these outward
Ceremonies is very consistent with the Lusts and Vices they are most fond of,
and that much profit will accrue, by prosecuting others who are not satisfied
in these things, Dr Stilling. Pref. to his Iren.
and whose exemplary lives are a reproach and shame to them. Men being very
loath to put themselves to the trouble of a Holy life, are very ready to
embrace any thing, which may but dispense with that; and if but listing
themselves under such a Party may but shelter them under a disguise of
Religion, none more ready than such to be known by distinguishing Names, none
more zealous in the defense of every Tittle and Punctilio that lies most remote
from those essential Duties wherein the Kingdom of God consists, viz.
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

But that Church is undoubtedly under very unhappy Circumstances, which cannot
have any owned for her Children, who will not imitate the worst of men in their
groundless zeal, their inhumane barbarity, and their detestable and most
enormous Immoralities. And as I have hitherto been speaking of what has been
done in former Ages, so I will adventure to say at present concerning
pretenders to the Church of England; if there be any who go under this
Character, who would willingly bring this Church under the same unhappy
Circumstances I have before mentioned, they are the greatest Enemies she can
possibly have.

As Satan has proved too successful formerly, in endeavoring to fill the
Church with wicked superstitious men, so he has done himself great, service, by
instigating people to force others to comply in the use of needless Rites, by
great and pressing Penalties. For this has proved a very powerful Expedient to
advance two of those Designs he does principally endeavor to have furthered in
the world.

1. It yields a very plausible pretense, under which wicked men may vent their
wrath, and envy, and malice. For tho these Bigots talk of the Church and
Religion, yet they give too much evidence in their carriage, that what they do
is the Fruit of that Rancour they have long cherished in their Breasts, and
which has quite Cankered their Spirits. The pretenses these men do make, are
but Colors under which they may more decorously vent their venom and malignity.

2. It tends much to the utter extirpating of that Love, and Charity, and
Meekness, which are commended by Christ and his Apostles as the Vital Parts,
the Honor and Glory of the Christian Religion.

Satan has created the Church much trouble by causing Divisions amongst
Christians. Sometimes he has suggested Errors and False Doctrines to some who
have professed Christianity, and then has irritated them to make Parties, and
adhere resolutely to those Tenets against all the Demonstrations the Orthodox
could give them both of the falseness of their Opinions, and how pernicious
they would be in their Consequences. But I think he has done Religion more
Disservice by hurrying men into undue and peevish Heats about Humane Devices,
than he has been able to do, by instigating men to broach and publish such
Doctrines as have had an immediate plain and direct tendency to overthrow
Christianity. For under a pretense of the Innocence of these former Instances,
and the great Benefit some pious men have concluded would follow from the use
of them, and the plausible Arguments they might easily urge for them, he has
first of all prevailed with men to lay out too much of their Zeal about these
things, and then by degrees has gone so far, as to obtain those very Instances,
which were at first designed by good men to be used only as Decent and Comely
Ceremonies, to be taught and enjoined as Doctrines of Christianity.

We have too many Instances of this in the Church of Rome. I will mention but
one. There is no great doubt to be made, but that the primary design of those
who first brought Pictures and Images into Churches, was innocent; but these
had not been long there, before Satan corrupted men's minds, and drew them to
pay them a Divine and Religious Worship. Yea he prevailed with the Leading and
Governing part of the Church to espouse that Cause so heartily, the did contend
and declare that Images not only ought to be set up, but to be worshipped.

Every man who has taken any tolerable notice of the History of former times,
must certainly know the Church of Christ has been often very miserably torn and
rent, and divided, on the account of Indifferent Ceremonies. Some have
stubbornly refused to comply in the use of those Rites for which others have
had an extraordinary kindness, and these being impatient of that Denial, have
been too fierce and rigorous in imposing what they have said they did believe
would be very useful.

And what has been just matter of complaint in former Ages, is thorough the
Craft of Satan, and wicked Hypocrisy of carnal men, a more than ordinary
ground of Fear and Trouble to this present Generation.

We who profess our selves Protestants, have stood a great while at some
distance, and of late our Difference has been exceedingly heightened, nay it is
to be feared many attempts have been made by some sort of People, to render us
wholly unreconcileable.

This is the more Deplorable, and has a more Direful Aspect, because we do on
both sides lie under more then ordinary engagements to unite as speedily and
firmly as we can. Besides the nature and tendency of our Religion, and all that
excellent provision Christianity does make to keep its Professors from Jars and
unseemly Quarrels, making Meekness, and Peace and Love, and Condescension, and
mutual Forbearance, some of its Vital Parts. Besides this, and all the ordinary
inducements to Union, we are now in a very audible and visible manner called
on, and importuned to do all we can on each side to unite. We must either
unite, or we must perish. It is high time to leave off insisting on little
punctilio's of Honor; we ought duly to weigh our circumstances, and the nature
of the things we Contend about, and if our Dangers be unmeasurably great, and
the things we differ about such as will not bear so great a weight, as the loss
of our Religion and all our Rights, we must yield something on either side, and
that side must be willing to part with most, that can do it with greatest ease,
and most innocence.

Many eminent persons have employed their thoughts to find out Expedients by
which our Common Enemy, the Papists, may be hindered from getting so much
advantage by our Differences as they expect. No doubt the Papists have had a
great influence in increasing our Divisions. They have been Industrious in
laboring to exasperate men, and work their Passions beyond all Government and
Moderation. Nay tho some of our Make-bates, who do wholly employ their Talents
to widen our Differences, do pretend to the Church of England, I am verily
persuaded they are either Real Papists, of very Mischievous Instruments in
Popish hands, to effect and bring about the common Ruin of Protestants.

The weakening of the Protestant Cause, be it under what pretense soever, is
undoubtedly very serviceable to the Papists; and whether this be done, by
keeping up mutual Animosities and Contentions amongst us, to the weakening and
impairing the strength of both sides, or by irritating the superior and
prevailing part to squeeze and subdue the other by their power and might, is
equally acceptable to them. This latter cuts off that supply the stronger part
would undoubtedly have from the other, when assaulted by the Common Enemy. It
is Policy in the Papists to employ some of their own Party to counterfeit, and
feign, and pretend themselves of the Church of England, and then engage them
and others under that pretense to endeavor the ruin of those they call
Dissenters, not only because they hate them, but because they know that having
done thus, they shall be more successful in attempting the Church of England.

However, they are certain, if they can make us the Executioners of their Rage
against our fellow Protestants, they shall be better able to grapple with, and
execute their own wrath on the Church of England, when single and by Her self.
He that encouraged the two Countrymen in their Quarrel, and provoked them to
fight with one another, till they were both absolutely tired, and when they
were thus wearied, did murder them both, would no doubt have taken his Revenge
on the Survivor, if one of them had killed the other.

Amongst the many Methods and Expedients found out for effecting a firm and
lasting Union amongst Protestants, I think Dr. Stilling-fleet in his early
years did hit on a very clear and infallible one, if it might be universally
attended to, and countenanced by those in power. Ireni^: p. 121.
Were we so happy but to take off things granted unnecessary by all, and
suspected by many; and judged unlawful by some; and to make nothing the bounds
of our Communion, but what Christ has done, viz. on Faith, one Baptism, etc.
allowing a liberty for matters of Indifferency, and bearing for the weakness of
those, who cannot bear things which others account lawful, we might indeed be
restored to a true primitive luster, far sooner than by furbishing up some
antiquated Ceremonies, which can derive their Pedigree no higher than from some
ancient Custom and Tradition: God will one day convince men that the Union of
the Church lies more in the unity of Faith and Affection, than in uniformity of
doubtful Rites and Ceremonies.

It is a very great instance of the deplorable Degeneracy of this Age, that
there are so many professed Enemies to all Moderation toward them who have
different Apprehensions concerning the Indifferent Appendages to our Public
Worship. Nay their zeal against this Moderation transports them into such
indecencies, they will not only have it expunged the number of Christian
Virtues, but they dare decry all who own and plead for it, as the worst of men.
Instead of Observing that Rule given by the Apostle, Phil. 4. 5. Bp. Wilkins
Sermon. p. 394.
Let your Moderation (a virtue inclining us to such a kind of benign and
equitable temper in our conversing with one another, whereby we may endeavor
to preserve concord and amity in our treating concerning those things about
which we differ) we known unto all men, they seem to read it backward, and do
in their practice publish to the world, they be resolved to let their Rage and
Fury be known to all men.

But the Hurt would not be so great, if they would only publish their wild and
untameable Temper under a Private name, and not strive to injure and bespatter
the Church of England, by pretending her Patronage.

Moderation is not only a Christian Duty, but a peculiar Ornament to any Church
which does espouse and practice it. And therefore those who do labor to
represent the Church of England under another Character, by pretending to her
in their fierce and outrageous carriages, do as much as they can to baptize her
Antichristian, and under a pretense of justifying themselves in their worst
Demeanor, do strip her of one of the greatest Excellencies, and chiefest
Ornaments the Christian Church does enjoy, and can glory in.

The ordinary matters, in dispute between us and other Protestants, are not of
that Moment we should be so zealous and passionate about them. Christian love
and charity must not be lost and thrown away for such things. Indeed where
these are in any considerable Degree, they will do very much to allay and
quench those Heats, into which passionate and inconsiderate people are too apt
to be unduly hurried.

We have at this time greater things which call for our zeal and concern to be
imployd about: And the dangers we are in of losing them should mightily operate
on us, and make us cautious, lest by any unsuitable carriage we should be any
way instrumental to make that breach wider, through which Popery is apparently
laboring to thrust her self in amongst us. The great and weighty matters of
Religion, the very Fundamentals of Christianity are now assaulted by the
Papists. And if they can get but a little more advantage, we shall be in danger
of having new Articles added to our Creed, and new Sacraments administered in
our Churches. And therefore whilst in danger of having such Innovations
obtruded on us, we cannot have any time on leisure (if heartily concerned for
our Religion and our Souls) to fall out and quarrel with one another about Old
Rites and Ceremonies.

It is very sad to consider with what heat our present Differences are managed
on every hand, and that which does very much Hurt, is that debauched and lewd
people are suffered to blow up our Divisions into much greater flames and
distances, than they would rise to, if only learned and serious, and pious men
had the manageing of them. What! is it not high time to agree amongst our
selves, now that Hannibal is at our Gates? shall we give no hopes of an union
amongst our selves, till being Sacrifices to our Enemies Fury, we meet on both
sides in Popish Flames, to witness to the same Religion? Bp. Wilkins Sermon. p.
424.
Such blustering boisterous Tempers as are all for the great River Euphrates,
which runs with a torrent and a mighty noise, and refuse the still waters of
Shiloah, which run soft and gently, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 8. 6. Such are
no friends to peace, because it is the latter which is the River whose streams
must make glad the City of God, Psalm. 46. 4. that is, must promote the quiet
and flourishing state of the church, Bp. Andrews Sermon.
as a Reverend Prelate has elegantly expressed it.

It is true and pure Christianity we must mainly discover our Zeal for; and for
other matters we must reduce them to their proper Sphere and place, and allow
them no more of our affection and Zeal, than in their own nature they deserve,
and the Exigence of the Church does call for. Our Savior lays no stress on any
thing but Real Practical Religion; he does rather Caution us against too much
Zeal about Mint and Cummin (lest this should eat up the heart and life, and
spirit of our Devotion) than oblige us to a particular and eminent discovery to
great and extraordinary warmth about those things in which Real Religion is not
immediately concerned.

We find the Apostles upon mature deliberation, and when they had the immediate
assistance and guidance of the Spirit, would lay no more on the Disciples, than
what was then Necessary. And it would be no difficult thing to show that they
were not Rigid toward those who did omit, and even refuse, afterward to
observe some of those Injunctions they concluded necessary to be observed in
that Juncture of Affairs, when they made that Determination.

I know some do insist very much on this Question, Whether the Apostles had not
power to determine Indifferent Ceremonies, so as to oblige the Church in her
several Administrations to the use of some, and to forbear the use of all
others; and whether if any Professors of Christianity should obstinately have
refused to comply with those Orders, the Apostles might not innocently and
justly have Excommunicated them for their Contempt?

Such kind of Questions as these are very unnecessary, and I am afraid those
who are so frequent in proposing these things in Company, as some in the world
are, have a design to trepan and ensnare the unwary. I will say no more to this
Point at present than

1st. First of all, That I believe the Apostles had as much Authority and
Power, as any of those have who pretend to be their Successors.

2ly. That they had so great a measure of Divine Grace communicated of them, as
did effectually restrain them from using their Authority arbitrarily, or in an
inordinate and hurtful way.

3ly. They never made use of their Power, that we read of, about these
indifferent and unnecessary points. And therefore whether they would have
proceeded to such Censures as some talk of, if they had appointed any number of
Rites, and had not been obeyed, is not evident enough, to convince and satisfy
inquisitive men.

The Question lies mainly here, Whether if they had exerted this Power, without
Divine Direction, they would have resented every thing, Imperious and Haughty
men have in after Ages called Contempts, with the same passion they have done?
It Is plain they thought it, if not more Christian, yet more prudent, to forbear
laying Snairs in peoples way, and chose rather to suspend the exercise of their
Authority about these things, than to make any unseasonable use of it, and than
vindicate it by so severe a course, as their delivering men unto Satan did
amount to.

4ly. I think it will be very difficult for any man to make it appear, that for
some hundreds of years after the Apostles, the Christian Orthodox Church did
ever require any thing more than common Christianity as a Term of
Church Communion. Or that any Ceremony was for so long a time imposed on the
Church.

This is not designed in the least to reflect on the Church of England, or to
expect against any of Her Orders; it is designed only to show,

1. That neither Christianity in the general, nor the Being of a particular
Church, is concerned in our Dispute; and that therefore, considering our
present Circumstances, there is no need of discovering such immoderate heat in
this business, as some men do manifest, and expect that all who pretend to the
Church should approve.

2. That some of those who do dissent from us, Jacobus Acontius is of the
opinion, that God does not allow the Church to use severe courses, even against
Heretics, lest these, when they obtain the power and government, should treat
the Orthodox in the same manner. His Stratag. Satan. and the Book called the
Samaritan, and those Tracts called, The Conformists Plea for the
Nonconformists, which do all savor of a most Christian, moderate, and Healing
Spirit, do particularly deserve to be read, digested, and considered, over and
over again, by those who are inclined to suffer their hasty and passionate
Tempers to have their whole swinge. These would do them much more real Service,
if attended to, and obobserved, than those trivial scraps of paper can, which
they do weekly dote upon, and which at best can only furnish them with a few
jejune, puerile, and nauseous Notices, and for the most part do impose on their
belief the most scandalous and enormous untruths.
may have more plausible pretenses for what they do, than some, who are
inconsiderately furious against them, do imagine.

But allowing that there may sometimes happen such cases, that the Church may,
and ought to proceed to great severity with some offenders, we cannot
reasonably conclude hence, that every difference about outward Rites and
Ceremonies, especially if managed with meekness, and other Christian Virtues,
by those who do dissent, must be treated and prosecuted in that manner. This
would be to make the Church transcribe that Quack's folly, who perceiving a
skilful Chyrurgeon had saved a man's life, and done him great service by cutting
off his Leg, when desperately gangreen'd, did advise one who was troubled with
the Headache to have his Head cut off. The same Medecin will not cure every
Disease, nor may the same Remedy be applied to every part.

Moderation in these lesser things is certainly very desirable; it may do the
Church great service. And whilst we are not obliged by any Law to prosecute and
ruin those who are not of our Judgment in these things, either unnecessarily
to turn Informers our selves, or to wheedle or threaten others into such
Courses, is very unbecoming any who profess they have a desire to befriend the
Protestant Religion in this day.

The Church of England is undoubtedly a very strong, and would be (if it were
not for these violent and headstrong Bigots, who endanger the ruining the
Protestant Religion under a glorious name and pretense) an Impregnable Bulwark
against Popery. But she is not so by her injoyning any Ceremonies, in which
point she and other Protestants do difler, but in her close and immovable
adhering to those Doctrines and Practices which are common to us, with the
generality of our sober and only scrupulous Dissenters, and which are directly
contrary to and destructive of Popery.

I dare affirm, That if the Rites and Ceremonies now in use in the Church of
England, should be altered, some changed, and some laid wholly aside, by the
same Authority which did at first enjoin them, the Church of England would
still be as Impregnable a Bulwark against Popery, as now she is. And I am fully
satisfied there is no man will deny this, unless he be either a Real Papist, or
an Ignorant Superstitious Fool.

Nor is this all that may be alleged, why we should be cautious of dealing
harshly with those who differ from us in these things, and against whom we have
nothing else to except. For the very Consideration of the Fruit and Effect the
continued imposing of these things has had on many, should both abate our
vehemence against Dissenters, and make us generally more inclinable to desire
that some Abatements might be legally made in these things, for the satisfying
of those, who still remain unsatisfied.

There are two dreadful Events, which have followed these Impositions.

1. Many worthy, pious, and otherwise every way qualified Persons, have been
hindered from either entering or continuing in the Lords Vineyard, to labor and
work publicly there.

2. The constant imposed use of these things has almost unavoidably begot in
the minds of ignorant and vulgar people, a belief that they are indispensably
necessary, and undoubted parts of those Ordinances to which they are annexed. I
have known several who would as willingly have had their Children and Relations
not baptized at all, as not to have the Sign of the Cross added. And this, not
because it is required by Authority, but because (as they have professedly and
openly owned) they thought the Baptism not good and valid without it. Nay I
have known when many Arguments would not satisfy people, that private Baptism
without the Cross (and I know not how any man can justify the use of the Cross
in that case) was sound and true Baptism, tho they have professed they did
believe the Child could not live half an hour. And in such cases the Sign of
the Cross is I think at least Contradictio in Adjecto. And some of these were
such I should scarce have believed had been so ignorant or superstitious, if I
had not had a particular knowledge of it.

And however both these Effects might happen directly contrary to the primary
design in appointing them, yet when these Fruits do apparently spring from
thence, whether naturally or only by accident, they may be enough to make those
who have the greatest zeal for the power of godliness, desire that no more
stress may be laid on these things, than their own Nature will bear.

For notwithstanding all the caution the Church has used to prevent these ill
Effects, by declaring her own design, and the true use and importance of these
things, that has not been universally effectual to answer her Design. Neither
her Rubricks, her Canons, no nor the Admonitions of her Clergy, have been so
effectual to prevent mistakes and false conceptions about these things, as the
constant, uninterrupted, and Injoined use and practice of them, has been to
engender and create them in some men's minds. Nor is it altogether improbable,
but more minds would have been leavened with such false Notions, as those
mentioned before, if these things had been universally submitted to, and the
contests and differences about them had not awakened people to consider them
more distinctly, and get themselves acquainted with the proper design and true
use of them.

Nor have I only observed, that some do misunderstand the Church in injoyning
the use of these Ceremonies, by the particular knowledge I have had of their
laying too much stress on these things, and looking on them as assential parts
of Ordinances, but I am inclined to think that many others are sensible what
kind of thoughts some pretenders to our Church have of these things. And this
from the Reasons some active men gave, why they would not yield to any
alteration, when that admirable Project of uniting us was on foot, and was
managed by those eminent and glorious Members of this Church, Lord Keeper
Bridgeman, Sir Matthew Hale, and Dr. Wilkins, afterward Bishop of Chester. One
reason why some zealous Clergymen would not yield was, Life of Sir Math. Hale.
p. 43.
because, many such Concessions might also shake those of our own Communion,
and tempt them to forsake us, and go over to the Church of Rome, pretending
that we changed so often, that they were thereby inclined to be of a Church
that was constant and true to her self.

I am for my own part well enough satisfied of the lawfulness of the several
things required, but I see not any reason why I should be angry with others,
because the same Arguments which do Convince me, have not the same influence on
them. There are several Arguments made use of to commend Conformity in these
things, and to prove the lawfulness of them, as now in use; but they have not
all that force and power on me, that some of them have. And it may be those
Arguments which sway most with me, are not so prevalent with others as some of
the rest, which I cannot discern to be so concluding. Now as it would be very
absurd and ridiculous, if I and another, who are full Conformists, should
quarrel, because we are not equally affected with the same Arguments; so it
would be very unreasonable, according to that measure of light I enjoy, if I
should be testy with, and fierce against another, because he is not convinced
in this unnecessary point by any of the Arguments I can allege for it.

The Church has said a great deal to signify her own sense of these things,
and to acquaint the world how innocent her design is in the use of them; but
seeing this declaration has not been of force to open some men's eyes, or to
remove their scruples, it is certain the removing some of the things themselves
which are most insisted on, and scrupled by Dissenters, would more effectually
convince them (if Authority should see fit to try that Expedient) how
Indifferent she does esteem them. This brings to my Remembrance that Apologue
Beza made use of, after Grindal had acquainted him with the import of the
Rubric which was designed to prevent those ill Consequences Beza did suspect.
The Apologue was very much to this purpose, A certain Nobleman having finished
his House, did suffer a very great stone he had no occasion for to lie before
the house, at this stone People did very often stumble, when they walked that
way in the dark, which occasioned some Complaints; the Nobleman would not
suffer it to be taken away, but ordered a Lanthorn should be hung over it. This
not effectually securing People from the inconveniences which happened by its
lying there, the Nobleman was at last entreated to remove both the stone and
the Lanthorn, by doing of which he would both ease himself of much Trouble, and
do the People good Service.

Having said thus much in general, by way of Plea for Moderation toward some
who do dissent from the Church of England, I will add something more
particularly, being as it were loudly and earnestly called to it, both by the
Dorcetshires Grand Jury's presenting, at the last Assizes holden at Sherburne,
my Sermon against Persecution, and by the noise and stir some who would be
thought Great Men do make about that Sermon; in which I have said but little in
Comparison of what may truly be said for some Dissenters. For there I have only
accidentally fallen on that point, and have engaged no further, than to warn some
hasty and inconsiderate people, that they do not rashly and furiously engage in
Prosecuting their Quiet, Religious, Honest and Peaceable Neighbors, lest by
ruining them on the account of some Differences they do not rightly understand,
they should at last be found guilty of such a Sin, as cannot be expiated by the
little, slight, and frivolous pretenses they are at present inclined to urge
for their own Vindication.

What I will further say in this matter, I intend to bring under these heads.

1st. I will say something of the matter in dispute between us and the
Dissenters. 2ly, I will give both a general and particular account of the
people I plead for. 3ly, I will very briefly answer those Objections I
understand are ordinarily in these parts raised against my Sermon. And here I
shall have occasion to show, that the exercise of that Moderation I plead for,
will very well comport with True Conformity.

1st. I will say something of the matter in dispute betwixt us and the
Dissenters. I do not doubt but there are some who do except against the Form of
our Church Government, pleading a Jus Divinum for some other. But I do not
intend to meddle much in this Controversy; for I never yet found any Argument
pleaded by the several Pretenders that way, that could fully satisfy and
convince me of the Jus Divinum of any one particular Form of Church Government.
Very Learned and Pious men do disagree in this point, yea they apply some of
the best Arguments they can jointly agree in for the evidencing of what they
assert, with great strength, to their own different ways. Nay the Learned
who have appeared for the Jus Divinum of Episcopacy, have in their agreeing on
this Notion, suspected each others Arguments, and have therefore found out
different Hypotheses on which they would superstruct this common Notion, and
prove it undeniably to the world. And indeed the ways they have taken to clear
and confirm this Notion, are some of them directly destructive of others.

Saint Hierom's Account of Original of Episcopacy, Vid. Hieron. Comment. in
Epist. ad Titum, v. 5.
does in the Judgment of very learned men carry a great deal of probability
with it. And the Learned Dr. Hammond has scarce given a full, absolute and
satisfactory Answer to all that Blondel offers in vindication of that Notion.
No nor does Mr. Maurice's reflecting on some litte instance in St Hierom,
Vindication of the Primitive Churches.
to invalidate his Notion, render it so ridiculous and uncooth, as he seems to
fancy. But allowing Dr Hammonds notion, it quite throws the Priesthood out of
doors, and makes the middle Order a mere Humane Invention, and so degrades the
Priests more than those did, Epist. 85. ad Evag.
who occasioned St Hierom's advancing them (as some think) too high, and making
them to differ very little from Bishops. The truly eminent Dr. Burnet, who is
equally famous for his Universal Learning, as for his excellent and
extraordinary Historick Talent, and who above most Writers, is solid and
victorious in his Reasonings, does in my apprehension offer the most plausible
account for the Jus Divinum of Episcopacy. Prof. to his Rights of Princes.
But I think I shall scarce ever be made an absolute Proselyte to that
Doctrine, till I see a more clear, full, and distinct Answer to Dr. Stilling
fleets most Rational and Elaborate Irenicum, than any yet extant. And the
naming of this last Book will be enough to manifest that an owning of the Jus
Divinum of Episcopacy is not necessary to Conformity.

Some who insist very much on this Jus Divinum run their Notion a great deal
too far, A Notion, the learned and studious Mr. Dodwell, has taken a great deal
of pains about, in his Treatise of Schism.
and their keeping such a stir as they do about Succession (whereas I cannot
find that any of the first Fathers did insist on any other Succession, than a
Succession in Faith) will suggest to some men, unrecoverable doubts concerning
all our Ministry, and the validity of all our Administrations.

There has been a great dispute concerning the possibility of personal
assurance of Salvation. This Doctrine of Succession will go a great way to
determine the Question in the Negative. And indeed it offers too great occasion
(if we allow the Notion) to question the validity of most Ministrations in the
world. For, supposing that some were anciently made Bishops by Presbyters, as
the most learned Archbishop Usher durst have undertook to have proved, and for
a belief of which, we have a great deal of ground from what St. Hierom says of
the Bishops at Alexandria. Epist. ad Evagrium.
For these not receiving their power in a Regular way, viz. not from those who
had Authority and Commission to Communicate and give it, all the Ordinations
they did afterward Celebrate, will prove null (according to this Principle);
and of how vast and wide an extent this might be, or how long a time this
spurious Communication of Orders did continue, is too difficult a point for the
most curious and exact Critic to resolve. Nay, for ought any one can tell,
some of the Ordinations, which now go for current, might appear, if they could
be run up to those Ages, to derive from some of those impotent and unauthorized
Bishops.

It Is a very hard task for people to undertake to prove to themselves, the
Administrations they partake of are valid, by proving the valid Ordination of
him who Ministers. For, it is not enough that one who is called a Bishop, and
was consecrated according to the Rules of a particular Church, did ordain him
who officiates, but you must prove that that Bishop's Ordainers, and so
upwards, till you come to them who were ordained by the Apostles, had every one
of them a True, Regular, Episcopal Ordination. And it will be a very unsafe,
tho it may appear to be an easy way, to persuade people to be satisfied with a
belief that the Providence of God is obliged to maintain this Succession
unblemisht in the world. For he may do that, and yet the greatest part of those
Ordinations, which are called Episcopal, be notwithstanding Invalid, because of
some Mixture, either further distant, or nearer at hand.

But tho this Notion obtains very much in these days, our great Churchmen, and
those who were high enough for Episcopacy formerly, had other thoughts, and
abhorred to strain their Opinions to countenance such Uncharitableness, as this
Notion does include. A. B. Spotswood's History.
For, when some were to be ordained Bishops for Scotland, An. Dom. 1609. Dr.
Andrews, then Bishop of Ely, proposed a Question concerning the Consecration of
those Bishops, Whether they must not first be Ordained Presbyters, because they
had not received Ordination from a Bishop? But Dr. Bancroft, Archbishop of
Canterbury, maintained there was no need of it; for the Ordination given by
Presbyters, when Bishops could not be had, must be owned lawful. And then the
Bishop of Ely did acquiesce, the other Bishops being of that Judgment.

That which I design to take notice of, as the matter in dispute between us and
the Dissenters, is the Ceremonies we use, and they do scruple. And I must needs
say, I apprehend it a very great unhappiness that such Divisions should be
amongst us, and continue so long, whilst occasioned by such things as are but
trifling and frivolous, when compared with the great things in which we agree.

Tho I plead for Moderation toward those who cannot come up to us in these
things, and that busy intemperate People, who lie under no obligation to
interpose and make themselves Acceslary to the causing of Fines and Mulcts, or
heavier Censures, to be inflicted on their sober, honest, pious, but
scrupupulous Neighbors, may not have any encouragement in their doing thus,
but may meet with those Checks and Reprimands as shall prove effectual to
restrain them from that course; yet I do heartily wish all could be fairly
satisfied concerning the lawfulness of the several things which are now
appointed. But I think much may be said by Them who are satisfied concerning
these things, to show the great reasonableness of compassion and tenderness
toward them who do at present dissent.

Besides, I perceive that by the serious and diligent use of those methods
which are universally acknowledged most agreeable with a Christian Church and
Ministry, many of those for whom I plead may be prevailed with to a
considerable Compliance in a little time. For I have known several, who have
been wholly proselyted to our Church, by the practical Sermons, exemplary
Lives, and the rational serious Discourses of some of our Clergy, and by the
calm and meek Endeavors they have used to satisfy their Judgments, and remove
their Scruples. And I do not doubt but if these and the like courses were every
where duly observed and encouraged, it would evidently appear there is not the
thousandth part of that need to use more severe Methods, which some apprehend
there is.

But it is a great unhappiness, we have so many who pretend to the Church of
England, who are her greatest disgrace, and who will not allow we make any
Proselytes to the Church, unless we do prevail with them to sit, ordinarily ten
times as long in a Tavern or Alehouse, as the longest Service appointed for any
day in the year, and a Sermon of near an hour long at the end of it, will
oblige them to stay at Church. It would undoubtedly be a great honor to our
Church, if all who pretend to her, would lay out the chief of their zeal for
Real Religion, and then labor to win on, and proselyte those who do dissent in
these lesser things, by condescending and yielding what they may, and treating
them with meekness and love. The very appearances of a calm temper have a Charm
in them, but the Effects of them in concurrence with other prudent Methods, are
most irresistible. In sum, it is better to be overrun and ruined in the ways
of meekness, than to conquer all the world by cruelty. In the one we bear the
Cross, and suffer for Righteousness sake; in the other we Triumph in the
Garments of Antichrist, died red with the blood of those, who, tho in Errors,
yet may be good Men in the main, for ought we know. Exhortation to Peace and
Union. p. 16.
Thus speaks the learned Dr. Burnet, who in all his Writings discovers an
eminently primitive, Christian, healing Spirit.

I might mention many things, now I am taking notice of the great Matter in
dispute between us, which may incline sober and pious minds to dislike all
unnecessary heat and Severity toward those who are not able to attain to so
great a Latitude in Relation to these things, as we are satisfied with. But I
will neither multiply instances to an irksom number, nor insist on those I
shall name, so as to make them tedious. I will name but seven things, and they
are such as will conduce something to abate that violent and unaccountable
Peevishness some have allowed themselves in, if considered with that candor and
equanimity which becomes every Christian, and every man who would judge fairly
of things.

1st. It is unquestionably certain, that the closer any Church does keep, or
the nearer she approach to the first Churches, in their simplicity, and fredom
from Humane Inventions, the more justifiable she will be. She will be the freer
from those Contagions which are too apt to prevail when way is given to every
thing that either a subtle man can represent as plausible, or a pious
affectionate man may apprehend useful.

I do not plead for reducing the Church to its ancient and primitive Poverty,
nor do I in the least incline to that opinion, that there may not be some
external difference in the Church when under Prosperous Circumstances, from
that she observed when persecuted and under storms. But undoubtedly, there is
no absolute necessity of making new Terms of Communion, because the outward
face of Affairs is altered. The less there is of Humane Inventions mixed with
the Worship of God, the more genuine and the liker it is to that which the
Apostles and Primitive Christians did observe. Nor do we find that outward
Circumstances were very much insisted on by the Orthodox, till very
Considerable Corruptions were crept into the Church. And tho this does not
argue or conclude against the lawfulness of any thing the Church of England
does enjoin (for I do not urge it for that end) yet it may induce us to have
much Charity and Tenderness for them, who have such a regard to what was only
observed and enjoined in the first Churches, they are almost afraid to deviate
from them, even in such particulars as are innocent and free.

The first Churches were so taken up with the great, necessary, and substantial
Parts of Religion, they had no time to fall out and quarrel about Indifferent,
Circumstantial Appendages. Indeed we do not read of any contendings about these
things till some, either very ill, or very weak men, had a mind to lay an
unnecessary and uneasy yoke on the rest of their Brethren.

There ought to be a great deal of care taken, when ever any unnecessary
Instances are admitted so much as to border on the Worship of God. For God is
very jealous of his Honor, and we can scarce be too wary in giving way to
Humane Inventions in Divine Service, because our minds are too prone to adhere
overmuch to what is sensible. Nay, we too easily give more way and room to
those particulars which are at first commended under very specious, colorable,
and innocent pretenses, than we can afterward justify to be lawful. However,
this is apt to lay us too open to the treacherous insinuations with which
cunning and subtle men will labor to commend to us other Instances which be
directly sinful. But we must take heed not only that we yield not in things
really evil, but that we do not transgress due bounds in the use of those
things which are Harmless.

A very ill use has been made of many things which were without doubt
Originally well intended; Our present Sovereign does in his Declaration
concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs take notice, that some Ceremonies may even
lessen that Piety and Devotion, for the improvement whereof they might happily
be first introduced, and consequently may well be dispensed with p. 4.
yea, those very particulars which devout and Holy Men have found serviceable
to them in the raising of their affections to the best things, have been of ill
Consequence when peremptorily enjoined on all.

There ought not any thing to be universally required of all men in the Service
of God, but what has either equal agreeableness to all men's tempers, or a
direct and certain tendency to advance the interest of Religion more or less in
all men. For, some Instances which are proper to excite and quicken Devotion in
some men's breasts, have not the like tendency in reference unto others; And the
goodness of the End will not justify an Universal Imposition, till you can
first of all make all men of one Complexion.

2ly. Teaching that Humane Authority has an unlimited Power to impose any thing
on the Church which is not expressly forbid in Scripture, may be of dangerous
consequence. It is generally acknowledged (I think) by most Parties, that it
does pertain to Humane Authority to determine those Circumstances relating to
the Worship of God, which do belong to those Acts, considered as they are
Humane Acts. Some Circumstances must unavoidably accompany every external
Religious Performance, because it is impossible for man to act, and his Acts be
stripped of all Circumstances; and therefore it is generally allowed, that those
Circumstances without which the joint Celebration of Divine Ordinances cannot
be observed, should be determined by Humane Authority. As to other Ceremonies,
which are not necessary to these Performances, some do apprehend they are left
free by Christ, and therefore should not be constrained and compelled by men.

There have been great Disputes in the Church about this matter. And some have
declared their sense in very large words, even so as to make way for the
bringing of very strange Innovations, into the Church. For,

1st. It is not Demonstrably certain, that Humane Authority has power any
further, than to restrain and punish disorders, and indecencies in the Church.
And if so, tho we our selves may be satisfied to serve God in the way appointed
by Authority, we cannot thence fairly conclude it lawful to ruin others who
serve God without our Ceremonies, but in a way that is grave and decent as well
as ours. For, if it should at last happen, notwithstanding all the
Probabilities we have on our side, that the extent of Humane Authority in these
matters, is only to keep men within Decent and Comely bounds, and to punish them
when they are disorderly, irreverent, and Rude; and that it does not reach to
determine one way Decent and Orderly, so as to make all other ways, (which are
in themselves equally Decent) unlawful; I say, if it should thus fall out at
last, then all those who do unnecessarily engage themselves in the immoderate
courses I am dissuading from, may wish, when it is too late, they had followed
the safest Advice.

2ly. The Limitations usually prescribed to the Exercise of this Power, by
those who yield it in a great measure, are such as will not secure us from all
the dangerous Inconveniences which do attend this Power when unlimited. Indeed,
if Humane Authority has such a Power belonging to it of Right, as some do
affirm, there cannot be very much said on the point. And therefore I will only
propose two Questions for such to think upon.

Quest. 1. Who has power to circumscribe and restrain it within the bounds they
do sometimes prefix?

Quest. 2. How shall we be secured, when under the conduct and government of
either a Popish, or very supersti^ious Prince, from having all those Popish
Ceremonies enjoined which were in force in the latter part of King Henry the
8ths Reign? If the Public and Governing Judgment and Conscience must be
undeniably the Rule and Standard in these things for all the Governed, I cannot
discern how we can be excused from an obligation to observe all those Rites and
Ceremonies that were then appointed, if we be ever so unhappy as to be cast
under the influence of a Prince who can be prevailed with to be superstitious
enough to think those Ceremonies not too many, and that they are Ancient, and
Expedient; especially if he do declare them to be required, as that King did,
not as parts of Worship, but for a more Honourary, and Decorous Performance of
it Vid Dr Burnet's Hist. of the Reformation. Vol. 1st. Addend. numb. 1st. Of
Rites and Ceremonies. p. 313.
.

3ly. The things we contend about, are of such a Nature, they cannot bear so
much weight as some would lay upon them. There have been in most Ages a sort of
Pretenders to Religion, who, like Aesop's Dog, have parted with the substance
for an empty shadow; only in this they appear worse, because he catching at
both, lost what he had, they willingly part with the substance, and aim at no
more than an outward show. It was thus in our Saviors time. The Scribes and
Pharisees, yea the Priests and Highpriests, the Ruling Clergy in those days,
did suffer, nay teach men to break Divine Laws, if they would appear zealous
for their Doctrines and Superstitions. For ought I can perceive, men might then
commute for as many sins, by crying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord, as some hope to do now by crying, O the Church, the Church.

These things are at best but mere accidental and separable Appendages. They
may (if Authority see fit) be removed, and Religion remain as entire and pure
at it is with them. And therefore for a man to be as zealous about these, as if
Religion it self did lie at stake, is every jot as absurd and foolish, as if a
man should pay the very same respect and veneration to a Princes meanest
Servant, which he and all other men acknowledge due only to the Prince himself.
But when men can no more trample Religion under foot, neither regard its
Doctrines, nor live agreeably to its Precepts, and yet will be peevish and
fierce against all who are not as Ceremonious as themselves; when they will
ordinarily swear, and be drunk, and commit all sorts of wickedness with
greediness, and yet express an Extraordinary Zeal for these Circumstantials;
this is to imitate him, who when he has cut his Sovereigns throat, does bow,
and cringe, and appears extraordinarily respectful to his Page or Footboy. How
unseemly a thing is it, to hear a drunken swearing Debauchee, declaiming
against Dissenters, and crying out, The Church, The Church? It Is much more fit
the Censures of the Church should be inflicted on such men, to the throwing of
them out of her Communion, till they obtain more Grace, and learn more Modesty,
than that they should patronize and defend their Lusts by such a Plea.

These things are not matters of such Moment, that Moderate and Pieus men
should lay forth much of their Zeal about them. Men on both sides may go to
Heaven, and when they are there, they will not quarrel about such things; why
then should those things create such Distances at present? Nay sufferings and
the sight of Death can reconcile and unite their Hearts and Affections, who may
at present be unduly Hot either way. Ridley and Hooper were perfectly
reconciled, notwithstanding their former Differences about such matters as
these, when they were both to suffer for the Protestant Religion; yea Ridley,
who was on the Conforming side, does now write to Hooper, who had scrupled some
things, That now he was entirely united to him, tho in some Circumstances of
Religion they had formerly jarred a little. And he adds, it was Hooper's
wisdom, and his own simplicity, that divided them, every one following the
Abundance of his own sense. History of the Reformation, part. 2d. p. 304.
But now he assured him, that in the bowels of Christ, he loved him in the
truth and for the truth. Dr. Burnet's Reflection on this is very useful. It had
been happy (says he) if the fires that consumed those good men, had put an end
to these Contests, and if those who have been since engaged in the like, will
reflect more on the sense they had of them, when they were now preparing for
Eternity, than on the Heats they were put in concerning them, when perhaps ease
and plenty made their Passions keener, they may from thence be reduced to have
more moderate thoughts of such matters.

Those who are so stiff in This Day, and do industriously prosecute to the
utmost those Brethren who are of the same Religion they pretend to, and do
differ only in these lesser unnecessary Points, yea dare declaim against, and
rail at them, who were so much of late for effecting a true Reconciliation, and
a lasting Union amongst us, in a Legal Way, are certainly very far from
approving themselves True-Sons of the Church of England. For Parliaments, whose
Authority alone has given a Sanction to these things, are most sit to take into
their Consideration whether it be convenient to make any Alteration or not;
unless men will have them to be unaltereble. And if any think them so, they may
learn from the Church of England her self, how much they have Apostatized from
her, and what dirt they endeavor to fling in her Face. Of Ceremonies before
the Common Prayer.
For she says expressly, They may be altered. And no meaner a Conformist than
Mr. Thorndike, does say, The Form of Service now enforce by Law may be
acknowledged capable of Amendment, Due way of Composing Differences.
without disparagement either to the wisdom of the Church that prescribed it,
or of the Nation that enacted it.

Men's laying too much stress on these things, and treating others too
rigorously for not believing or practicing in these matters as they like best,
has occasioned more mischief than I can easily describe. What Mr. Burges said
concerning Ceremonies, in his Sermon before King James, was very true and
moderate. viz. They are like the Roman Senators Glasses, which were not worth a
man's Life or Livelihood: For (says he) This Senator invited Augustus Caesar to
a Dinner, Wilson's History of Great Britain, p. 11.
and as he was coming to the Feast he heard a horrid Outcry, and saw some
company drawing a Man after them that made that noise. The Emperor demanding
the cause of that violence; it was answered, their Master had condemned him to
the Fish Ponds, for breaking a Glass which he set a high value and esteem upon.
Caesar commanded a stay of the Execution, and when he came to the house, he
asked the Senator whether he had Glasses worth a man's life? who answered (being
a great lover of such things) that he had Glasses he valued at the price of a
Province. Let me see them (says Augustus). The Senator then brought him to a
Room very well furnished: The Emperor saw them beautiful to the eye, but knew
withal they might be the cause of much mischief, therefore he brake them all,
with this Expression, Better all these perish than one Man. My Author says he
left it to his Majesty to apply, and so do I to the Reader.

Did those we call Dissenters refuse to yield as ready and free a submission
and obedience to any of the Laws we look on as purely Civil, as any amongst our
selves, I do not know any man that would plead for them, tho they were
prosecuted with great severity. But if their Consciences are so strait they
cannot yield in these other instances relating to Religion, it will be
generally allowed they are not to be blamed whilst their Consciences are so
affected I do not say it is superstition for any man to abstain from doing what
he apprehends to be unlawful by virtue of a general command, for this is a
Moral Duty, and obedience to those places of Scripture which bid us abstain
from all kinds and appearances of evil. Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon. of the Nature
of Superstition. p. 37.
, And to say peremptorily it is not Conscience, but Humor and Fancy, is not
only placing your selves in God's Throne, and taking too much upon you, but it
is every jot, as uncharitable, as some men's proceedings are severe. Especially
considering they are made of flesh and blood, as well as we Conformists be; and
they know (it may be better than we do, even by Experience) what the difference
is betwixt a warm house, and a cold and nasty Prison, betwixt the Poverty and
other Inconveniences under which many of them suffer, and the comfortable
Enjoyments many of us do share in. Thousands of pounds, and hundreds by the
year, would be money to them, as well as to any of us. And if it be not
Conscience that makes them deny themselves, as to these things, but it must
still pass for Fancy and Humor, it is such a Humor (I believe) most of those
who are fiercest against them, are very little acquainted with.

That Passage of St. Austin deserves to be particularly considered, and often
thought on, where he tells us it is a very unworthy and unbecoming thing, to
condemn and judge one another for such things as will not render us of greater
or of less value with God. Indignum est ut propter ea quae nos Deo neque
Digniores, neque Indigniores possunt facere, alii alios vel condemnemus vel
judicemus.

4ly. I never yet met with any Argument (especially that I can at present call
to mind) for the absolute enforcing of some particular needless Ceremonies to
be observed in the Church by all who live under one Civil Government, but what
would be of the same force if it were applied to all the Churches in the world.
There is as much Reason (I think) that every Church, and every Congregation for
the Service of God, throughout the world, should observe the same Ceremonies
(if we only respect the Observations and Reflections Heathens, Strangers, and
Enemies to our holy Faith will make, when they see that in one and the same
Nation People professing the same Religion do observe Different Rites) as that
all the Congregations in one Nation should: Because the Enemies of Christianity
have the same ground to make the very same Reflections on our Religion, when
they observe that those who profess the same Religion, and own the same Faith,
and use the very same Ordinances in different Nations, have such a Disagreement
amongst themselves, they cannot consent together in the use of the same Rites.
For the Reason of their Reflection in this case, is grounded on the Unity of
their Faith and Religion. And it is universally acknowledged they make up but
one Church, in how many Kingdoms and Nations so ever they be.

Now what peculiar Reason can be given, on the account of Religion, why it is
more unseemly, and will give greater occasion of offense, for several
Congregations, which are but parts of one and the same Particular Church, or
for several Particular Churches, which are but parts of the National Church, to
observe and use different Ceremonies, than for several National Churches, which
are but Parts of the one Universal Church, to do so.

And seeing the Notion of Catholic Communion is particularly insisted on at
this time, and urged with some earnestness, some solid and weighty Reason,
(such as may satisfy inquisitive Men) should be given, why Catholic Communion
should not have Catholic Terms. But I cannot perceive any such, in the
Writings of Dr. Sherlock, Discourse (...) about Church-Unity, etc.
the great manager of this Argument, though he does assert, that all Christians
are bound to join in Communion with that part of the Church where the
Providence of God does place them.

5ly. Long and often Experience has made it undeniably evident, that the
putting of Penal Laws rigorously in execution against humble, modest,
conscientious Dissenters, (and I plead only for such) has not answered the
Design and End for which they were intended. And therefore it may be more
excuseable, if those who were formerly very warm for the Prosecution of
Dissenters, do now after so many years experience begin to be more moderate,
and desire that a more amicable Expedient may be found out to compose our
Differences; severity is not a proper method for the satisfying of men's
Judgments, or the removing of their Scruples. And though the using of such
courses may hinder people from assembling so publicly as they desire, nay may
make some comply in opposition to their own Judgments, yet it never made any
real Proselytes; it has rather prepared the minds of others to have a greater
compassion toward, and liking of them. And therefore when ever by accident,
necessity, or of choice the Reins have been let loose, and they have found any
Indulgence, those very persons, who according to some Men's thoughts were
reclaimed, have fallen off, and multitudes of others have discovered an unwonted
inclination toward them. This is evident in all the Instances Historians do
relate, and particularly in all those a late Author has taken notice of, with
a design to urge and promote the severe and rigid prosecuting of all
Dissenters, Remarks on the Growth and Progress of Nonconformity. Some are great
Admirers of that Book. But I must affirm, and so will every Intelligent and
unprejudiced Reader, that the Author has neither discovered that candor and
ingenuity in the manner of his writing, nor that evidence of truth and
faithfulness in his Historical Relations, nor that strength and clearness of
Reason and Logic in his Arguings, which might justly be expected from one who
would attempt to treat on such a subject.
without any Difference. Severity has conduced as much as any thing to the
growth and spreading of Nonconformity, as all those Instances do demonstrate.
For the more any tolerable party is afflicted and frowned upon, the more is
that party admired and owned, if such occurrences do happen, that any favor
and kindness must be showed unto it.

And the true Reason why the Nonconformists did multiply so numerously when the
Public state of affairs did require them to be indulged, was not because they
were then tolerated, but because they had been before treated with obvious
roughness and severity, and under that usage had demeaned themselves with a
very becomeing and graceful exemplary carriage. If you will absolutely vanquish
and root out Nonconformity by severe methods, there are two things at least
which you must have a peculiar regard to, and be able to effect.

1st. You must lay an invincible check and restraint upon Gods Providence, so
that he may not suffer any public occurrence to intervene, which will make it
Necessary to tolerate and indulge those who do Dissent, till you have
effectually subdued them all, and absolutely destroyed both Root and Branch.
For if there should be a Public Necessity to indulge them, after they have
been vigorously prosecuted for a time, their numbers will undoubtedly be much
greater than they were before. And there is scarce an instance to be given of
Moderate Dissenters being prosecuted with great warmth and unecessary Heat,
but, in a little time after, there has been some or other very notable
Emergency which has rendered it very necessary to have them entertained with
great Clemency and Gentleness.

2. If you destroy them all, with an indifferent, undistinguishing hand, you
must keep a strict and constant watch over them after they are dead, lest a
greater Generation of the like sort do arise and spring out of their blood and
ashes. Nay, you must be able to stop and stifle the Cry of their blood, lest
otherwise the Nation being so thoroughly drenched with it, the clamorous noise
of that blood coming into Gods ears, do provoke him to pour out such dreadful
Vials on us, as will make us at once to cease being a Church or People.

It is an excellent, true, and very useful Observation which Bishop Tailor made
concerning Force and Extremity in matters of Religion. Epist. Ded. before his
Treatise of Holy living, etc.
viz. When Religion puts on Armor, and God is not acknowledged by his New
Testament Titles, Religion may have in it the Power of the Sword, but not the
Power of Godliness, and we may complain of this to God, and amongst them who
are afflicted, but we have no remedy but what we must expect from the
fellowship of Christ's sufferings, and the returns of the God of Peace.

6ly. It was never known that any Indifferent Ceremonies were universally
imposed in a knowing Age, and the Judgments and Opinions of all good men did
consent and agree to them. Indeed I think there never was such an attempt made,
till Popery had got a great influence over the Christian world. I am persuaded
there never was an universal compliance in Imposed Indifferences, till Popery
had involved people in a more than Egyptian and almost inextricable Darkness.

Some do think it would be as commendable to oblige all men to have the same
Face, as to have in every respect the same judgment. Indeed men would have just
ground to wonder, if a Law should be made, requiring all men to be of one
Bulk, and Stature, and forbidding them to eat and drink (at least in Company)
if they fail to observe it. But I am sure I have some where read of a certain
Expedient that was sometimes made use of to make Dwarfs, and breed them to be
all of one Bigness. It was not any such Stratagem as Procustes used to make his
Friends and Visitants of one length, viz. Cutting off their Heads if they were
too long, and racking them ought of joint if they were too short. This looks
like the persecuting way made use of in some Foreign parts of the World, when
men's Judgments and Consciences do not answer the Politic Standard. The way I
speak of, differs very much from this. For it will let People grow till they be
of a just size, and then stops them that they shall not increase one jot. It Is
couping them up at first, and then Dieting them proportionably, and never
suffering them to stir out of their first enclosure, till they have not only
stuffed it quite up, but are quite past growing.

If you would have all men of the same mind in every thing relating to the
Service and Worship of God, and what men call so, the most effectual Expedient
will be to involve them in the same Gross Ignorance in which their Ancestors
were held under the Romish yoke. There is no way so likely to make men to
entertain any thing without Scruple, as keeping them in so much darkness they
cannot see, or making them so dull they cannot examine things. People are never
brought to a servile submission to all kind of Impositions, till they have for
some time been inured to an Implicit Faith, and then you may obtrude on them
what you please.

7ly. Very great and considerable Alterations have been made in our Rubricks,
our public Service, and our Articles, in order to the bringing of the Papists
to join with us in our Worship, and to prevent our giving them so much as the
color of a pretense for their withdrawing from our Communion. And if so much
might be parted with to gratify our worst and most implacable Enemies, even
them who differ from us in the very Substantials of Religion, is it not highly
Reasonable we should express some Moderation and Tenderness toward them, who
are in every thing of the same Religion with us, and do only differ about some
unnecessary Ceremonies?

But there are too many who pretend to this Church, who discover they are of
the mind that we cannot manifest too much Complacency in those who are avowedly
of the Popish Persuasion, nor appear inexorable enough toward our afflicted
fellow Protestants. How many are there who pretend to be Sons of the Church of
England, and yet dare openly declare they have a greater aversion to Protestant
Dissenters than Popish Recusants? What hopeful Church of England men will these
be, if the Sins of this Nation should rise so high as to provoke God to pour on
us the Vials of his displeasure, and to imbitter, nay poison them all, by
adding the greatest of all other Plagues, making us subject to a Popish
Governor?

Dr. Hist. Reform. p. 111.
Heylin tells us there was great care taken for expunging all such Passages in
the Book of Common Prayer, etc. as might give any scandal or offense to the
Popish Party, or be urged by them in excuse for their not coming to Church,
etc. In the Litany that most excellent passage was expunged, where we pray to
be delivered from the Tyranny and all the detestable Enormities of the Bishops
of Rome. In the Communion-Service a whole Rubric against the Popish Doctrine
of the Sacrament was expunged. And in the Original Copy of the 39 Articles
there is a very considerable Addition to the 28th Article, Dr. Burnet's Hist.
Reform. part. 2. p. 405.
which does expressly declare that no Christian ought either to believe or
profess the Real and Corporal Presence of the Flesh and Blood of Christ in the
Encharist, giving a very strong and invincible Reason for it. But because some
alleged that such an express Definition against a Real Presence might drive
from the Church many who were still of that Persuasion, etc. therefore those
words were by common consent left out.

Is it not a very strange and unreasonable thing that some great Pretenders to
the Church of England, should think it Lawful, and consistent with their
pertaining to that Church, to be familiar, and converse ordinarily with, nay
Feast, and it may be revel and be drunk with professed Papists, and yet fail
at, and declaim against others who are much truer Conformists than themselves,
because they dare visit, and have sober and neighbourly Communication with
Pious, Honest, Sober, Peaceable Protestant Dissenters?

I offer these things to peoples consideration, not to except against the
Lawfulness of any thing the Church of England does enjoin and practice, but
only to mind some who do unnecessarily engage in the prosecuting of their
Honest Peaceable Neighbors, that there are several things which have some
weight in them to oblige us to forbear all unnecessary severity toward people
who are not yet in every thing of our Judgments.

But some will be ready to say, What do you plead for all sorts of Dissenters,
or only some particular Sects? And if so, Why do you not name the Sects you
plead for? I answer, I am against all Sects, Parties, and Divisions in the
Church, and I look on all the Factious Reproachful Names people professing
themselves Christians are listed under, as pernicious Devices of the Devil to
help forward Division, and to molest and injure that Common Christianity we do
all pretend to. I am sorry any who profess themselves Christians do lay so much
stress on any thing in which Christianity is not immediately concerned, as to
give occasion for people to coin any other Name, by which they may be
distinguished from others, than that by which the Disciples and Believers were
first called at Antioch. I do not consider people by the Names of Reproach
Atheists and Profane men do set on them, but by what I do really find them in
their open profession and general practice. But that you may know more
distinctly who they be I plead for, I will now say something to the second
point I proposed. Which is,

2ly. To give both a general and particular account of the people for whom I
plead. And in general, I plead for all who deserve the Character I gave in the
Preface to my Sermon against Pesecution, of many Dissenters with whom I had
particular acquaintance. I believe there are many of the same Stamp and Merit
amongst them, with whom I never had any acquaintance. Let people come under
what Denomination soever, if I can discern no just ground to doubt but God will
accept them, I think I owe them a very great Respect and Deference; and
therefore I do profess I rejoice in the conversation of all whom I apprehend I
have good cause to believe do Fear God and work Righteousness, and I mourn to
consider how Differences are kept alive and heightened betwixt them and other
Good men. We all ought to have a great tenderness for, and regard to all those
who are vigorous Protestants (that is, who profess and own all the Doctrines of
Christianity the Church of England does, and do oppose and reject all those
Tenets which are truly Popish: For it is not men's owning or renouncing some
Indifferent Ceremonies, which makes them Protestants, or of the Reformed
Religion) who are exemplarily pious and virtuous in their Conversations, and
who live peaceably and soberly, and do not endeavor any unlawful Alteration in
the Government.

I plead for Moderation toward such as were known some time since to the Kings
Majesty, and all who answer that Character he was pleased to give of them who
had attended on him in Holland. His words are these, When we were in Holland we
were attended by many Grave and Learned Ministers from hence, His Majesty's
Declaration to all his loving Subjects, etc. concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs.
p. 3.
who were looked on as the most able and principal Assertors of the
Presbyterian Opinions, with whom we had as much conference, as the multitude of
Affairs which were then upon us would permit us to have, and to our great
satisfaction and comfort, found them persons full of Affection to us, of Zeal
for the Peace of the Church and State, and neither Enemies (as they have been
given out to be) to Episcopacy or Liturgy, but modestly to desire such
Alterations in either, as without shaking Foundations might best allay the
present Distempers which the Indisposition of the Time, and tenderness of some
men's Consciences had contracted.

Those Nonconformists do deserve a peculiar respect and kindness from our
Church, who really scrupeling some things, do comply with us as far as possibly
they can under their present apprehensions, and do publicly declare themselves
against erecting Altar contra Altar, nay who are particularly cautious of
pressing others not to Conform. Indeed if all who do at present Dissent, and
are capable of examining the matters in difference betwixt us, would carefully
lay aside all Partiality and Prejudice, and not dare to indulge themselves in
making Parties, or in suggesting unnecessary Doubts to any, but would rather
comply themselves to the utmost they are able, and persuade others to join with
us in Divine Ordinances, by removing and answering those Objections and
Scruples which are sometimes alleged, and which they themselves are satisfied
are of no force, I am persuaded they would do themselves great Right, the
Church of God much Service, and be greatly instrumental toward the composing
those Differences which have long weakened the Protestant Interest, and given
too great Advantage to the Common Enemy. And such as these there are
undoubtedly amongst them we call Dissenters. Nay I am persuaded the Reverend
Mr. Baxter, (though by some Reproachfully and very Desingenuously called the
Provincial of the Protestant Schismatics) has by his Writings, Practice, and
Advice, prevailed with as many to be in Communion with our Church, as any one
man whosoever in the Kingdom. The Nonconformists vindicated from the Abuses put
on them by Mr. Durel and Mr. Scrivener. p. 182, 183.
And the very Learned Mr. Hickman has not only often declared in private his
aversion to dissuade any against Conformity, but has also published in Print
his dislike of Nonconformists being over zealous in pressing others not to
Conform.

More particularly I plead for Moderation toward,

1st. Men of such Learning as Mr. Baxter, Mr. Hickman, etc. These and many more
have given the world undeniable and very signal Evidences of their being men of
extraordinary Reading and Judgment. They are great Ornaments in their
Generation, and very shining Lights in the Church of God. The Christian world
will (no doubt) have a great veneration for them as long as it shall endure.
Future Ages will honor their Memories with all the respect and intimations of
high Affection found Christianity will allow, when their inveterate malicious
Enemies shall have their Names continued only to be used as a Proverbial
Obloqui and Reproach.

2ly. Men of such Loyalty as Mr. Cook, Mr. Harrison, and Mr. Kerby, etc. These
have adventured further, and suffered more for the King, than most (nay it may
be any) of those who under these present favorable circumstances do talk so
much of Loyalty and Obedience. It is easy talking of these things when this is
the way to Preferment. But these I have named, did talk and preach for them,
when they were in danger of losing their Lives for doing so.

It seems very strange to me that those who could keep their Places in the Late
Times of Usurpation, The same men (says Mr. Baxter) that then wrote against me
for the changers and usurpers have since bin the fierce accusers of us who
opposed th^^ Ready way of confuting Mr. Baxter, p. 8. Vid. more in his. True
Hist. of Councils defended. p. ^^.
and on the Turn of affairs could swallow down, and dispense with more than
some of their Neighbors could, should now be thought more Loyal than those who
lost their Benefices in those days, nay were imprisoned and in danger of losing
their Lives too, because of their avowed adhering to the King, and cannot
dispense with the same Oaths, and some other Instances to redeem their
Benefices, others could to keep them.

3ly. Men of such extraordinary Charity, Modesty, and other eminent Virtues as
Mr. Tho. Gouge was, and others amongst them are. There are very many amongst
them we call Dissenters, who are so eminent for the practice of the best, and
in this Age the most rare Virtues, Consider Mr. John Hows pious Peaceable
Epist. Dedic. before his Treatise of Delighting in God.
it will be no disparagement for at least some Conformists to propose them as
Patterns to themselves; and more particularly in the exercise of Moderation
toward them who differ from us in Judgment even in such instances as we have a
singular kindness for. The Pious and Reverend Dr. Tillotson thinks Mr. Tho.
Gouge, before named, worthy to be a pattern in this to men of all Persuasions.
His Words are these. Allowing others to differ from him even in Opinions which
were very dear to him, Sermon. at the Funeral. of Mr. Tho. Gouge p. ^4.
and provided men did but fear God, and work Righteousness, he loved them
heartily, how distant soever from him in Judgment about things less Necessary.
In all which he is very worthy to be a pattern to men of all Persuasions
whatsoever.

Now what Crime is it for a Conformist to plead for Moderation toward such men
as these? or for a Son of the Church of England to endeavor to give some check
to the immoderate Heat and Peevishness of those furious and headstrong Bigots,
who by unnecessary engaging themselves in prosecuting their Peaceable Religious
Neighbors, do endanger the weakening the Protestant Interest, and the making
the Church of England her self a Sacrifice to the Rage, and Trophy of the
Conquest of her most inveterate and indefatigable Enemies? But however innocent
and justly commendable the thing is in it self, the practice of it does not
appear so safe, and to have such general Countenance as it deserves. This is
evident enough by the treatment the late Sermon against Persecution has had
amongst men of certain Characters.

But the World will in time be satisfied that Places and Garments do not make
men better. They may yield them greater opportunities than they had before to
discover what they truly are. Tie Ass was an Ass as well when he had the Lions
skin on his back, as when it was off. Nay that Lions skin must be very large
that can cover and hide the Asses ears. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or
the Leopard his Spots? Jer. 13. 23.
then may ye who are accustomed to do evil, learn to do good.

Notwithstanding such a stir is kept about the Sermon before named, the
Exceptions ordinarily alleged against it, by the very Dons themselves, are
very pitiful and trifling, ye I must acknowledge they do better become them,
whose faces would flatter the world into a belief they pretend to be men, than
Indictments and Deprivations (which are now talked of) do.

3dly. The Objections pretended against the Sermon are chiefly these two.

1. How can I who am a Conformist, and consequently satisfied of the Lawfulness
of every thing required by the Church of England, be against punishing them,
who will not comply with what I my self acknowledge Lawful, and do practice?

2ly. That it is very unbecoming one who receives Profits from the Church of
England (and to use their own canting Phrase) sucks the Churches Breasts, to
Apologize and plead for them who dissent from the Church.

Now any man who has either eyes or any thing else in his Head, may easily
perceive these Exceptions are not so much against the Sermon, as against my
self. And therefore I will take the less care in answering them. For I think
all such absurd and feeble Reflections are best confuted by a due contempt.

The first Objection is proposed by way of Query, and asks How I who am a
Conformist, and consequently satisfied of the Lawfulness of every thing
required by the Church of England, can be against punishing them who will not
comply with what I do acknowledge Lawful, and do practice?

Ans. 1st. There may other more agreeable Methods be used to make Proselytes,
against which I never spoke one word. Solid Arguments, strong Reasons and
Authorities are more fit for confutation of an Error, Whitlock's Memor. An.
1650.
and satisfaction of Different Judgments. When the Emperor took a Bishop in
complete Armor, he sent the Armor to the Pope with this word, Haecinae sunt
vestes filii tui?

2ly. There is a great Difference betwixt a man's being satisfied of the
Lawfulness of things, so as to direct his own Practice in the use of them, and
his being convinced of the Necessity of them, so as to be induced thereby to
justify or approve the unnecessary headstrong and furious courses, some
profane loose Fellows do take against them who are not equally satisfied with
him, by the Evidence he has. There is no Reason I should pull a man's eyes out
of his head, because he cannot see, what I either do see, or at least fancy I
see.

3ly. The Greatest, the Wisest, and the Learned men this Church was ever
blessed with, have had the same thoughts that I have, and did believe the
Moderation I plead for very consistent with true Conformity. We need not (says
his present Majesty) profess the high affection and esteem we have for the
Church of England, His Majesty's Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs.
p. 4.
as it is Established by Law. -- Nor do we think that Reverence in the least
Degree diminished by our Condescentions, not peremptorily to insist on some
particulars of Ceremony, which however introduced by the Piety and Order of
former times, may not be so agreeable to the present, etc.

The Eminent Judge Hale, at his entering on that Employment, did oblige himself
to observe this, amongst many other Excellent Rules, viz. That I be not too
rigid in Matters purely conscientious, Dr. Burnets Life of Sir Matthew Hale. p.
36.
where all the Harm is Diversity of Judgment. And it is further said of him
that, Besides great Charities to the Nonconformists, who were then as he
thought too hardly used, Id. P. 39.
he took great care to cover them all he could from the Severities some
designed against them, and discouraged those who were inclined to stretch the
Laws too much against them.

It is very well known that Dr. Wilkins, late Bishop of Chester, was a man of
as prodigious Universal Learning, and of as clear and solid a Judgment, as any
man the Christian world was ever adorned with; And it is as well known that he
was equally Famous for his Moderation toward Dissenters before he was made
Bishop, as for any of his other Extraordinary Accomplishments: And after he
ascended the Episcopal Seat he continued the same man he was before, and made
that Diocese (as it is very well known there, and in most other Places) the
most flourishing and truly Religious part (I think I may truly say) of all
Christendom, by the happy Influence under Divine Grace his eminent Moderation,
Zealous Piety, and most Christian Government had in those parts. And the
Eminent and Reverend Dr. Tillotson, in his Preface to the Reader before that
Bishops Sermons lately published, has this most remarkable Passage concerning
his Moderation. And I purposely mention his Moderation, and likewise adventure
to commend him for it, notwithstanding that this virtue, so much esteemed and
magnified by wise men in all Ages, has of late been declaimed against with so
much Zeal and Fierceness, and yet with that good Grace and Confidence, as if it
were not only no Virtue, but even the Sum and Abridgement of all Vices; I say,
notwithstanding all this, I am still of the old Opinion, that Moderation is a
Virtue, and one of the peculiar Ornaments and Advantages of the Excellent
Constitution of our Church, and must at last be the Temper of her Members,
especially the Clergy, if ever we seriously intend the firm establishment of
this Church, and do not industriously design, by cherishing Heats and Division
among our selves, to let in Popery at these Breaches.

4ly. They are generally the worst men (especially if they be Clergymen) who
are most for violence in relation to those who differ about some little
Indifferences. Nay, what is more, if you consider all Persuasions, you shall
find they are the most Illiterate, Unsteady, Profane and Debauched Pretenders
to any Persuasion, who are most for severity toward Modest Dissenters. Even
amongst the Papists, who were so hot and furious as Gardener, and Bonner, Men
who were not only flagitious in their Lives, but had no more than an empty
supersficial Learning. But Tonstall, who was truly a Scholar, abhorred that
severity toward men's persons the others were fond of practicing. It is
observable (says Dr. Hist. of the Rights of Princes, etc. p. 257.
Burnet) that the best Clergymen have been always the most gentle to those who
differed from them; for they confiding in the goodness of their Cause, and in
that true merit of which every one that has it, must be conscious to himself,
and yet without Pride or Vanity, are persuaded that by the methods of love and
meekness they shall, with the help of some time, and the use of all due
prudence and caution, overcome Errors and Schisms: But the unworthy, who know
that a good Cause may be spoiled, but is not likely to prevail in their hands,
and who will not trouble themselves with the slow and laborious Methods of
conquering Errors, are always apt to fly to extreme and cruel courses; since
they know they must either prevail by these, or by none at all.

The second Objection says, It is very unbecoming one who receives Profits of
the Church, to plead for them who dissent from the Church.

I Answer, first of all, That there is no unseemliness at all in any ones
countenancing and pleading for that which all Religion, Equity and Reason do
justify and prompt men to.

2ly. They are extremely stupid and dull, who cannot distinguish betwixt
pleading for Peoples Dissent, and pleading that they may be treated with more
mildness, than some are inclined to use. I do not plead for their Dissent, to
justify that, but do only endeavor to show that much may be said for
Moderation toward some who do Dissent, against the fierce debauched People who
are their greatest opposers.

3ly. They discover no good Opinion of the Church, who would persuade the World
she maintains her Ministers for no other end, but either to Preach up severity
against all who scruple some Indifferences, or to keep them silent, that they
do not decry the violent courses some lewd profane Pretenders to her do put in
practice: Would not this be to make our Ministers like that old Register I have
heard of in one of the Ecclesiastical Courts, who would not suffer a certain
Churchwarden to be at rest, till he would Present his Neighbors who came not
to the Sacrament? The Churchwarden being at last overcome by his
importunities, did get a Presentment drawn out, and amongst those Names which
were set down, there was one which had Mr. before it. The Register spying this,
thought it would be very convenient to begin with this Man: And accordingly had
him Summoned to the Court, and began to manage the business very briskly. But
another who had a great veneration for the Court, being present, and hearing
that Man called, applied himself immediately to the Register, and asked him
what he meaned to do? Why, said the Register, I will make this Man go to the
Sacrament before I have done with him, for all his Mastership. Nay then, said
the other, you will spoil all; for this Gentleman is ONE OF US, he will Swear and
be Drunk as well as the BEST of us. Say you so, quoth the Register, then the
case is altered. And immediately he called the Churchwarden, and child him
very sharply, telling him he was a most impudent and villainous Rakehell, in
that he durst adventure to Present so worthy a Gentleman as that was. Why, said
the Churchwarden, he did not come to the Sacrament. Why Sirrah, answered the
Register, you are not to Present all who do not come to the Sacrament, but only
those who scruple to receive the Sacrament on their Knees.

Some do lay a great stress on this, That several who are in eminent Places in
the Church are against both my Sermon and my self. But for my own part I do not
much concern my self for that, 1 Cor. 4. 3.
With me it is a small thing to be judged of Man's judgment. I am willing to pay
every Man the respect his particular Place, Character, Office and Quality can
require. But I hope it is no fault for a Man to wish and pray that the Church
of England may never Sink, Perish, no nor Suffer by the False and Insiduous
Tricks of some who pretend to her. It Is not the opposition of Enemies on all
hands that can do us so much hurt, Bishop Wilkins Sermon. p. 162.
as the Scandal and Folly of Pretending Friends.

Some are apt to believe, that evil designing Men have insinuated themselves
into places of Trust and Power, and that a degenerate kind of Pretenders to the
Protestant Religion do make a great Figure at present amongst us. Whether they
have ground or no for that surmise, is no business of mine to determine. Yet if
any Man do think he has too much ground for such suspicion, when he does
deliberately read a late Book set forth by Mr. Elymas the Sercerer.
Tho. Jones, I do declare if he will be delivered from those thoughts, he must
not come to me, but go to some Body else who understands those things better.
If Phaeton drive the Chariot of the Sun, Dr. Stilling. Irenic. p. 47.
the World, will be soon on Fire, I, mean such in the Church whose Brains like
the Unicorns run out in the length of the Horn, such who have more Fury than
Zeal, and yet more Zeal than Knowledge or Moderation.

The overdoing of Conformity, Dr. Loyd now Bishop of St. Asaph says of the
admirable Bishop Wilkins, that he Conformed himself to every thing that was
Commanded, beyond which for any Men to be vehement in little and unnecessary
things, either for or against them, he could not but dislike, and often called it
Fanaticalness. Funer. Sermon. p. 49.
that is, making more necessary to Conformity than the Laws of the Land have
made necessary, is as great a fault as Nonconformity. And whoever will not be
content with a Man's doing as much as true Conformity does oblige him to, but
will expect he should be rought and severe with every one who Dissents from
him, is a Superfine Conformist! And I take all such (of what Degree soever they
be) to be the greatest and most dangerous Enemies to our Church, of any sort of
Men in the World. From the subtle and deceitful Craftiness, and the violent
Rage and Force of this sort of Men, and of their Brethren and Companions the
Papists, the merciful and good Lord deliver every Sincere and Hearty Protestant.

FINIS.

