Bogg-Witticisms: OR, Dear Ioy's Common-Places. BEING A Complete Collection of
the most Profound Punns, Learned Bulls, Elaborate Quibbles, and Wise Sayings of
some of the Natives of Teague-Land. Shet fourd vor Generaul Nouddificaushion:
And Coullected be de great Caare and Painsh-Tauking of oour Laurned
Countree-maun, Mac O Bonniclabbero of Drogheda, Knight of the Mendicant Order.

PRINTED For Evidansh Swear-all in Lack-Plaush Lane.

Price Bound Two Shilling Sixpence

TO THE READER.
THe Bulls and Witticisms, that have too frequently dropped from the Mouths of
Dear Joys, have made them so Famous, that they are become the Discourse and
Entertainment of almost all sorts of Companies: And in troth, they are
generally so full of Diversion, that they would almost force a Smile from
Heraclitus. Nothing more recommends them, than the natural Stupidity or
Simplicity of the Natives; so that they do not appear like little Contrivances,
but purely the Effects of their Notions and Mistakes of Things.

The Welchmen and Scots had a long time Engrossed all the Table-Talk of the
Town; and the Jests and Stories that were Related concerning them, passed
instead of a Song, or a Fidle. But Teague and his Countrymen have clearly
Baffled Saint Taffy and Saint Andrew, for downright Dunstable, Blunder, and
Punn; who are no more to be compared to them, than the little Sooty Lanthorns
in Smithfield, to the Radiant Magnifying Lights in Cheapside. The following
Collection presents you with great variety of the most Novel and Facetious;
which may serve as Wallnuts with a Glass of Wine, and be an excellent Relief
against an uneasy and sullen Melancholy. The Collector has not the Vanity to
persuade himself, that they will Suit every Temper; there being some so
perverse, and implacable, as never to like any Man's humor but their own; and,
like the Crow, think their own Offspring fairest: I fairly leave such to the
Election of their own Appetites; and shall not presume to force my Sauce upon
their Palats. I have no apprehension, that any Ingenious Reader can Interpret
any thing herein contained, as a National or Particular Reflection; that being
the most Remote imaginable, both from the Collector's Inclination and
Intention: And I shall, for once, presume to Obviate any such undue Reflection,
with the Motto of the Royal Garter; Honi Soit Qui Mal Y Pense. But if you will
have it in short, The design of Publishing them is this; That whilst the Reader
enjoys himself and Friend over a Glass of Wine, the Bookseller and I may have
a Glass of Wine to make Merry over too.

Farewell.

THE PREFACE By Teague.
BE Shaint Pautrick, de Dee'l tauke me noow, but Y caun remaumber de time,
vaan me Fauder vash maukeretorne of a grate dele vary must monish, be
Creesht; and dat vash consharning Sheepsh, and Cowesh, and Hourshes, and Piggsh
too, be Shaint Antonie; and vaat ish de maater, in de Dee'llish Naume, indeed,
dat dear ish noe money for mine Bullsh, indeed? And, in fait, Dear Joy, Dee'l
tauke me, bot dey be of de largesht kind too, indeed; and dey be aull of de
right shtraine too, noow. Hear ish no Leeving vidout Monysh, in fait, Dear
Joy, and me Beef and Broat Voman, (de Dee'l tauke de Beesh) she vill not
Trosht me for Tree haulf-Pensh more, for mine Dinnar indeed. Y hauve mauke try
to bind me shelfe Prentish to shome boudy, to gat Monysh; and, be Shaint
Pautricks Bonnet, dear ish noe boudy vill haufe me, noow. And Y did tinke to
bind me shelfe Prantish to shome Evidansh-mauker; and be Shaint Bridgat, dat
be aull oout of de Faushion, and every Boudy musht be Hounesht, be Creesht,
and dear ish noe Plaushes to be got noow. And I vash jusht a-goeing to coume
and manke haung upon mee-shelfe indeed, and to put de maater oout of aul dout;
vor dear vash none Leeving vor Teague any longar. And vash not dish a veery
shad caush indeed? Vaan Y vash in dish Condishion, and vash jusht mank tinking
upon haunging, be Creesht; dear comesh a Maun, and lookesh upon me Faush in
fait; What is the matter honest Lad (says he?) Be Creesht, and daat be veery
goodt newsh, to call me honesht, Y tinke; and Y tall him, de maater vash veery
baud indeed, vor y vash in mishurable poor Condishions indeed. Dan he shay to
me, daat Y musht be for putting me shelfe upon good Cheer; daat he had
friendsh voud halpe me to shome money, indeed. Be me Shalvashion, Dear Joy, Y
vash for manking veery mush Joy upon me shelf noow; and Y deed shay to hem,
indeed; Be de Maush, Dear Joy, dee beesht de shivillest Parshon in aul de
Vorld, in fait; and de Dee'l tauke me indeed, bot dee hasht mauke mush
rejoyshing upon me noow, too; And Y vood praay dee to do me de fauvour, to
show me de kindnesh, to tall me vhatdish Friend of dyne ish, daat vill halp
me to shommony indeed; and Y shall be boond to mauke me shelfe, and aull de
Poshterity of poor Teague, over to hem, and hish Haresh, be Laater of
Atturny, in fait noow. Well then, (he deed shay to me) If thou can furnish
me with some good Current Bulls, thou shall have ready money for them. Noow, de
Dee'l tauke dee, Dear Joy, (Y did shay to him) dou hasht mauke me deed again,
be me Shoul; for de Armish did mauke Plundar upon mine Fader, and did tauke
avay aull hish Bullsh, Cowesh, and Horshes too, be Creesht, before dat Y vash
born indeed; Andnoow, if dat be and, Y vill onsh moure tauke haunging into me
Conshideration, indeed; and sho fare dee veell, Dear Joy. But stay, (he did
shay to me again) I do not mean Horn'd-Beasts, my Friend; we Citizens have enough
of that sort of Cattle; I say, I mean a sort of Comical Joques, called Bulls,
That are a Preposterouskind of speaking; when you return my meaning as by
mistake: In short, I do not mean the Bull For the Mouth; but the bull Of the
Mouth; and such as these, and any other pleasant Stories for Diversion, are the
Market I would be at. Enoow! Enoow! Dear Joy, (Y did shay) Y do undershtand
dee, indeed; it ish shome Shtories consharning me shalfe, and Bryan, and half
a Doshen more of ush: Be me Shoul, Y can tall dee abondansh indeed. And if
dee vilt be sho shivil, to mauke paymensh of shom Monysh, Y vill tall dee sho
many ash a vhole Drove at dish time, indeed: And ven vee do meet again, vee
vill hauve de toddar bout, he me Broguesh, in fait noow.

Bogg Witticismes.
NEcessity has been often the Mother of Ingenuity, and it will appear a very
great Truth, if the following Story be Considered. For Dennis had a long time
been waiting, and mauking Petishion for a Plaush, until Fob grew so low that it
could not produce three halfpence a day for the Ireish Ordinary: So that as he
was taking the matter into serious consideration, and End of Gold and Silver
Woman passed by with her usual Cry, Any old Satin, or Taffaty, or Velvet, and
old Lace take money for it. No Y prithee dear Joy (quoth Dennis to the Woman)
what ish the prishe dat thee vilt geef for good Lace? Y have so much at me
Lodging as cost about three poundsh, and Y will go and fesh it for thee
preshantly, if thee vilt give me shom money for it? The woman replied, that she
never gave above 5 s. an ounce for the best, when it was well burnt, and
cleaned: Dan Y would besheech thee to call at me Lodgingsh an hour after thish
time, and be Creesht Y will burn me Lansh for thee now, and thee shall have it
indede; pray where is your Lodging? said the woman, why me Lodgingish at the
bird and Baby he Sharing-Cross indeed, and Devil tauke me if thee vilt call
thee shall have me besht laush, and it ish very good indede. The woman went her
way, and Dennis repairs to his Lodging, taking his best Lace Crevat, and
Ruffles, and set them on fire, preserving the ashes carefully, and making them
up in a piece of paper. The woman came at the time, and Dennis brought her down
the paper of Ashes: what is this (says the woman) that you have brought me? By
me Shoul what dosht dee tinke it ish? why is ish all my besht Lauce, and Y have
burnt it very care fully for thee indede, and no Y would have the take notish
what ish de wayt of it, and give me de money for it. Do think me mad (replied
the woman) to give Money for a few ashes; I tell thee, I do not use to deal in
such ware. Now the Deevil tauke me ( said Dennis) it ish me besht Lauce Crevat^
and Cuffs, and Y had them of me Captain the other day, and no Y have burnt
them for d^ vilt geeve me noting for it. Deevil tauke the for a Bish, you Son
of a Wore, Y will mak^ Swear upon thee before the Justice for putting a great
cheat upon me, bashe Slut indeed. Where ish the money for the burnt Lashe now,
ha? Prithee get home, you bog-trotting Owl (quoth the woman) burn thy Mantle
and Brogues, it may be that may yield thee shom money to buy a Plaush; you
simple Scoundrel thou. Be Creesht ( quoth Dennis) thee be come to put abuse
upon me, Deevil tauke me for a Son of a Whore, but Y will make revenge upon
thee for me besht Laushe now, yesh indede. The Scuffle continued a long time
before Dennis could be convinced of his Error; until at length all that heard
it laughed heartily at his Ignorance, which made him go out of the House in
great Indignation.

2.
A Bird in hand is worth two in a Bush they say, and Own made some proof of it;
For his Lady gave him a Canary Bird to present from her to a Lady of her
acquaintance, now Owen had seen the boys house their Sparrows under their
Hatts, and (being taken with the humor) puts the Canary Bird up under his; but
in the way as he ways going with his present, a Coach passed by, behind which
was a Countryman of Owens, who put off his Hatt to Owen, and our dear Joy
answered his Complement with much respect, not minding the Canary Bird in the
Garret; at length he came to the Ladies house, and asked the Porter if his Lady
were within, who answered him, Yes. Why then ( quoth Owen) Y prithee tell her
that Y am belonging to such a Lady, and be me Shoul Y have brought her a
preshent from my Lady: Whereupon, Owen being called in, delivers himself after
this manner, Me Laudy presents her Sharvish to thee, and has shent thee (at
that he began to feel on his crown, to look in his heart, and to brush the locks
of his wigg, looking every way about him:) What has she sent? (quoth the
Lady,) Be Creesht it wash a little Shinning Bird, and the Deevil tauke me Joy
it ish come to nothing at all now.

3.
Dear Joy paying great Devotion before a certain old Image at a Church in
France; It hapened that the rotten Figure fell upon him, and bruised him very
much, so that he was forced to keep within doors for a considerable time, and
then coming again to the same Church, he saw a very fine new Image set up in
the same place: to which he addressed himself after this sort; Be me Shoul dear
Joy, Deevil tauke me if the dosht not look as pleashant as mine own Sweetheart,
and Y can scarce forbear to mauke Prayer to thee, but thy Father leaped down
upon me and wash like to break my Neck; and by Creesht Y have no mind to trust
thee for all thy sine looks.

4.
When Tangier was in the possession of his Majesty of Great Britain, a certain
Irish man was Servant to a Major there; the Major happened to die in his
Servants debt for Wages, and about three years after his Masters death, the
Irish man delivered a Petition to the Governor to this effect.

The Petition.
May it Pleashe thy Graushes Neckshellence,
THere ish happen to be great Falling-out between me Mashter Major White, and
me Shelfe, consharning shom monysh that ish owing unto me from himshelfe, and
be Creesht, dear Joy, Y vill tall thee it ish for Wages; nov the Devil tauke me
but Y will make Petition upon thee, that thee would be pleased to do me the
favor to do me the kindnesh, to tauke order wid him that he may pay me the
money; and be me Shalwashion Y will tell thee, Y will buy Comishion of thee for
a Captain or a Collonelsh plaush Indede. So Y advish thee to tauke shpeashial
caure that I may hauve what ish due to me, for the Deevil tauke thee if Y can
tell what to do for want of it Indede. And if thee own dear shelfe cannot tauke
order for me, Y will pray thee to make petishion fexe me upon his Majeshties
Grauce into England, that Y may not have Cheat put upon me, for what ish my own
Indede.

Sho Y resht, Dear Joy, thy Graushes humble Sharvant M.D.



The Governor having considered the Contents of the Petition, began to Enquire
what this Major White was, and being informed that the Gentleman had been dead
for three years, he could not forbear smiling at the downright Ignorance of the
Petitioner, and ordered him to be called in, when he spoke to him to this
purpose: Friend, I have read thy Paper here, and I find thee would have me
order one Major White to pay thee money; where is this Major White?

D. Why, if thee wilt come along wid me Y will show thee whare he ish put under
a Shtone indede.


Gov. What! is he dead then?


D. Yesh be Creesht ish he.


Gov. How long?


D. It ish! let me she, it ish about tree Yearsh, dear Joy.


Gov. This is very pretty, and thou would have me sue him in the Grave for
thee, I warrant thee? ha!


D. Yesh, yesh, Devil tauke me Y would indede.


Gov. It is not like that such a Gentlemen died in debt to his Servants, but
the Dead pay no Debts.


D. Be me Shoul dat ish very pretty, dear Joy! than it ish nothing but to dye
and put the Cheat upon every body for what ish due to them! be the Mash thish
ish de greatest Cheat in the wholl world now! Y will die too be Creesht, and
put the great Cheat upon every body too indede.


The Governor was ready to burst with the Comedy, and ordered his Servants to
make the Irishman drink, and so dismissed him.

5.
A certain Colonel having lost one of his Hands in his Majesty's Service, and
an Artificial Hand of Steel put on, and it was done with that Curiosity, that
he could hold his Fork in it or take up a cup of Beer, or command his Horse
with it, but still it appeared to be Steel, and was very finely pollished. It
happened a Dear Joy was waiting upon his Master at Table, who dined with the
Colonel; he took great notice of the Steel Hand, at length (quoth he to the
Colonels Servant) Y prithee tell me, wash die Mashter born wid dat Hand? be
Creesht it ish very strange an Iron Hand should grow so big, ish it not? the
Servant told the Irish-mans question to the Table, who laughed heartily at it.

6.
Naturam Expellas Fune licet usque Recurret. Once a Tailor and always a Thief,
was an Addage founded upon good Experience; or if that will not Convince you of
the unalterableness of men's natural Dispositions, perhaps the ensuing Story may.

It is said a certain Mac-lander had listed himself in the Spanish Army in
Flanders, but (not well approving of that Service) had deserted his Colors,
and was thereupon apprehended, and tied up to Destiny upon a Gibbet not far
from Bruges; A Countryman passing by with his Cart in little time after the
body had been trussed up, and considering him to be a proper Fellow; (having
likewise felt, and found his body very warm, and that his breath had not quite
deserted it) began to entertain some thoughts of taking him down, and
endeavoring to restore him again to the number of the Living; accordingly,
when he had driven the Cart under the Tree, and received the body in it, he cut
the Hemp, and drove him home, where there was immediate care taken, by
bleeding, fomenting, and other requisite means for his recovery, so that in few
hours he was as if he had never been suspended: He had a remembrance that he
had been dragged to the place of Execution, but not the least apprehension of
what had been done to him afterward. The honest Countryman told him the
condition he had found him in, and the Cure, and means that had been taken for
his recovery, Mac. seemed very penitent, and resolved upon a new Course of
Life; Complaining much upon de Shaints upon (...) says he) be Creesht Y have
mauke abundansh of Shuplicausion, aund Y have been shivil to them indede, Aund
eet upon aall daat neever one of them wash sho kind to come shaare me, or to
taake de Shtring from me Neck indeed: Noow de plaague devil them, for Y am
shatishfied de beesht honeshter man dan dey be, Y have mauke much sharvish, and
kindnesh upon them, aund dey wash not come to shave me, aund Y vill not come to
them again indede; but Y vill be vid dee, aund vill mauke all me Sharvish upon
dee, in fait, and let them aall be sharved ash dey vou'd let me be sharved,
indede.

The Country man hoped that he had gained a stout Servant, and was very well
satisfied in what he had done. But there are a sort of Horses, bred in a
certain Country, that all the art and care of the most Exquisite Jocky can
never reclaim or break from their Jades tricks, they will still retain their
unlucky Qualities, and it is not improbable that many of the Natives of that
Land are of the same disposition with their beasts (that is to say) they are
not Reclaimable. For this very Mac. we are now speaking of, no sooner was
entrusted by the honest Flanderkin, to assist him in the business of his
Husbandry; no sooner was he Warm, but (like the Snake) his Poison returned to
him: his Mac. qualities regained upon him, he made a shift to rob the honest
Country man of what he could pillage, and rid away with one of his best Horses
to the bargain, and this within three days after the good man had saved his
Life: the Flanderkin and his Son soon perceiving something amiss, pursued the
ungrateful wretch, and in a League or two of the Village found him wallowing in
Brandy, (a Bastard sort of Vsquebah) He was immediately bound, and Manackled,
carried to his Masters house, and there once more put into the Cart, and
conveyed to the place from whence he had been reprieved from Execution, when he
came underneath the Fertile Tree, and had the second time taken the form of
hanging into his consideration, there was a great hoo boob raised within him,
by reason of something of regret he had to make his Exit on that fashion: But
for greater decorum of Conclusion (for want of a Ghostly Father) he made his
Confession to his Executioners in manner and form following (that ish to shay)
Yt ish a plaugy Caush indede (me Dear Joy) dat dee vilt tie me up to dish
deevillish Unwholesome plaush again be Chreesht; Noow de deevil tauke me, aund be
Shaint Pautricksh Shoo-bookle! it ish very haard indede! Me Fadder wash a
Cut-Troat be de Mash, in fait; and he had great Liberty of Conshiansh, to do
every Ting: aund be Creesht! hoo! hoo! hoo! woo! woo! it ish bloody haard
indede! Noow to maake two Murdar upon me body indede, Fursht de King of
Shpainsh Laawesh, for desharting me Coloursh, indede! and now (dear Joy) be
Chreesht dee vilt hang me too, for shom Pishtolsh, and a plaugy drooukan
Guelding of a Maure, (be Chreesht) dat shtop at the next Braandy Shop, aund
noow de deevil tauke de Maure too indede, daat she could not run avay furdar
vid me, aund be de Mash I musht be haung'd twish noow for de Jaud'sh treeksh of
dish plaugy Maure indede! hoo! hoo! woo! boo! boo! Noow de deevil tauke dee too
noow, aund vaat musht Y be haung'd twisbe for noow? hear ish die Maure again
indede, aund hear ish de Pishtolsh, aal but Shix upon me fait noow! Aund Y
predee, dear Joy, lat ush be friendsh agaain, indede! aund Y vill Swear me
shelfe to de Devil for dee indede: Hark ye, hark ye, (dear Joy) quoth the
Spaniard, I do you no wrong, I found you hear in a Stinking pickle, I carried
you home, and dried ye, and made ye Clean; in fine, I saved ye once from the
Gallows, and ye have served me accordingly, and now let the next Man that has a
mind to be Cheated, take thee down again, for I will e'^^ leave thee as I found
thee, and so Farewell and be hanged, that is twice God bu'y.

Having so said, they left there the dangling Objet to scare the Passengers,
who were in great surprise to see the same Man that was hanged for three days
before, and they thought buried the same Night, come again and hang upon the
same Gibbet, and that now he had got Boots on, whereas before he had none, (for
you must know the Farmer, and his Son were in such have to be rid of him, that
they e'n tied him up in the same garb that they found him,) this (as I was
saying) mightily surprised them, and they thought the Devil had sent him Post
back again.

7.
A Gentleman's Footman in the Country took an occasion to Gallant the Kitching
Maid (between whom, and himself, there had passed many an amorous Intrigue) and
leading her into the Orchard in a Summer Evening they happened to sit down
under a Pipping Three, to entertain themselves with a little private Converse;
It was about the business of Comfortable Importance; Be Shaint Pautricks
Shoo-horne (quoth Donell) Y have very much great deal of Love for dee, Y vill
put shom kish upon dee faush, aund maake shom Child upon dee body indede! and
so Donnel put what he had said in execution: Now it happened that upon that
very Tree was a Spark, who had come thither to borrow some of the Fruit, and
upon their approach to that place, kept himself very close, but so that he saw
and heard all that passed. When the Exercise was over (said the Miss to the
Lover) O! Donnel, you and I have often had these enjoyments; but if I should
prove with Child, what care would there be taken of me, or the Infant? Noow de
Deevil tauke me (replied he) be de Mash it ish unshivil for dee to put shuch
question upon me indede; pradee let me shom more kish upon de faush in fait,
and dear ish one above vill tauke caure for de Child and dee too be Creesht.
That Is a damned lie (quoth the Fellow in the Tree) for I never intend to take
care for any Bastards, but of my own getting. Upon which words they both ran
away in great confusion; Donnel crying out, Be me shalwashion de deevil hash
been vitness to vat vee haave don indede; aund if dee beesht mauke vid Child,
he himshelfe shall be de Godfader in fait.

8.
Bryan having hurted one of his Legs, that it was much swollen, and his Master
having occasion to send him a considerable Journey into the Country; Bryan went
to the Shoemaker, directing him to make one of his Boots pretty much bigger
than the other. When the Boots were brought home, and to be put on, Bryan fell
into a great fumigation with the Shoemaker, Swaring at him, Be de shoul of mine
Fader aund me Graundfader, let a toushand deevilsh pull me to peeshes, if dou
beesht not de greatesht Fool dat ever wash borne upon a woman; vaat de deevil
cansh dee not undarshtand vaat ish sho plain shaid to dee, Y did bad dee mauke
one of me Botosh bggar dan de toddar, aund be Chreesht de shimpleton have mauke
one Leshar dan de toddar: preddee dear Joy! dee maisht tauke them home vid die
none shelfe again indede, day vill not be upon sharvish for me be Creesht noow.
La.

9.
Mao Clan, and his Man being traveling together upon the Road, and one of his
Horses was lamed by a prick of a Nail, the other had received a strain in one
Shoulder: Be Shaint Pantricks Tobacco-stopper, and Shaint Brigatsh Thimble,
noow de deevil reed avaay upon me in fait, but one of deshe Horshes ish boat
doownreeght laam, in fait! yeet be me Mashbooke, de blaake Maure be a shtoutar
Horse dan de vite Naag indede, Deevil take me if Y have not maake ride upon me
laame Beetch indede, dat mine Arsh ish sho shore ash de baak of mine haund, in
fait; plaague deevil de daumn Beech for me, she vill never leave mauke shtumble
aund faul, before she trow me from de Shadle down Shtairesh, and brauk me Neck,
be Creesht. But Dennish (quoth he to his Man) Y vill mauke shpeak upon dee a
leetle indede, upon a wheesh foot ish me Maure laume indede? Noow de plaugue
taake dee in fait, dosht not dee know? be Creesht it ish de hander footsh
before, creplayed Dennish to his Master.) Aund be me Shawl vaat ish de maatre
daat die Naag be sho upreeht laume, Y preddee? Noow de deevil taake dee indede,
dear Joy! (replied Dennis to his Master again) dosht dee not she vid dyne
Eyshe indede? whee dan Y vill tall de noow, it ish the Rumpe-boan of de reeght
Sholdar upon the needar side dat is put oout of hish plaush, Joy, aund be
Shaint Antonce, de deevil tauke me but Y am sho laume daat Y cannot sheet upon
de baak of de deevil any longar in fait, noow! They jogged on upon their
cripled Jades for a long time, sometimes cursing themselves, sometimes their
Horses, sometimes their Saints, or any thing they thought on; till at length
they stumbled upon a Farriers Shop, in a small Country Village upon the Road;
they got up to him, Ashke hish audvishe about their Rosinante's; Vulcan told
them, one must have his foot drawn, and the other be rolled on the Shoulder,
and that they must have many days rest, before he could warrant a Cure upon
them. Deevil rasht dare Sholesh in dare grauvesh indede, (replied Mac Clan) voo
de pocksh vou'd be sho plaug'd vid a couple of deevillish beeches, in fait' Y
veesh vid aul me Shoul, indede! dat Y haud mauke von lushtie auble Horse for
boat de beechesh, in fait, La!

Say you so (quoth the Farrier, who perceived the Simplicity of the Animalls,)
If you will leave the Horses to my care; I doubt not but for both of them I may
procure a stout Nagg, against your return this way: Vid aul mine heart dear
Joy, (said Mac Clan) Y will mauke put them upon dye Caure be me shoul, and Y
will mauke caull upon dee about tree Weeksh after yeshterday, aund Y will geeve
dee shatishfaction for die kindnesh to me Horshes, indede! aund be Creesht dear
Joy, she dou mauke a propper Galding oout of them too, indede! Let me alone for
that (replied the Smith) and so they parted, leaving their Cattle to his care,
whilst they pursued the rest of their Journey on foot-back, about fifty Miles:
during their absence (you must know) the Farrier had cured, and put off the two
Beasts belonging to Mac Clan, and his Man Dennis, and had got Money by the
bargin: And had provided an old rotten Keffill to accommodate the Spark at his
return: By the way you are to understand, that Mac's Mare was black, and
Dennis's Nagg was white, and the Beast that Vulcan had provided was Pyed,
answerable to both their Colors: So that when our Spark returned, and saw the
Animal that was provided for him, he concluded with himself that it had (in
earnest) been Compounded of his Black Mare, and Denis's White Nagg. Noow be
shaint Bartelemew's Butcharing Knife (dear Joy,) (Says Mac Clan to the
Farrier) let me shinke up to de Earesh in de necksht boog be Creesht, but dee
art shartainly de mann of de mosht Confounded Shiensh in de Vorld, in fait, for
dear ish de shame Colloursh be Creesht, de very shame Coomplackshion ash me
maure vash, and de same vite bairsh ash vas upon Dennish's Horshe; be de Mass,
it ish like boat one of de too; But Y vill mauke a leetle shpeaking upon dee
(dear Joy) What ish de reashon daat dish horshe ish shoe leetle, aund be me
should indede, dee hasht put too Horshes into hish body? Y should mauke
Expectashionsh dat de too Horshes should mauke one tall, Shtrong, and lushty
Gualding, indede? You must consider this is but a Colt yet, being not three
weeks since it was made, but when it is full grown, it will be a mighty Beash
indeed. D- sht dee bear daat Dennish (quoth Mac to his Man) be Creesht it ish
a Colt (he shay) aund it vill be a veery grate Horshe, van he be grown op to
Mansh Eshtate. Be Chreesht dish be the verey Larned Man in fait; Deevil tauke
me dear Joy, Y will mauke publicaashion of die great shkill in every plaush
indede. In fine, they came to agreement what the Farrier was to have for making
up the two lame Horses, into one; Mac paid him his demands, put one of the
Sadles upon Pie, and Mac gat upon the outside of him, the other Sadle was girt
on upon Dennis, who followed his Master on foot. They parted from the Farrier,
not without great suspicion of his being a Conjurer; Dennis was once under some
fear, when the Saddle was fastened to his back, Least the Man of Art should have
converted him to a Horse too. They had not travailed far before Dennis
perceived his Masters Horse to be lame of all four, and upon that Ocasion
addressed himself to him after this sort. Noow de Deevill tauke dee, dear Joy;
de two Horshes daat was maake up into dish Cattle, vash laume but upon too
shidesh, indede; but in fait dish Gualding ish lame upon all de forwre footsh,
La: she she vat a damn fool dou art (replayed Mac) aund be Creesht did not de
Larned man Shay it wash a Colt; and deevill tauke me, hish footsh vill be
tandar dish great vile, till hish nailesht be grow hard and strong indede. Many
more Observations were made upon their Miraculous Beast; and some say Mac was
upon mauking Petishion to mauke show of his Twin-Barb at the Bell Shavage.

10
Pautrick had been in the Wars in Germany, and after his return, sitting in
Company with some of his brother Brogues, he was vanting what dangers he had
gone through, what exploits he had don, and amongst the rest that he had cut off
one of the Enemies Legs, Be Creesht Pautrick (says one of them) dee shoudsht
have dishcharged, dee Paike at him, annd hauve Cut hish heed off from hish
body. Noow de Deevill tauke me (replied be) daat ish veery true indede, but be
de Maush dear Joy, Y caume too laute for daat indede, for be me shalwashion
hish heed vash tauken avay before indede now.

11.
One of deare-Joy-Land had a Son that served a Gentleman here, in quality of
his Footman; after he had been in England for some time, his Friends (upon
some Occasion) writ over for a Testimonial whether he was alive, or not, upon
Consulting his Acquaintance about the matter, they advised him to get a
Scrivener to draw it, and get it signed by the hands of the most Credible
Country men that were known to his Relations: This being all done accordingly,
he was told he might send it by Post to Chester, and after the Packet Boat
would take Care of it: One night his Master sent him to the Post house with
Letters; and he had some Inclination to have put in his Certificate, but
fearing the Packet Boat might miscarry, he resolved to carry it himself; His
Master saw him no more in six weeks, at length he appears again, and being
asked what had occasioned him to absent himself so long; he made answer to this
purpose. Be Creesht me Relaushionsh deed mauke shand a Leetre, daat Y musht
shend them a Shartificate daat Y wash alive; Y haad geet a skrivishner to mauke
vrite upon de Pauper for me, aund it vash shined be me Friendsh here indede,
but upon fear daat de Pacquat Boat should miscary, be Creesht Y did mauke go,
and carry eet me shelfe indede, daat van day she de Shartificatsh, dey maight
tinke it vash mien awn shelfe daat vash alive indede.

12
Teague having been Obliged to wait upon his Master to Edingbourgh, where he
continued for some time, at his return to London fell in Company of some of
his old Aquaintance, how do thou like that Country Teague (says one of
them) Y will tall dee be Creesht (replied he) Y vash Sheeke all de time Y vash
dare indede; And be shaint Pautrick if Y haud Leeved daure 'till dish time, be
de Maush, de Deevill tauke me indede, but Y shou'ed hauve been deed noow for
Sheaven Yearsh ago, dear Joy, upon me fait it ish true indede.

13
A certain Lord having a Nimble Bog-Trotter to his servant which use to travel
with him when he rode and would make as quick speed as his Horse let him ride
never so hard, This Nobleman having occasion to send his servant to a Gentleman
of his acquaintance who lived about a dozen Miles from him, he called his Man
to him over Night, and said Teague (for so the fellow was named) I must send
you to morrow very early in the morning to Mr.... pray remember, to which
Teague replied au my shaul Joy I saul remember very well, In the morning Teague
rose very Early and away he trots to this Gentleman's house leaving his Master
(as supposed) a sleep, and being come Teague knosked at the Door, and was let
in, Who presently asked for the Gentleman, he Master of the House, to which the
Servant answered he was not stirring; Teague said be Chreesht I must speak
with him I did come from the Lord... my Master. The Servant went and acquainted
his Master thereof, (thinking it had been some Urgent affair that Teague should
come 12. miles so soon in the morning.) Whereupon his Mr. having a great
respect for the Lord (and believing it business of Moment) ordered Teague to
come up to his Chamber, And the Gentleman said how now Teague, what news do
you bring from My Lord your Mr. that you are here to Early, to which Teague
answered, be Chrest I cano tell, how does my Lord quoth the Gent. Indeed very
well, said Teague, what is your Errant or business with me Teague, (quoth the
Gent.) Quoth Teague be Chrest and St. Patrick I cannot tell, My Lord did call
me to him over night and said I must come to thee this morning, yes indeed, and
he did charge me to remember it, and be Chrest thou can witness I have not
forgot it for thou see I am here with thee, quoth the Gent. is this all,
quoth Teague au my shaul I do not know any more, and so I will go home (Dear
Joy) to my Master and tell him I did remember to come to thee (quoth the
Gentleman) now I think on it Teague, you must stay a little while, I have
something to send to your Master, which you come for, be Chreesh ( quoth
Teague) I cano tell: Then the Gentleman began to think how he should be
revenged of this Rogue that had thus disturbed him to no purpose, at length he
Considered he had an ugly stone Mortar which he did not value, which Mortar he
gave Teague and told him, he came for that Mortar, and that his Master had sent
him purposely for it; The Mortar weighed about 80 l. which Teague got upon his
Back, and took his leave of the Gentleman, many a face and many a Curse he did
make at the Mortar, for it did hurt his back and shoulders, and almost grippled
poor Teague, but he was bound to endure it with Patience, having brought it
home, he had some help to get it off his back; And the rest of his Servants
asked him where he had been, for his Lord missed him; To which he was Dumb and
would not answer any thing for a long while, at last My Lord being at a Bouling
Green near, sent to see for Teague, and to command him to come to him, who came
to the Green to My Lord, said the Lord to Teague ye plaguey Rogue where have you
been all this day, Teague made ugly faces and points to his back an shoulders
(being sore and gauld by the stone ortar) andas often as My Lord asked him
where he had been, My Lord received no other answer but wretched wry faces and
pointing to his Shoulders and back, till at length my Lord grew a little angry,
Sir, said he, tell me where you have been and the meaning of your Pointings
and wry Mouth, or else I will Cudgel your bones, Then Teague answered, did
thou not say I must go to Mr.... this morning, and be Chrest I have been with
him, you damned Rogue, said My Lord, I told you over night you should go to him
in the morning, but you should have come to me and taken my Errant along with
you, A plague take thee, and they Errant to, I did bring they Errant upon my
back be Chreest, till I did bruise my shoulders, and au my shoul I shall go no
more of thy Errants, nay Teague (quoth my Lord, do not say so) what is it you
brought from the Gentleman, be Chrest thou may see it if thou will go home,
no Teague, said the Lord (being willing that some Gentlemen shoud share in the
mirth that this fellow was like to make among them) go you home and fetch this
Errant that has so mortifyed your shoulder and let me see it, Teague goes home
and takes up the Mortar and brings it to his Master upon the Green, and throws
it down there, at which they all laughed heartily that this fellow should be so
sordid as to go to the Gentleman without his Errant, and commended the
Gentleman's Ingenuity to punish the fool with such a burden. To be short, his
Master and the Company having had sport enough with his sour faces, his
pointings and his Errant, his Master bid him carry the Mortar home but withal
to go to the Gentleman again, and fetch the Pestell to the Mortar, he having
forgot it.

14.
Among the Serwants of a Certain Nobleman were a Teaguelander, and a French
man, and these two did sometimes jarr, sometimes were mighty loving. It happened
at a certain time that these two Sparks were in a hott dispute about their
Country, and their Saints; And de French man did sputter much in Praise of his
Country, and of St. Dennis who was Saint for France, saying that no Saint in
all the World could compare to St. Dennis, po po po po po po, Jay war, what St.
Dennis, says Teague, quoth the French man, St. Dennis was Saint for France, and
St. Dennis was murdered at Paris, and his Head was cut off, and begar me tell
you no lie, when his Head have been Cut off, St. Dennis did ketch up his Head
in his hands and he did carry it two leagues after it was cut off in his hands,
and there he did faint and fall down, so he was buried in that Place, and there
is a Chapel built and called by the Name of St. Dennis to this day, and all
the Kings of France will be Crowned there the Teaguelander did burst into
laughter, and did say, be Chreest my Joy thou do make a great Prate of thy
St. Dennis, but upon my Shalvation St. Patrick was far beyond him, St. Patrick,
auoth, the French man, What was St Patrick, Po po po, be Christ, says the Irish
man, do thou not know St. Patrick, no begar said the French man, me did
never hear of an Irish Saint, no quoth Teague, be Chrest I shau break thy Pate
for thee, what do thou say there be no Teagueland Saint, these words caused
some blows, but they were quickly parted, and the French man was judged to be
in the wrong, because he gave affront to the Teague lander in Contradicting
him, so he did ask the Bog Trotter pardon, and desired him to go on upon his
story; Then said the Bog Trotter, St. Patrick was Saint for Ireland, and be was
murdered at Dublin in Ireland, and his Flead was Curt off, But the Holy Saint
did take his Head up and did make to the Sea side, resolving not to stay in
that Country where they had so served him, and coming to the sea side, he did
fling himself into the Sea, and be did swin indeed threescore Leagues, and then
he did come on shoat, and was o faint that be dyed, and be was buried, and the
Place is called Holy Head to this day. Quoth the French man, how did he swim,
upon his back, quoth the Irish man, no be Chrest he did swim upon his Belly,
and did strike out his hands as I do now (he striking out his hands in
imitation) where says the French man, did he carry his head then, Po po po po,
Joy, why be Chrest he did carry it in his Mouth betwixt his Teeth, and indeed
and upon my Shalvation it is true.

15
A certain Teague called Comines, begging of some Gentleman some Charity, one
of the Gentleman said to him, Comines why do not thou get some preferment
amongst thy Countrymen, you see the King is very kind to your Countrymen and
gives them Places, and makes some Officers in he Army, why don't you put
forward, and beg a Lieutenants Place of his Majesty, or if it be but a
Sergeants, it would be better than this Scandalous way of begging; To which
Comines replied, That the King had made him a Justice of Peace in Teagueland;
and he would not accept of any Preferment in the Army, but that some great Men
did detain his Papers from him, and said he, an my shoul I canno go for
Teagueland till they will give me my Papers.

16
The said Comines did frequent a certain Printers House near Charing Cross,
that the People were wearied of him, and the Master said before a Gentleman's
Servant that lodged in his House, I would fain be rid of this Fellow, this
Comines, for I can never be quiet for him, said the Gentleman's Servant, I will
shoot him for you if you will, no said the Master, I would not have him hurt,
no said the Servant I will not hurt him, then said the Master do what you will
to him; So Comines one day standing with his back to the Window of the back
shop of the Printer, and the Printer being walking and talking with a Friend,
the Gentleman's Servant happened to came down to the shop, and spying Comines at
the Window, Pops out a pocket Pistol, and theer being a Pain broke, he fires
the Pistol under Comines ear; It did no further hurt then caused his Peruke to
stink for the present, but Comines falls down and Cries Out, a Poor Comines be
Chrest, Poor Comines the Kings Evidence is killed, I am Dead, I am Deaf; The
Printer finding some red Ink did sprinckle some upon his Face and Cloths as he
lay tumbling, sometimes with his face upward, and his Eyes shut, sometimes on
his back, roaring out that he was murdered, and the Kings best Evidence slain,
at length having continued in this manner some time, and no Body condoling him
(for it was a back Place where few People came) he began to take some Courage,
and rubbing himself with his hands about his Face, he opened his Eyes, and saw
his hands (as he thought) all bloody, which was only the red Ink, then he Cried
out louder and Tumbled up and down saying be Chrest my heart blood is out, and
upon my Shalvation have washed my hands in my heart blood! O for the Soul of
St. Patrick help poor Comines whose heart blood is spilt for the Kings sake,
but those which were thereby, did so flout and jeer him, that at last he did
get up upon his Legs, and did dog trot it away having never since been seen
there, a pretty way to be rid of Impertinent Irish Beggars.

A certain Teaguelander came to some of his Comrades, and did say to them, who
dear Joy, do you think is dead, be Chrest (says one) I cano tell, the other
answered in the same manner, why faith, dear Joy, it is our Friend Mac Daniel,
and au my shoul you must come to the Funeral, quoth the Teaguelanders
Comrades, when did our Friend dye, quoth the Bog Trotter be did dye to Morrow
be Chrest, then quoth they, when will he be buried, said the other, he will be
buried yesterday, yes indeed, and so God reast his shoul.

17
One of St. Patrics Countrymen belonging to a certain Lord, did Enquire in
Dublin in a certain Street for the Sign of the white Dog, to which he was
answered, that there was no such Sign as that, he goes a little further, War
Joy, says the Teaguelander, can thou tell me where the white Dog is, no said
the Man, there is no such Sign in this Street, be Chrest, says the other, it
must be in this Street; Then says the Man, there is the Talbott, but no white
Dog, Po Po Po, Joy, be Chrest that is the white Degrees, says the Man I tell you
no, it is the Talbot, said the Teaguelander, Hold my dear Joy, you must not
call it the Talbot, but the white Dog for the Lord Tyrconels's Name is Talbot,
therefore you must say the white Dog.

18
A certain Lady sending her Servant for some Candles, the Fellow meeting with a
Comtade of his, stood talking in the Street with him, and having the Candles
tied up in a bunch he held then dangling in his hand, by and by comes a drunken
Fellow along, and it happened that this drunken Fellow beat the Candles out f his
hand into the Dirt the Wealker being very durty, O said the Teaguelander, be
Chrest I am undon my Lady will break my Pate and turn me away! O what shall I
do my Candles are all spoild in the Dirt; But the Candles had received no
further Prejudice then being dirty, says Mac to his Country man, my dear Joy
prithee tell me what I sall do to make my Candles clean and white as they
were, for an my shoul I Care not go home to my Lady till. I have made 'em
clean; So laying their Noddles together, it was agreed by them both to go to
the next Coffee house, says Mac, Hark me dear Joy (to the Master) I faith I
have had a great Misfortune, my Candles have fell in the dirt, and I dear not
go home to my Lady before they be clean, prithee Joy if thou can make 'em
clean I sall thank thee, and I will spend some money in they house on my shoul I
will, dear Joy; well said the Coffee man, let me see them, the Coffee man took
them and put them into a Platter, and washed them with some of hot Liquor, so
that the Dirt came off and some of the Tallow also, but they were clean; so the
Coffee-man brought Mac the Candles; said Mac, Noow be Chreest and de Devil
tauke me, Y shware be him dat made me, thou bast done them very well, but on me
shoul dear Joy, thou musht dry them too, for dey be all vet, where shall I dry
them (said the Coffee man) Po po po, Joy, come hisher wit me aund Y will show
dee, so he took the Candles and hung them in the Chimney; and he did say, Good
Master Cooffeeman, predee geeve me a Pipe of Tobacco, Y vill smoke one Pipe,
and be dat time dey vill be dree indede. While this Son of Teagueland was
smoking, the Candles dript away all the while; so that when poor Mac's Pipe
was out, he did go for his Candles, but he could find none, then said he, Be
Chreest de damn Rogues hauve stole me Caundles! O me Shoul Y musht not go home
to me Laudy widout me Chaundles; but the Coffeeman presently showed him the
Wicks of his Candles, and told him the Tallow was all melted into the fire.
This is an Experiment, how to dry Candles when they are wet.

19.
Another of the Sons of Teagueland having got into the Service of a worthy
Gentleman, and lying with the rest of the Servants who did usually fart; Mac
told his Master of it, and said to him, Dear Joy, predee mauke anoder Lodging,
for I cano, lie vid de nasty Shervants; quoth the Master, what is the matter?
quoth Mac, be Chreest dey de so fart and stink, dat O me shoul does, mauke me
very shick: (quoth the Master) how can that make you sick? Yesh indede (quoth
Mac) for be Chreest de stink of de Fart dos get into me Noshe, shomtime into me
Moutsh, and it goes done into me Bally and dos mauke me full of de Gripe of de
Gut, on me shalwashion it ish true, and Y tauke me Snush, and be Chreest it all
shmel of Fart: so his Master promised to remedy the matter for him.

20.
another Son of Teagueland drinking Braudy with his Comrade, (said to the
other,) Dear Joy, we musht not drink too mush Braundy, it vill mauke ush sleep,
and den we shall be deed, ash me Friend wash de oder day; says the other to
him, How dead! I prithee how do thou mean? the other replies, be Chreest Y
bad a dear Friand did drink so mush Brandy he did fall a sleep, and be Chreest
when he awaked be was deed, yesh indede.

21.
A certain Nobleman having a Servant of Teagueland, whom he loved very well,
and would entrust him with his Plate, and made him his Butler; this Fellow
continued honest a while, and having occasion to drink with one of his Country
men wanted Money to entertain him abroad, having thought on several ways to get
some, those did not please him; at last he took one of his Masters Dishes,
which was Silver, as his Lord used nothing else) and did find out a way to cut
out his Master's Coat of Arms from the Plate, and threw the rest down the
Vault, because it should not be seen to accuse him of his Theft; when he had so
done, he and his Friend went to the Alehouse, and having plentifully liquor'd
themselves: The aforesaid Butler called to the people to change his money, and
gave this piece to them, which was about the bigness of half a Crown; the
people resns'd it, and said it was none of the Kings Coin; Be me Shoul, said
Mac. it ish a vary guod haulf Croon, and Y vill go and change it; so being
near his Lords house, he went home and showed it to one of my Lords Gentlemen,
and said, Dear Joy, pradee geeve me two shallings aund six pance for thish
haulf Croown? the Gentleman answered, how Sirrah! this is my Lord Dukes Coat of
Arms! Po, po, po, po, joy! O me Shoul dear ish de King on horsheback; It ish a
very good haulf Croon; but the Lord Duke being acquainted of the passage,
examined Mac where he had ht; be me Shoul, said his Servant, Thou didsht put
haulf Croons upon die Plate, and Y had occashion for to mauke use of one with me
Countryman, and Y did tauke it from die Plate: The Lord said, you Rogue, where
is the rest of the Plate; Po po, Joy, be Chreest dear ish no more baulf Croons
upon it, it ish good for noting, O me shoul Y did fling de resht in de house of
Office; O Villain! said the Nobleman, do you use these rogueries, I thought you
very honest; O me shoul, dear Joy, be not aungry, says the Teaguelander, here
ish die hauf Croon, and Y vill fetch dee de resht of die Plate if dou cansht
mauke more baulf Croons upon it.

22.
A certain Nobleman having one of these Macks to his Servant sent him to his
Drugster for some Sarsaparilla (for his Lord did boil it with some other
Ingredients, and drink it and as some drink Tea.) The Servant went to the
Drugsters; and said my Master must have some saucy Fellow from this Shop; the
Master of the Shop examined his Men, who of them had affronted my Lord, that he
should send in this manner? but his Servants denied that they ever gave
occasion to my Lord to be angry. Whereupon the master going along with the
Lords Servant to beg parpon or excuse, if any thing had disliked his Lordship;
and as soon as his Man returned, the Lord asked him for the Sarsaparilla? the
Servant replied, here is de Master of the Shop, Y have brought him wid me; You
Rogue (quoth the Gentleman) I bid you bring some Sarsaparilla; be Chreest (says
the Servant) dear is no saucy Fellow dear: At which both Lord and the Drugster
laughed heartily at the Ignorance of the Fellow; the Master returned home and
sent the Sarsaparilla by his Man.

23.
Another Virtuoso of Teagueland, being invited to a Venison Pasty, after he had
fed very well, and satisfied himself; he came among his Friends and Countrymen
in the Evening, and as they were drinking, one begun to talk what a rare Dinner
he had this day, and another told his Entertainment. At last the Virtuoso that
had dined with the Pasty, said, Be Chreest Y did dine with a Venison Pasty, it
is true, but O my shoul! when it was first cut up, dear did come such an Echo
from it, was ready to strike me down; some Moderns call it a Hogo.

24.
Two certain Teaguelanders consulted together how they might raise their
Fortunes, and to get Money, one of them had observed some body burning of Gold
and Silver Lace, and did intend to make a trial of them upon Gilded Leather,
so he imparted this to his Comrade; Dear Joy, says he, you must assist me; dear
is in such a plauce, a room with Guilt Leather, we vill cut away the Guilt
Leather and burn it, and in faith we vill be marry with de Money we mauke of
it: They both put their resolution in practice, and did spoil a whole Room of
that Furniture, and went away with it to have it burned: so they used an
Alehouse near their Masters house, where they called for a Faggot and burnt it,
and did put the Guilt Leather in the fire; having drunk a Pot or two, by that
time the Fire and Leather was consumed, so they got a Broom and swept up Ashes
and all together, and then searched for the Gold that should come from the
Leather; at last both of them being impatient, having raked a pretty while, and
could find nothing; the one said to the other, be Chreest Y cano find de Gold,
thou have stole the Gold: Says the other, O me shoul! dou art a lying Rogue,
dou hasht robbed me of me part and shtole it away: At these words they were hot
at it, that at last with the Noise and fury of these Teaguelanders, the Master
came to part them, and enquire into the matter, and found they had been burning
of Gilded Leather to get the Gold from it, so he discovered from whence they
stole it, and the poor Teaguelanders had the gentle Lash for it.

25
A certain Teaguelander being upon his Journey, in his way chanced to light
upon a small Pig, says he to the Pig, little Pig, will you come and stay with
me a Month, the Pig did say, a week, a week, a week, a week, four times, then
be Chrest, says Mac, that is a Month, for four Weeks mauke a month, but poor
Teague was taken for stealing the Pig, and carried before a justice, and Mac
did say, Mr. Justice, o my shalvation! the Pig did promise to live with me a
Month, but if the Man will have him sooner, here is the Pig for him.

26
Another of the same Country, happened to the service of a very honest Gentleman,
who was much pleased with his Servants tallk, but his Master one time sent him
to receive forty pounds, and to bring it to him to such a place, if he should
not be at home; Now Mac had been very just and faithful in several Services
his Master had employed him in many times before, and his Master did not doubt
him in this affair; however Mac goes according to his Masters order and
receives the forty pounds, poor Mac never saw the like before, and having the
money, resolved to run away with it to his own Country; But withal, he went
home first to take some of his linen and other things with him which he was not
willing to leave behind, little thinking to meet his Master there, when poor
Mac came in to the house, the first he met with was his Master, says his
Master, how now Mac, have thou received the Money I sent thee for? At which
being surprised, Mac could not presently answer, says his Master, why don't you
tell me Sir whether you have received the money? Quoth Mac, the Devil tauke
thee and thy money too, quoth the Master, why so angry Mac? quoth Mac, A Plague
tauke dee aund they money too, Y say, and there is they money, and the Devil
tauke it; prithee why so angry? says the Master, says Mac. be Chreest when Y
had received they money the Decvill did tempt me to run away with it, yesh
indeed, but my Conscience came behind me and fetched me back again, and so the
Devil tanke thee and thy money to; Why Mac, where would you have run with it?
quoth Mac, O my shoul! into mine own Country, in Mackland, then quoth the
Master, I should have fallow'd you thither and put you in Prison, Po po po po,
Joy, be Chreest if thou had come there thou should have been my Man there.

27.
One Barnewell of Dunbrough in Teagueland, being a young Man, and his Father
having a very handsome Maid Servant in his House, the Son had a great mind to
lie with her, and upon a certain time when he went to the Priest to Confession,
amongst the rest of his Sins, did Confess to his Father Friar that he longed to
lie with the Maid, but he never did attempt it; The Priest told him it was a
great Sin nevertheless, for said the Priest, thou have committed fornication in
they heart, because thou did lust after her, and therefore thou must do
Penance for this, for it is an Abomination; so the Priest enjoined young
Barnewell to go 30 miles to a certain Church, and there to Pray, and that he
must go and come back barefoot to Expiate his Crime: To which poor Barnewell
was forced to do because he would not disoblige his own Father, but he was so
galled and lamed, and his feet so soar in the persormance thereof, that he
vowed revenge upon the Priest; And it fell out, that upon a certain day a little
after his Penance, as Barnwell was looking about and Plowing some Ground which
his Father had gave him, he spied the Priest Mare looking into an Oat field of
his, but could not get to it, so Barnewell called his Man, and said to him,
do thou not seerthe Priest Mare yonder looking into my Field of Oats, be
Chreest the Maure does lust after my Oats, and Y will mauke the Maure do
Penance for it; So Barnewell and his Man caught the Priests Mare, and opened
an old stinking Pidgeon-house door, and put the Mare in; The Priest the next
day, having occasion for his Mare, could not find her, and sent all about to
enquire after his Mare, but could hear no tidings; this continued about 5 days,
the Priest then meeting with a Smith who as a Neighbor to Barnwell, asked him
concerning his Mare; the Smith told him, he did belive Barnewell had played a
strick with the Mare, because he vowed (said the Smith) to be revenged upon you
for making him do Penance; Quoth the Priest, I have searched all about
Barnewells House and Ground, but I cannot find her, quoth the Smith to the
Priest, Father, have you searched the Pidgeon-house? no be me shoul, said the
Priest; then the Smith and the Priest searched the Pidgeon-house and there
found the Mare almost starved and Chop-fall'n; The Priest complained to
Barnewells Father of his roguery, at which the old Man began to reprove his
Son, and said, thou great Rogue, why do thou do such things to the Holy
man; his Son answered him, on my shoul Father, he did mauke me do Penance
because Y did Confess to him I had a mind to lie with thy Maid, and he did tell
me I did lust after her, tho I did not lie with her, and by Chreest did mauke
me go 30 miles harefoot, and my feet are soar to this day, and his Mare did
lust after my Oats, though he did not eat any, therefore I thought the Mare
should do Penance because be did look and lust aftn emy Corn?

28.
A great debate happened between a French Footman, and an Irish Footman, which
of their Countries was most Fertile; Quoth the Monsieur to the other, we have
such rich Grass in Brittany, dat begar it vill grow over de Horse Legs in won
Night, begar: And be Shaint Holly-Head (replied the other) vee have shuch
fruitful Groundsh in Yrelandt, daat if dee mauke put in die Horshe into de Field
at Neet, de caunst not mauke find die Horshe in de Morning, in fait.

29.
Will (who was Footman to Sr. Henry --) meeting with Mac, who was in the same
quality with Esquire; F. -- Says Will, how the pox did thou come by that broken
Face Mac? have thou been in the Wars? or has some Female scratcht thee? No be
Shaint Antonie ( replied Mac,) Y vill tall dee indede, I did go and mauke
dehauch wid shum of me Countrymans; aund when Y did she Y vash sho drunk daat
Y could not go nor shtand, Y did run home ash fasht as Y could drive indede,
and be de Mash Y did faul ashleep in de Shtreet by de vay, aund did mauke great
Break upon me Faush wid de fall, and de Vaatchmans did tauke me up, and caury
me home indede. What in the Devil's name is all this (says Will?) thou could
not go nor stand, and yet did run home, and yet fell dead drunk in the way,
and were carried home! why faith Mac, this is very astonishing.

30.
A Dear Joy that had waited on a Gentleman into Holland, told some of his
Comrades, that the P. of O. lived at a very great and splendid rate, for that,
Y hauve seen (quoth he) be Chreest, tree or four shecond Courshes carried up to
hish Tauble at vone Dinner, in fait, noow, la.

31.
Bryan having been sent in an Errant to a Gentleman's house in the Country, fell
deeply in Love with a Welsh Maid, who belonged to the Kitching there, sometime
after he met a Footman belonging to the same Gentleman; Bryan desired him to
tauke a pot of drenk vid him, for a a quarter of an hour, vile he did mauke
request to shom Skrivishner to vrite a Letter for him to Vrsula; which being
done, be me shoul Y did pray him to shend it upon Ursula by do Vaaterman indede.

The Letter.
Shweet Mrs. Ursula,
BE de ham of me Moddarsh Smock, aund be aul de Vsquebah daat vash drunk at
mine Fadersh Vedding; de Deevil tauke me indede, but Y be sho much in Lofe vid
dee, daat Y cannot go to Bed aul the long Night for sleeping upon dee; aund Y
cannot be upon vaaking, but the Deevil tauke me, Y do fall upon dreaming
consharning thy shweet shelfe indede, daan do Y tink, vaat is the matre? vaat
is the maatre vid mine awn shelfe? Aund Y do feend it is aal for much Love
consharning dee, in fait: Be me shalwashion Y vill tall dee vaat Y vill do
indede; Y vill put kish upon die faush indede, and Y vill be for mauking Child
upon die Body indede, aund Y will mauke a great del more consharning dee, dan
dyne own Moddar in fait. Noow de Deevil tauke de fashion, daat van two young
Cople of Man and Voman be for coming togadder vid on anodder, daat dare musht
be mauking upon the great Sherimony of de Presht, aund aul de People to mauke
Witnesh upon it: Be me Shoul Y vill not manke staying sho long; but Y vill be
dyne husband vidout aal daat now, aund be Shaint Pautrick, Ye vill love dee
like auny ting indede. Y vill shend to Tredagh for mine Moddarsh tree Goats,
four Sheep, one Filly Mare, and the tauny Coow, and vee will be for mauking a
Daury in Lincolns-Inn-Felds be Chreest, aund vee will mauke Butter and Chese,
aund Eggs, and shell our shelves into Plauce and Conferrmant every day indede.
And we vill shing Curds and Crame be Chreest, and Buttar and Eggs,
Bony-Clabber, and Tiff, untel de Coow shall have Caufe, de Maure shall have
Colt, de Goats shall have Kidd, aund Ursulah shall hauve Child indede; Aund dan
vee vill shet up Housh-kepin and be for livein aul togadder, be Chreest, as it
is de fashion in mine awn Country, in fait. Noow de Deevil tauke me, dear Joy,
dou shaut be for sending Answer to vaat Y hauve sent dee by de Skrivishnar;
aund if dee vilt mete me to morrow morning at four of de Clock in de aufter
noons, aut de Hole in de Vaal, vee vill go to Bed aund be Mawrry'd presantly
indede, viddout de Charge of de Vedding, aund de Priests fese be Chreest, aund
vee vill put de grate Chete upon our Parantsh, aund be me Shoul vee vill be
Mawrried, dear Joy; aund none body shaul be vysher for it indede; Aund being at
such dishtansh daat Y cannot come to put Kish upon die shweet faush, Y vill put
a hondrad Kishes upon dish Pauper, and shend me Sharvish, aund me Affuction to
dee indede, and me shalwashion Y vill alwash be

Dine own Dear Joy, BRYAN.
Y have geeven de Vaaterman Shixpensh to breng it to dee, to shave de charge of
de Penny-Posht in fait.




32.
The Water-man was punctual, and put the Letter in Vsulah's own hand the same
evening, telling her he had it from her sweet heart, at which she smiled like a
furmity Kettle: when the Water-man was gone, she shows her Letter to the Butler
to read it for her her (but you must know) under an Obligation of secrecy; he
may a shift to unriddle the mark at the bottom, but for the rest, it was as
unintelligible to him as the Original Welsh, or the unbaptized Characters of
Arabia: therefore they concluded it to be some very learned Language, and it
was agreed to desire the Chaplain to read it; Sr John was almost gravelled at
the first sight, but after some consideration he made shift to Expound it, and
to enlarge upon the Point: Telling the Audience (who were composed of the Valet
de Chamber, the Buttler, my Ladys woman (who ought to have been named first)
two Footmen, the Coachman, and three or four Servants of the Kitching;) That,
though the Letter in it self parcularly considered, with respect to the Hand
Maid therein mentioned, and to whom it did immediately relate, Savoured of
nothing but a profound Love and sincere Affection. (Looking meltigly, upon my
Ladys Woman, and fetching a sight;) Yet some passages therein contained, looked
as black as the powder Plott; and carried a deep Conspiracy in them, and that
against the whole Body of the National Clergy; which will prove worse Madam
(speaking to my Ladys Woman) than a Telleration; and it is plain that the
Atheistical part of men entertain these Varlets in perfect spleen to the
Ministry. Wha to be robbed of their Comfertable Importance Fees? (Alas! Sr.
says my Ladys Woman looking languishing upon the Chaplain) I say to be deptived
of the sweet and standing Revenue, Entayled upon our Function, as long as
People shall think fit to Copulate according to Modern Instituction: It is a I
say it is a down right, Diametrical Contradiction to our Establishment; which I
will prove in nineteen, or twenty Particulars humb! humb!

Just as he was going to hold forth, the Gentleman of the House came home, and
(crossing the Room where this grave Assembly were) hey da (says he) what is
here, a Conventicle? No a'nt please you Sr. (replied my Ladys Woman) here is
a'nt please you Sr. such a discovery of a design upon Ministry, by a Letter
from an Irishman to one of the Kitching Maids, that if it be not prevented
(a'nt please you) the function will fall to the ground. Well said Betty! (quoth
the Gentleman) standing up for the Clergy, or thon wilt lose they Copy hold.

The Gentleman got into the Parler to his Lady, called for the Chaplain, and
the Letter, which being read, he could hardly contain to hear the Comedy out;
but that which mot pleased him was the Parsons Exposition, and Notes thereon.
Betty (allthe while) stood by my Ladys Chair, touching, and whispering my Lady
at every clause; Well Madam, this is a dangerous design against the Clergy, The
Gentleman (being loath to lose the further diversion that might be Improved upon
so Comical a Plot) bid the Chaplain provide to go with him to the City to
morrow, and to have the Letter with him, and he would take care to see the
Irish man taken to account for his design upon th eClergy, Sr. John was somewhat
pacified with this; and in token thereof, tipped a wink upon Mrs. Betty.

The next day the Gentleman met his Friend (the Master of (the Master of Bryand
in London, and (at the Coffee-house) old him all the story of his man's Letter,
the Chaplains Notes thereon, and the sport it had been to himself, and his
Lady, and that the Parson and Letter were both in Town: His Friend replied; he
was much pleased at the Conceit of it; and that he would have him and the
Chaplain dine at his house; The Gentleman accordingly sent for his Chaplain,
and they meet at his Friends at dinner. The love Letter was produced, and Bryan
called coram Nobis; The Chaplain read the Indictment, by Explaining the Letter;
And Bryan was examined upon the premises. Be Cheest (dear Joy) says he tome
his Master; Now de Deevill tauke if dish Priesht be not de deevillish shon of a
howr mauke all dish Treashon upon me dan; vaat plotsh ish it for me to tall de
Maid vee will be married, ha! be shaint Pautrick it ish shuch a damn Ting waare
deshe Parshons do come into he House, dare ish be not quiett in fait. Daare
ish someting beshides daat maake me put Conshiderashion upon dee indede, aund
daat ish in fait to mauke hanging upon me indede, aund daan de vilt mauke
Marriage upon mine shweet heart, mine Ursulah indede; Aund Y will mauke shware
upon dee, daat dee vash shteal mine Lettre oout of of mine shoeet hartsh
pocketsh; And dee vilt marry mine Urshulah, aund put me upon mauke kill upon me
shelfe for Love indede: Whoo! whoo! whoo! poo! Be shaint Pautrick Y will mauke
petishion for die plaush noow, aund maake dee be put oout of die Chaplainsh
Comishion, aund dan Y will mauke ride avay vid all de Veemen mine own shelfe
be Creesht, aund dee shall hang die shelfe before Urshula vill Love dee. Some
Strangers coming in to mauke a visit, put a period to the rest of the Comedy.

33.
It was in Flanders that a certain Boglander, who was of the Army there;
happened to be very much smitten with the Daughter of an Inhabitant at
Brusselles: The young Gentlewoman was a zealous frequenter of Mattins, and
Vespers; where he had often opportunity to see-her, and Consequently to be the
more Captivated, but it was impossible for him to get admittance to her to make
known the violence of his passion, because of the vast distance their
difference Fortunes had put between them. He therefore made frequent Orisons,
and was almost perpetually rattling over his Beads, thumping his Breast, and
using all the Demonstrations of a very fervent Devotion, in so much that a
certain Boy that belonged to one of the Fathers had often Observed him to pay
his Adorations to one particular shrine, and (by degrees) understood the
business which put him upon those frequent Adresses. It was all for Love
forsooth, it was the heat of his passion, that begat that of his Devotion: All
his Applications were made to the figure of a Lady with a Child in her Arms;
Whom he earnestly besought to Incline the Idol of his thoughts to answer his
Inclinations with a reciprocal passion; And to be so propitious as to favor
his Love with a fortunate minute, wherein he might discover the violence of
that Irresistible Flame, the Rays of her Beauty had kindled in him, with
abundance of such Rhetorical Bumbast which he had picked (it is like) out of Wits
Commonwealth, or the Accademy of Complements; but still accented and pronounced
in the Tone of Dear Joy Land, interlarded with a world of O bone's! hoo! hoo!
poo's, and the like; one would have thought enough to have melted down a Lady
of Marble. But tho it obtained not the desired effect, our Soldier knew not
how to despair, but daily repeated his Addresses, and renewed his Vows to the
Obdurate Shrine. The Boy before mentioned, had one day placed himself behind
the Statue, and that so advantageously, that the Soldier did not observe him;
but with a Tone and gesture very pitiful, was heard to express himself to this
pupposee

Deevil tauke me (dear Joy) Y hauve come a mauny timesh indeed to mauke
Shuplicaushion to dee, and Y can nevar get one vord from dee in fait; now be
his Holynesh's Slipper, Y tinke it ish vary hard indede date dee should ushe
a body after such fashion be Chreest; vaat posht dee be in dish plauce for, if
de vilt not be sho shivil to manke Answer, vaan Y speak to dee indede? daat Y
do shay me hort is amosht broke to peeshes in fait, dare ish no mauking belief
in any body at all be Creest, aund dee beesht sho hord haurted, daat if Y do
come to dee every day indede, dee vilt shay noting at aul to me in fait; Aund
ish not dish very hord noow? Yesh be shant Pautrick it ish indede: Aund yet
v'rall dat Y musht be for coming to dee again, to mauke Shuplicashions upon
dee, daat Y may ondershtand if she vill be mauking Love upon me, or no be
Chreest; aund if Y shaul make mauriage upon her indede? No, no, says the Boy
behind the Picture, at which Dear Joy was in a very great discontent, and could
hardly forbear salling into a fumigation; but a little recollecting, he
proceeded: Noow Y prathee dear Joy, let that shame pratty little Child hold
hish tongue, shpake to me vid dyne awn Lipsh indede; vaat dosht dee shay noow;
shaul Y aver come to Bed to daat pratty Voman, daat Y vash spaking to dee
aboout? aund upon me shalwashion indeed Y vill be for mauking Prayer to dee
sholong ash Y live be Chreest: No, no, I say (says the Boy again) thou shall
never have her. Daan de deevil tauke me if aver Y do mauke Prayers upon dee any
more be my Shoul, Y vill go aund mauke hang upon me shalf 'noow; aund de shall
never she me faush any more in fait noow, aund sho fare dee vall dear Joy,
indede. At which he marched out of the Church in great Indignation, and the Boy
was ready to burst with the thought how he had imposed upon poor B^^lander.

A dear Joy being arraigned for stealing a Mare, and the Evidence making Oath
they saw him lead her out of the Ground he was at length asked, what he could
fay for himself? Now de Deevill tauke me it fait (says he) but hear ish de
greatesh parshell of Lawyers daat ever vash in the World, vor upon me
shalwashion (dear Joy) Y did but tauke de end of the bridle in fait, aund de
Deevillish Jade came after indede, aund Y vash loat to cut of de end of de
Bridle, aund a^ Chreesht of dee dosht mauke haung upon it, dare well be au end
of me Generashion indede, for me Vaadar, me Grandfar, me great Grandfar, and
two Broddarsh wash all hanged for Shomtinesh after one anodder, shom vash for
finding of Coush, shom for Sheepsh, aund shom for mauking Murder be Creesht,
aund de Deevil tauke de envanshion of hampe in fait, for ish mauke destrushion
upon aull me vaadarsh Faumily indede. And be shaint Pautrick if dee ^osht mauke
putting the haang upon me, Y vill navar mauke forgett of it indede, La.


